                    Governance Global Practice




  GOOD PRACTICES FOR COURTS:
  Helpful Elements for Good Court Performance and
  the World Bank’s Quality of Judicial Process Indicators




Key Elements, Lessons Learned, and Good Practice Examples

Heike Gramckow, Omniah Ebeid with Erica Bosio and Jorge Luis Silva Mendez




                                                            Good Practices for Courts   1
    © 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
    1818 H Street NW
    Washington DC 20433
    Telephone: 202-473-1000
    Internet: www.worldbank.org



    Disclaimer

    This document is published to promote the World Bank’s work in the development community with the least possible delay.
    The manuscript of this document therefore has not been prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate to formally
    edited texts. This document is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World
    Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
    the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or the
    executive directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
    data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not
    imply any judgment on the part of the World Bank of the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
    boundaries. Some sources cited in this paper may be information documents that are not readily available.

    Rights and Permissions

    The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because the World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this work
    may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution is given. Any queries on rights
    and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW,
    Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

    For permission to photocopy or reprint, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.,
    222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, www.copyright.com.

    Contact Details

    Governance Global Practice
    The World Bank
    1818 H Street, NW
    Washington, DC 20433 USA
    worldbank.org/justice | jrol@worldbank.org




    Cover Photos: Heike Gramckow




2   Good Practices for Courts
  GOOD PRACTICES FOR COURTS:
  Helpful Elements for Good Court Performance and
  the World Bank’s Quality of Judicial Process Indicators




Key Elements, Lessons Learned, and Good Practice Examples

Heike Gramckow, Omniah Ebeid with Erica Bosio and Jorge Luis Silva Mendez
     Foreword and Acknowledgments


                                 An effective and efficient justice system is essential for sustained economic growth. In
                                 a well-functioning, independent, and productive justice system, decisions are taken
                                 within a reasonable time and predictably, are effectively enforced, and individual
                                 rights, including property rights, are adequately protected. Among other objectives,
                                 the efficiency of the judicial system is important for creating a good business climate,
                                 attracting foreign direct investment, securing tax revenues, and supporting economic
                                 growth (Bénassy-Quéré, Coupet, and Mayer 2007). Research has shown that weak
                                 contract enforcement, for example, raises the cost of borrowing and shortens loan
                                 maturities (Bae and Goyal 2009), with a resulting negative effect on investment and
                                 GDP (Jappelli, Pagano, and Bianco 2002). Weak court enforcement systems have also
                                 been linked to late payments, which can lead to liquidity issues for companies and
                                 increase insolvency (Intrum Justitia 2013).

                                 Since the publication of the World Bank’s World Development Report 2005, the
                                 importance of well-functioning courts to strengthening the investment climate and
                                 ultimately to reducing poverty and boosting shared prosperity has been brought to
                                 the forefront and become internationally recognized (World Bank 2004). Indicators of
                                 commercial court performance, as well as business community perceptions of and trust
                                 in the courts, are a part of the World Bank Group’s (WBG) country-level investment
                                 climate assessments and its influential Investment Climate Surveys and Doing Business
                                 reports (see World Bank 2016). Court performance has also become an element of
                                 European Union (EU) and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
                                 (OECD) accession.1 Helping countries to improve commercial court operations and
                                 ensure greater accessibility and more effective delivery of services is an important part
                                 of the development assistance provided by the WBG, the OECD, the EU, and other
                                 bilateral donors. This publication was developed to assist WBG teams, as well as those
                                 of other development partners and their client counterparts, especially commercial
                                 courts, in this effort.

                                 This document was developed as a result of discussions that took place in 2014 and
                                 2015 with OECD colleagues, Chloe Lelievre and Tatyana Teplova, who were interested
                                 in good practice examples, benchmarking options, and performance measures for
                                 courts in general, with a special view to assisting OECD accession countries. At the
                                 same time, the methodology for the “enforcing contracts” indicator included in
                                 the WBG’s annual Doing Business report was adjusted, adding the new “quality of
                                 judicial processes index” to the assessment. The set of 15 good practice areas that
                                 are tracked not only provide a way for courts to assess how well they are performing
                                 on this indicator scale, but also indicate areas that could benefit from improvements.



                                 1	 For information on the OECD accession process, see http://www.oecd.org/legal/accession-process.htm.




II   Good Practices for Courts
While working with several client counterparts and some WBG assessment teams, it
became clear that several of these good practice areas required some clarification.
Equally important, client countries immediately requested more information about
implementation requirements, lessons learned, and constructive good practice
examples that would help courts assess their own performance and develop new
practices that are a good fit for their particular jurisdiction. This publication was
developed in an effort to respond to these client country requests. We hope that the
information included here will be helpful to courts across the globe and useful to our
colleagues at the Bank and OECD and other development partner organizations.

The authors would like to thank the World Bank’s internal and external reviewers of
an earlier concept note and draft of this document: Chloe Lelievre (OECD Policy
Analyst, Justice Services, Public Governance) and Tatyana Teplova (OECD Senior
Policy Analyst, Justice Services, Public Governance), Klaus Decker (World Bank Senior
Public Sector Specialist, Governance), Pilar Salgado Otonel (World Bank Senior Private
Sector Development Specialist, Trade and Competitiveness [T&C]), and Justin Yap
(World Bank Senior Private Sector Development Specialist, T&C). Their feedback
and comments have helped shape this paper into what we hope will be a useful
contribution to the continuous reform efforts of many courts around the world. We
also thank Patricia Carley for her excellent and skilled editing and Jihane El-Khoury
Roederer for her creative design.




                                                                                         Good Practices for Courts   III
IV   Good Practices for Courts
Contents



Foreword and Acknowledgments.......................................................................................................................II
About the Authors....................................................................................................................................................... VI
Introduction.......................................................................................................................................................................1
Evaluating Judicial Performance...........................................................................................................................1
The New Court Performance Indicator: Quality of Process..................................................................3
Expanding Knowledge About Good Court Practices and Reform Efforts...................................6

1.	 Good Practice Area: Court Structures and Proceedings.............................7
1.1	AVAILABILITY OF A SPECIALIZED COMMERCIAL COURT OR COURT DIVISION............................................................7
1.2	AVAILABILITY OF A SMALL CLAIMS COURT OR SIMPLIFIED PROCEDURES FOR SMALL CLAIMS........................ 14
1.3	AVAILABILITY OF PRETRIAL ATTACHMENT............................................................................................................................. 21
1.4	CRITERIA USED TO ASSIGN JUDGES.......................................................................................................................................... 30

2.	 Good Practice Area: Case Management......................................................37
2.1	REGULATIONS SETTING TIME STANDARDS FOR KEY COURT EVENTS.......................................................................... 37
2.2	REGULATIONS ON ADJOURNMENTS AND CONTINUANCES............................................................................................ 46
2.3	AVAILABILITY OF PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT SYSTEMS.......................................................................................... 54
2.4	USE OF PRETRIAL CONFERENCES.............................................................................................................................................. 59
2.5	AVAILABILITY OF AN ELECTRONIC CASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM................................................................................ 64

3.	 Good Practice Area: Court Automation......................................................... 73
3.1	E-FILING.............................................................................................................................................................................................. 74
3.2	ABILITY TO SERVE PROCESS ELECTRONICALLY.................................................................................................................... 81
3.3	E-PAYMENT OF COURT FEES........................................................................................................................................................ 85
3.4	 PUBLICATION OF JUDGMENTS................................................................................................................................................... 89

4.	 Good Practice Area: Alternative Dispute Resolution.................................. 97

References.....................................................................................................................................................................113




                                                                                                                                                                                                                V
     About the Authors



                                 The main authors of this publication are Heike Gramckow and Omniah Ebeid. Erica
                                 Bosio provided much of the data collected by the Doing Business staff and related
                                 graphic presentations. Jorge Luis Silva Mendez authored a significant part of the
                                 section on judicial assignments.

                                 Heike Gramckow is a Lead Counsel with the Governance Global Practice of the World
                                 Bank in Washington, DC, where she advises on justice reform issues and conducts
                                 related research. She has been working on justice sector reform issues for nearly 30
                                 years. Before joining the Bank, she was Deputy Director of the International Division
                                 of the National Center for State Courts and served as Director for Research and
                                 Development for the American Prosecutors Research Institute. Dr. Gramckow has
                                 worked with courts, prosecutors, and police in the United States and throughout
                                 the world, especially on justice system management and reform. She has directed
                                 justice reform programs and assessments and provided advice to the governments
                                 of numerous countries, including Argentina, Bosnia, Bulgaria, Egypt, Germany, Haiti,
                                 Hungary, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Nigeria,
                                 Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Slovenia, Syria, Thailand,
                                 the United Arab Emirates, and the United States. In her career, Dr. Gramckow has
                                 worked with common law, civil law, Shari’a-based, and customary justice systems.
                                 She has trained judges, prosecutors, and court personnel on management, budget
                                 and strategic planning, reengineering, and other substantive issues, such as victim
                                 assistance, drug case management, juvenile offenders, and domestic violence. She
                                 has also provided advice on establishing sustainable mechanisms for continuing
                                 education, introducing effective information and communications technology (ICT)
                                 solutions, and designing good governance structures that support democratic and
                                 accountable agencies. Dr. Gramckow holds a law degree and a doctorate in law from
                                 the University of Hamburg, Germany. She has taught undergraduate and graduate
                                 courses on international criminal justice systems and juvenile justice at American
                                 University and the George Washington University in Washington, DC, and is widely
                                 published in the United States and internationally.

                                 Omniah Ebeid is a Senior Justice Sector Specialist with the Governance Global Practice
                                 of the World Bank in Washington, DC, where she advises on justice reform issues
                                 worldwide. She has been working on legal, legislative, and justice sector reform issues
                                 for over 20 year across regions and in civil and common law justice systems as well as
                                 Shari’a based systems. Prior to joining the Bank, she was Director of the International
                                 Cooperation Department and the Human Rights Office at the Abu Dhabi Judiciary,
                                 where, in addition to her responsibilities, she oversaw justice reform initiatives for the
                                 courts and public prosecutors’ office. While in the United Arab Emirates, she was also




VI   Good Practices for Courts
Program Manager for the Abu Dhabi Government Restructuring Committee, where
she oversaw the restructuring of the judiciary and public prosecutors’ office as well
as the establishment of the judicial council and the judicial training academy. Her
international development work also included managing a regional Middle East and
North Africa justice program based in Jordan aimed at establishing a judicial council
linking over 13 judiciaries and developing the necessary strategic and administrative
framework for sustainable operations. In addition, Omniah also worked in Egypt on a
comprehensive justice sector reform program focusing on conducting comprehensive
assessments of civil courts across the country, improving case management practices,
re-engineering and automating court processes, and working with policy and decision
makers on integrating women judges into the judiciary. She also worked with Egyptian
civil society organizations on business and project development as well as project
evaluations. Omniah began her career working with courts in the United States where
she was a trial lawyer. As a litigator, she represented the private sector and was also
Assistant Attorney General at the Texas Attorney General’s Office representing state
institutions. While in the US, Omniah was also a lobbyist focusing on municipal civil
service and employment-related issues. She has extensive experience with legislative
drafting and review. She holds a BA in political science degree from the University of
Houston and a doctorate of jurisprudence from South Texas College of Law, Houston.

Erica Bosio joined the World Bank’s Doing Business team in January 2013 and current-
ly leads the “enforcing contracts” indicator. Prior to joining the World Bank Group, she
practiced arbitration and litigation at the law firm Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton
LLP in Milan. She holds a masters degree in international legal studies from the
Georgetown University Law Center and a law degree from the University of Turin (Italy).

Jorge Luis Silva Mendez joined the World Bank in 2013 as a Public Sector Specialist
for the Latin America and Caribbean (LAC) region. He has worked on several projects
related to justice sector reform, security, procurement, management models,
monitoring systems, and regulation of statistics institutions, among others, in countries
such as Colombia, Peru, Mexico, El Salvador, Paraguay, Morocco, Equatorial Guinea,
and Pakistan. Before joining the World Bank, he was a professor and full-time researcher
at Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México (ITAM) and a consultant on several
World Bank projects. He has also collaborated with various institutions, such as the
U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), the Inter-American Development
Bank, the World Justice Project, and the Mexico Bankers Association. Jorge Luis holds
law and history degrees from the Universidad Autónoma de México (UNAM) and is an
economist at ITAM. He also has master degrees in statistics and legal sciences and a
SJD in juridical science from the University of Stanford in California.




                                                                                            Good Practices for Courts   VII
VIII   Good Practices for Courts
Introduction
Most courts around the world continuously strive for good performance in the timely
delivery of just and fair court decisions and other judicial services to all who need
them. At the same time, many courts face challenges in reaching this goal and receive
criticism from different government actors, the media, or various constituency groups
for not performing well enough or not sharing performance information. Judiciaries
in countries seeking accession to the European Union (EU) or to the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) are especially under pressure
to demonstrate satisfactory performance. Generally speaking, judiciaries that have
focused on good performance tend to be better prepared to respond to challenges
using data to effectively manage their operations; they also tend to focus on user
experiences and are increasingly able to provide a range of information on their
websites, including on court operations, services, and performance. With regard
to the latter, more and more, courts include references to intentionally recognized
performance indicators and reports that provide an independent view of their
performance in relation to other courts in similar situations. Many courts are especially
looking for information about how well performing courts implemented good practices
to achieve good performance results. The latter is the focus of this publication.




Evaluating Judicial Performance
Today, a large number of international indicators and data collections include some
measure of court performance. Some of the more prominent organizations that
regularly collect information from different countries include the quite detailed data
collection efforts undertaken by the European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice
(CEPEJ), which are limited to EU and EU accession countries; the more general (and
more sporadically collected) data obtained by the worldwide Rule of Law Index,
which is implemented by the World Justice Project, a nongovernmental organization
(NGO); the broader World Development Indicators collected by the World Bank; and
other measures that have a narrower focus, such as the Corruption Perception Index
compiled by the NGO, Transparency International.

Another international measure increasingly used by courts around the world is the
“enforcing contracts” indicator included in the Doing Business report published
annually by the World Bank (see, for example, World Bank 2016). The full Doing
Business indicator set measures regulations and operations affecting 11 areas of
the life of a business, ranging from starting a business to resolving insolvency. The
enforcing contracts indicator is one of the 11, and it tracks the performance of courts
and civil enforcement agencies in over 180 economies around the globe with regard
to their ability to successfully resolve commercial cases.2 Among the many indicators
available, it is one of just a handful of internationally recognized annual publications


2	 The “resolving insolvency” indicator of the Doing Business report also includes measures of court performance, but they are not as detailed and
   are limited to the smaller subset of commercial cases that involve insolvencies.




                                                                                                                   Good Practices for Courts         1
                                that continuously track information about court and civil enforcement agency
                                performance trends related to the handling of commercial cases in a large number of
                                countries across all regions of the world. It also is one of the few that track updates
                                on reform efforts and good practice examples from various countries. The enforcing
                                contracts indicator was included in the Doing Business report not only because contract
                                disputes can be a critical part of business operations, but also because studies across
                                the globe have shown that efficient contract enforcement influences how businesses
                                operate and grow and is essential to economic development and sustained growth.
                                Economies with an efficient judiciary, in which courts can effectively enforce contractual
                                obligations, have more developed credit markets and a higher level of development
                                overall. A stronger judiciary is also associated with the more rapid growth of small
                                firms. In fact, enhancing the efficiency of the judicial system can improve the business
                                climate, foster innovation, attract foreign direct investment, and secure tax revenues
                                (World Bank 2016).

                                As important as all of these different international performance data and indicators
                                are, it is also crucial to understand their limitations, what they actually address
                                and mean, and how they can be used to inform improvement efforts. All data and
                                indicator sets have some methodological issues, especially since many are based on
                                respondent perception rather than concrete agency data. Furthermore, most measure
                                only certain aspects of court performance, and since the systems, conditions, and
                                circumstances across countries vary significantly, even the most well-defined indicators
                                comparing elements across locations and time can be used only to understand trends
                                and provide some performance reference points for benchmarking and identifying
                                good performance examples. Another limitation is that few of these indicator sets
                                provide courts with the information and examples needed to help them improve their
                                performance in a particular indicator area.




2   Good Practices for Courts
The New Court Performance Indicator:
Quality of Process

In an effort to widen the scope and usefulness of the enforcing contracts indicator, the Doing Business methodology
was changed in 2015 to include what is called the Quality of Judicial Processes Index (QJPI). Although the
methodology continues to measure two important performance elements, namely, the time and cost needed
to resolve a standardized commercial dispute, it now also tests whether each economy has adopted a series of
good practices that are captured in the QJPI. The aim of this change was to track select good practices that are
internationally recognized as contributing to improved commercial court operations in support of fairer, timelier,
and more transparent judicial proceedings. These 15 good practice areas address court structure and proceedings,
case management, court automation, and alternative dispute resolution (ADR) (see figure 1).3 They aim to reflect the
findings from numerous country studies that show that modern management approaches and advanced technologies
provide new opportunities for courts and other justice sector agencies to modernize their operations to better reflect
the changing needs of their communities as well as those of national and international markets.


FIGURE 1.	 Areas covered by the quality of judicial processes index


   Court structure and                   Case management                      Court automation                Alternative dispute
      proceedings                                                                                                  resolution

         Availability of                       Regulations
                                                                                   Ability to file                Availability and
         a specialized                         setting time
                                                                                 initial complaint                 regulation of
       commercial court                     standards for key
                                                                                   electronically                   arbitration
          or division                         court events


        Availability of a                                                                                        Availability and
                                            Regulations on                       Ability to serve
     small claims court or                                                                                         regulation of
                                            adjournments                             process
     simplified procedure                                                                                      voluntary mediation
                                           and continuances                       electronically
        for small claims                                                                                          or conciliation

                                             Availability of                      Ability to pay
         Availability of                     performance                            court fees
      pretrial attachment                    measurement                          electronically
                                             mechanisms

         Criteria used to                                                         Publication of
     assign cases to judges                  Use of pretrial                       judgments
                                              conference



                                           Availability of an
                                            electronic case
                                          management system

Source: World Bank (2016).



3	 For details on how each of these elements are defined and collected see Doing Business 2016, p.153-155.




                                                                                                             Good Practices for Courts   3
    Courts in many countries are undergoing reforms or are                     FIGURE 2.	 QJPI and court performance
    interested in keeping informed about new trends in court
    operations elsewhere. Similarly, governments—and espe-                       Distance to frontier score for quality
    cially the business community—want to know how well                          of judicial processes index
    their courts are working, how they compare to courts                         100
    in similar countries, if there are areas that could be                          90
    improved, and if so, how. And, as mentioned above,                              80
    countries in the EU or OECD accession process are                               70
    particularly seeking to learn about their own performance                       60
    in comparison to others and about useful benchmarking                           50
    points and good practice examples in other jurisdictions.                       40
    Although the Doing Business assessments focus on                                30
    commercial case processing only, most of these good                             20
    practices apply also to other case types and can help                           10
    improve court operations overall.                                               0       10       20       30      40       50      60       70      80        90   100

    There are of course many other good practices that have                                  Distance to frontier score for time and cost to enforce a contract
    been introduced in courts around the world beyond
    those that the QJPI tracks. These include the broader                      Source: Doing Business database.
    range of case management techniques that courts apply,                     Note: The correlation between the distance to frontier score for the
                                                                               quality of judicial processes index and the distance to frontier score
    a variety of assistance options for self-representing                      for the time and cost to enforce a contract is 0.37. The relationship
    litigants, and particularly the use of other information                   is significant at the1% level after controlling for income per capita.
    and communications technology (ICT) solutions,
    especially short message service (SMS) communication
    methods, video hearings, and many others. The index                        Other findings include:
    also does not track other good practice options that are
    specific to the post-judgment civil enforcement process.                   •	        On average, OECD high-income economies have
                                                                                         the largest number of judicial good practices in
    Clearly, courts have many other important functions                                  place as measured by the QJPI, while Sub-Saharan
    and mandates and contribute to well-functioning                                      African economies have the fewest.
    societies and governments in numerous ways beyond                          •	        Economies with more judicial good practices in
    commercial issues, and other measures of performance,                                place have higher levels of domestic credit provided
    such as judicial independence or transparency, are                                   to the private sector (figure 3).
    equally important. Nevertheless, the QJPI’s good                           •	        None of the 189 economies covered by Doing
    practices set provides some key examples of what some                                Business received the full measure of points on the
    courts apply to enhance their structures, proceedings,                               QJPI, demonstrating that all economies still have
    case management, automation, and ADR options to                                      room for improvement in judicial efficiency.
    better serve all court users. They all represent proven
    good practice elements used by well-performing courts.                     As shown in figure 4, although some good practices
    A special case study published in conjunction with                         have been introduced in almost all economies tracked
    the Doing Business 2016 report discusses the                               by the Doing Business report, others remain scarce.4 The
    implementation of these good practices throughout                          reason that some good practices are almost ubiquitous
    the world and concludes that countries that have                           and others are rare are manifold but are generally
    introduced more of them have faster and less costly                        related to the preconditions and capacities that need to
    contract enforcement (World Bank 2016a; see figure 2).                     be in place before specific changes can be introduced.



    4	 Doing Business generally includes only the court in the commercial center of a country that handles the specific commercial case type the study
       focuses on. This standardized sample case was created to ensure that the same information is collected from each economy evaluated acoss all
       jurisdictions. As a result, there might be other courts in a particular economy, often higher-level courts, that handle more complex commercial
       cases, that may feature a special bench or other elements included in the Doing Business methodology but are not part of the study and cannot
       be reflected accordingly.




4   Good Practices for Courts
FIGURE 3.	 QJPI and court performance


 Domestic credit to private sector
 (% of GDP)

 300

 250
                                                                                                                              Source: Doing Business database; World Development Indicators
                                                                                                                              database (http://data.worldbank.org/indicator), World Bank.
 200                                                                                                                          Note: Domestic credit to private sector refers to financial resources
                                                                                                                              provided to the private sector by financial corporations, such as
 150                                                                                                                          through loans, purchases of nonequity securities, and trade credits
                                                                                                                              and other accounts receivable, that establish a claim for repayment.
 100                                                                                                                          The data for this indicator are for 2014. The correlation between the
                                                                                                                              distance to frontier score for the quality of judicial processes index
  50                                                                                                                          and domestic credit to private sector as a percentage of GDP is
                                                                                                                              0.40. The relationship is significant at the 1% level after controlling
                                                                                                                              for income per capita.
   0          10         20           30        40           50        60           70         80         90     100

                  Distance to frontier score for quality of judicial processes index




FIGURE 4.	 Number of economies with good practice area


   Number of economies
   with feature
   200
   180
   160
   140
   120
   100
    80
    60
    40
    20
     0
                                                                                                                                                                                          (law ent
                                                                                                                                                                                            (jud ment
                                              s*
             ent


                              *




                                                            ion*




                                                                                         s*


                                                                                                        s*


                                                                                                                     sion


                                                                                                                                     e


                                                                                                                                               rts


                                                                                                                                                              s*




                                                                                                                                                                                                    cess
                                                                                                                                                                                                         t




                                                                                                                                                                                                     ling
                                                                              e




                                                                                                                                                                                                  men
                                                                                                                                  enc
                              tion




                                                                           dur




                                                                                                                                                                                                       )


                                                                                                                                                                                                       )
                                           ase




                                                                                        dard


                                                                                                     ent




                                                                                                                                                           ent




                                                                                                                                                                                                 ges


                                                                                                                                                                                                yers
                                                                                                                                           repo




                                                                                                                                                                                                   m
            hm




                                                                                                                                                                                               ic fi
                                                                                                                                                                                               pro
                                                                                                                 divi
                                                       iliat




                                                                                                                              nfer
                                                                         oce




                                                                                                                                                                                              age
                                                                                                                                                                                              age
                          itra




                                                                                                                                                                                             pay
                                       of c




                                                                                                    dgm




                                                                                                                                                           m
           ttac




                                                                                    stan




                                                                                                                                                                                         tron
                                                                                                                                                       urn
                                                                                                                                         nce




                                                                                                                                                                                        e of
                                                                     r pr
                                                         c




                                                                                                               t or




                                                                                                                                                                                      man
                                                                                                                                                                                      man
                      Arb




                                                                                                                            l co
                                                     con
                                      ent




                                                                                                                                                                                       fee
                                                                                               of ju
       al a




                                                                                                                                                     adjo
                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                       o


                                                                                  me




                                                                                                                                                                                   Elec
                                                                                                                                                                                    rvic
                                                                                                               our


                                                                                                                             ria


                                                                                                                                       form
                                     gnm




                                                                                                                                                                  ic
                                                                   urt
                                                   n or




                                                                                                                                                                                case
                                                                                                                                                                                 ase
       ri




                                                                                                                        Pret




                                                                                                                                                               ron
                                                                                    i


                                                                                                 n


                                                                                                           al c




                                                                                                                                                                              ic se
                                                                               on t
   Pret




                                                                                                                                                    s on
                                                              s co




                                                                                            atio




                                                                                                                                                                                 c
                                              iatio




                                                                                                                                   Per
                               assi




                                                                                                                                                                  t




                                                                                                                                                                          ated
                                                                                                          erci




                                                                                                                                                                            ated
                                                                                                                                                             Elec




                                                                                                                                                                         tron
                                                                                s




                                                                                                                                                Rule
                                                             aim




                                                                                             lic
                                                                           Rule
                                            Med
                            dom




                                                                                                         m
                                                                                         Pub




                                                                                                                                                                      om
                                                                                                                                                                         om




                                                                                                                                                                    Elec
                                                          ll cl




                                                                                                     Com




                                                                                                                                                                   Aut
                                                                                                                                                                      Aut
                         Ran




                                                       Sma




Source: Doing Business database, http://www.doingbusiness.org/data.
Note: This figure is based on a sample of 189 economies. For features marked with an asterisk, an economy must have received a score of
at least 0.5 to be included in the count.




                                                                                                                                                                                     Good Practices for Courts   5
    Expanding Knowledge About Good
    Court Practices and Reform Efforts


                                This publication resulted from earlier communications with colleagues at the OECD
                                who were looking for information on court performance indicators, benchmarking
                                options, and good practice examples. The QJPI was introduced at that very time,
                                tracking a new set of good practice indicators for understanding commercial case
                                performance. To assist courts interested in learning more about how other courts have
                                addressed the 15 core good practice areas tracked by the Doing Business report,
                                this document outlines the key elements needed for effective and user-friendly
                                implementation. It also points to lessons learned and provides some good practice
                                examples from around the globe for each area:

                                The key elements needed for effective and user-friendly implementation. These
                                were selected from a wide range of reports and case studies and were chosen based
                                on their applicability to courts of all sizes and jurisdictions.

                                The lessons other courts have learned. The lessons learned in the design and
                                implementation of a particular good practice area were chosen based on a review of
                                assessment reports from a variety of countries. Naturally, each court has learned many
                                diverse lessons and some are unique to a particular location; chosen for inclusion here
                                were those repeatedly mentioned in key review reports.

                                Good practice examples. The examples from around the world in this report make
                                it easier for other courts interested in enhancing one or more practice area to better
                                understand what is required in designing and implementing effective services that meet
                                court and court-user needs. The examples were selected because assessments have
                                shown that they have been effectively implemented and have received good court-
                                user feedback. All of the good practice elements are used in a majority of countries
                                in some form, but the meaning of each differs to some extent between countries, and
                                related implementation requirements are not always well understood. And as with any
                                good practice, its applicability in a different country and different court will need to
                                be assessed, and adjustments may be required to ease its transferability.

                                Although the report has a special focus on OECD countries and those seeking accession
                                to the OECD, these same lessons apply to other countries, and many interesting good
                                practice examples can be found in non-OECD jurisdictions. Thus, when feasible, non-
                                OECD country experiences were also included. Nevertheless, even the very best good
                                practice examples may not be feasible in some jurisdictions, due to incompatible legal
                                frameworks, high costs, and/or inadequate IT infrastructure and local court and user
                                capacities. As such, the good practice examples presented here should be taken as
                                just that—examples only, possibly seen as aspirational goals or benchmarks to work
                                toward in the future rather than as a mandatory prescription.




6   Good Practices for Courts
          1                         Good Practice Area:
                                    Court Structures and Proceedings

   Court structure and              The first component assessed by the Doing Business QJPI is related to the structure
      proceedings                   and select proceedings established at a court to handle commercial cases. Four
                                    particularly good practice areas have been included in the index: the availability of
         Availability of
         a specialized              a specialized commercial court or division, the availability of a small claims court or
       commercial court             simplified procedure for small claims, the availability of pretrial attachment, and the
          or division               random assignment of cases to judges. These four good practice areas have proven
                                    to be essential for courts in effectively handling different case types in a fair and
        Availability of a           transparent manner that protects the rights of debtors and creditors alike. This is not
     small claims court or          to say that this is an exhaustive list of good structure and procedure options that
     simplified procedure
        for small claims            courts can employ to better meet the needs of all court users. For example, limiting
                                    the requirements for notarization to only the most essential documents is another
                                    important good practice to support efficient case processing—and not just for courts
         Availability of
                                    and enforcement agencies. An effective notary system is also a factor in most other
      pretrial attachment
                                    Doing Business indicator areas, such as starting a business, registering property, or
                                    resolving insolvency. Changing notarization requirements and improving the operations
         Criteria used to           of notaries is, however, generally beyond the control of the courts. Other procedural
     assign cases to judges         good practices, such as pretrial conferences, differentiated case management, and
                                    clear adjournment rules, are included in one of the QJPI’s other good practice areas.




1.1 AVAILABILITY OF A SPECIALIZED COMMERCIAL COURT OR COURT DIVISION

Background

Court specialization is commonly considered to be an                     a more detailed review of implementation requirements
important reform initiative to advance the development                   for specialized courts, see Gramckow and Walsh 2013).
of a successful judicial system. Court specialization                    These studies have also shown that court specialization
has been shown to also address broader business and                      of any type should take different forms depending on
development concerns, such as a better investment                        the needs of a particular jurisdiction. This can mean the
climate or more adequate protection of the environment.                  assignment of specialized judges to regular panels, the
Studies from the United States, Australia, and other                     creation of specialized benches, or, if the case volume is
countries have shown that specialization can be helpful                  large enough, the establishment of a specialized court
in improving the processing of court cases that are more                 in the commercial center of a country, or a combination
complex or require special expertise, including expertise                of these different options across a country depending
beyond the law, such as in bankruptcy, intellectual                      on the needs of different locations. Not surprisingly,
property, or environmental issues, or cases that must                    the Doing Business 2016 report showed that 97 of the
be handled differently to better reflect the needs of a                  189 economies included had created some form of
particular court user group, such as business cases (for                 commercial court specialization (World Bank 2016).5


5	The Doing Business methodology assess whether a specialized commercial court or a section dedicated solely to hearing commercial cases is in
  place at the court included in the study.




                                                                                Good Practice Area: Court Structures and Proceedings             7
       BOX 1.
       Beyond Costly International Arbitration:
       Addressing International Commercial Disputes Locally

       A new trend in commercial litigation involving parties from more than one country is the “local-international”
       commercial court that is being created not just in international free trade zones, such as the Dubai
       International Finance Center Court, but also in regular (non-English speaking) jurisdictions with high
       levels of international business. These special courts offer litigation in English and are created based on
       demand as an alternative to the increasingly costly international arbitration processes that many mid-
       size and smaller companies trading across borders can no longer afford. An example is the limited-juris-
       diction international commerce chamber at the District Court in Rotterdam. In addition, commercial court
       hearings are already offered in German courts in several commercial centers. The planned creation of a special
       international commerce division at the District Court of Amsterdam, and similar efforts at the district courts in
       Hamburg, Cologne, Bonn, and Düsseldorf, Germany, are currently pending legislation.

       Source: Gramckow 2016.




    The international court studies have also pointed to                    general public’s trust in the courts, if not adequately
    some drawbacks that are important to note when                          addressed (Gramckow and Walsh 2013). The following
    considering any specialization effort. For example,                     sections outline the key components of this good
    special attention to, and the allocation of additional                  practice area and lessons learned across the world to
    resources for, handling business cases can lead to the                  help courts assess their own specialization needs and
    perception that the court provides preferential services                address potential problem areas early on. The good
    to the business community, which can undermine the                      practice example section offers further information from
                                                                            three well-performing commercial courts.




                  KEY ELEMENTS                                  LESSONS LEARNED                           GOOD PRACTICE EXAMPLE

                                                     •	 The level of specialization should be
                                                        tailored to current and future needs
                                                        and not just follow external pressure,
                                                        and it should be flexible enough
     •	 Data-driven specialization                      to adapt to a changing business
     •	 Enabling legislation and court rules            environment.
     •	 Streamlined processes                        •	 Services for self-representing litigants
                                                        should be reflected.                       •	 The Delaware Court of Chancery
     •	 Appropriate facility and IT infrastructure
                                                     •	 A cost/benefit study should be             •	 The London Mercantile Court
     •	 Specialized judicial selection and              conducted to select the most
        capacity building for judges, court staff,                                                 •	 The “Tribunal de Commerce” of
                                                        appropriate form of specialization.
        and users                                                                                     Abidjan
                                                     •	 Efforts should be made to counteract
     •	 Monitoring system to track                      any potential negative effects of
        performance and inform adjustment               specialization.
        needs
                                                     •	 The functioning and benefits of the
                                                        new system should be explained to
                                                        manage public expectations and
                                                        perceptions.




8   Good Practices for Courts
Key elements

Key elements for implementing and maintaining effective             cases to understand what type and form of special
court specialization are those that allow the court to              attention they may require.
adjust its specialization offers over time to meet the ever-   •	   Reviewing the data and views of the court’s
changing needs of the business environment it is serving.           leadership, the government, judges, and others
This involves especially the needs of small and mid-sized           to understand what areas of specialization are
businesses as well as consumers, whether or not they                considered important and a matter of public interest.
are involved in international commercial transactions.         •	   Using the data and views of the various court actors
Larger, and especially multinational, companies tend                to determine what specialization option will most
to favor and include international arbitration options in           likely meet the needs identified.
contractual agreements, as they can afford them and thus       •	   Assessing the need to adjust the rules or laws to
rarely rely on local courts. Below are some key elements            support the different options.
needed for effective specialization identified by courts       •	   Conducting on-the-job training needs analyses of
in countries as diverse as Tanzania, South Africa, the              judges to identify areas of judicial specialization that
United States, the United Kingdom, South Korea,                     require additional training and other educational
Germany, the Netherlands, Abu Dhabi, and Egypt.                     development programs or activities. Such analysis
                                                                    should also consider how long it would take to
Data to identify sufficient “special” case handling                 develop the requisite educational courses to
needs and volume to target specialization requirem-                 develop the needed number of specialized judges.
ents and justify their expense. Commercial cases               •	   Based on the data collected, evaluating the other
range from simple contract disputes to complex                      resources that need to be made available for the
litigation issues in specialized legal fields. They can             different options and their likely costs.
involve straightforward disputes about nonpayment              •	   Organizing discussions and outreach to other
of a contract or the delivery of faulty goods between               courts that have gone through similar changes to
two business partners, complex disputes concerning                  determine a good approach to planning, pilot
the insolvency of a large firm, or intellectual property            testing, implementing, and monitoring the chosen
right infringements involving many parties. The special             options and to provide information for future rollout
expertise needed varies, depending on the type and                  and continuous fine-tuning.
volume of commercial disputes. Today, courts operating
in large commercial centers across the globe tend to           Key elements in establishing specialization also have to
be presented with commercial cases ranging from the            focus on its impact on the rest of the court and legal
simplest to the most complex, not counting those that          system, especially on any real or perceived significant
are utilizing international arbitration. Courts in smaller     inequalities in the handling of other case types.
cities and rural areas tend to have fewer or different
needs for specialization, depending on their business          Enabling court rules or legislation. Naturally, any new
environments.                                                  form of specialization has to be supported by enabling
                                                               court rules and legislation. Effective specialization
In order to assess the type and level of specialization        frequently means not just that a particular court with
that would be feasible for a particular court jurisdiction,    specially trained judges will focus on a special set of
it is important to have data and stakeholder (such as          cases but also that different, streamlined processes to
judges, the business/legal community, and so forth)            more effectively handle such cases are in place. This
opinions to inform the choice of specialization options.       means, that court rules and procedural codes may
At a minimum this means:                                       need to be adjusted enable the court to use different
                                                               processes. Parallel enhancement of new rules and draft
•	   Assessing the number of cases by type that were           legislation while pilot projects are being developed is
     filed and processed in the court and the filing and       essential. In some jurisdictions courts may be authorized
     type of settlement trends, and also the collective        to adjust court rules to test pilot a new specialization
     views of judges, private lawyers, and the business        approach but for long-term permanent procedural
     community on the processing needs of those                changes and a country-wide rollout the law itself may




                                                                     Good Practice Area: Court Structures and Proceedings      9
     need to be changed. This is a process that can take a        ful implementation of any specialization. At the same
     while and is generally beyond the control of the court       time, relevant education and training will also need to
     and therefore requires early legislative engagement to       be made available to other professions that are part of
     ensure enabling legislation is in place to the change        the process, such as experts, mediators, prosecutors,
     does not end after a successful pilot period.                private attorneys, and enforcement agents, to enable
                                                                  them to respond effectively to the new court option.
     Use of the specialization effort as an opportunity to        Equally important is that the business community
     develop more streamlined procedures for commer-              understands and has an appreciation of the changes
     cial cases as a test for process enhancements in other       that are being introduced, and if small businesses and
     areas of the courts. It is generally understood that well-   individual consumers are the likely litigants, developing
     functioning commercial benches and courts are success-       resources for self-representing plaintiffs will be
     ful because they are staffed by qualified judges and are     especially crucial.
     applying streamlined processes and meaningful case
     management techniques. The leading commercial courts         A system to monitor the implementation of
     in the world, such as those in Singapore, South Korea,       specialization. Building on the preliminary data
     Delaware (the United States), or the highly specialized      obtained during the initial planning phase and the case
     Admiralty Court in London, all distinguish themselves        management and user feedback information collected
     by using comprehensive and clear processing timelines,       during implementation, the court should track (or
     a range of early settlement options, fast-track process-     develop) the information available to understand if the
     ing, and comprehensive case management approaches;           new option is meeting its objectives and goals and is
     they are also all supported by advanced IT solutions and     worth the change investment. This will include case filing
     automated case management systems (CMSs). Using              data; information on timelines, cost and resource needs,
     the commercial court as a testbed for process optimi-        and court outcomes; and feedback from internal and
     zation and other efficiency enhancement options will         external stakeholders and users. Without such progress
     also be helpful in advancing changes throughout the          monitoring, any needed adjustments may be missed
     entire court system, an important factor in counter-         and further rollout plans will be insufficiently supported.
     ing public perception of preferential treatment for the
     business sector.
                                                                  Lessons learned
     Availability of appropriate facilities, equipment,
     and adjusted IT structures, including adjusted case          Understanding court business–based specialization
     management software. The choice and scope of                 needs and future trends. As outlined above,
     specialization will determine the need for supporting        specialization decisions should be based on the current
     court facilities and infrastructure. A special court         business needs of the courts, their ability to adapt over
     building tends to be the most costly option and has          the short and long term, and especially future trends.
     to be justified by sufficient special case volume and        In some instances, unusual economic developments,
     demand and the capacities to respond. Considering            such as the 2008 worldwide economic crisis or local
     that specialization generally means not only that judges     economic up- or downward trends in certain sectors
     with special qualifications and expertise are assigned       or in general, can significantly change the number
     but that more streamlined proceedings are being              and type of commercial cases filed in the courts.
     applied, any CMS will also need to be adjusted to            Depending on economic pressures, especially if the
     reflect the new processes. The time needed to make the       business community is in a crisis situation, demands
     necessary system changes will need to be reflected in        for commercial court services in special areas, such
     the planning process.                                        as real property, bankruptcies, and so forth, can spike
                                                                  temporarily. Assessing multi-year court filing and
     Development of qualified judges, court staff,                processing trends and ongoing user feedback and
     and other core participants. Adequate training for           needs assessments are therefore essential. There may
     judges to adjudicate commercial cases effectively            be a temporary need for the court to react to particular
     and, together with court staff, to implement special         commercial cases, for example, but such spike may not
     processing requirements is a necessity for the success-      be a long-term trend that would require the creation




10   Good Practices for Courts
of a permanent response. This does not mean that a
court that is diligently tracking filing and processing          BOX 2.
trends and prospects should ignore such spikes and               The Self-Represented Litigant Coordinator in
exceptional situations; rather, it means that different,         Colorado, United States
temporary solutions should be considered.
                                                                 The Coordinators, commonly known as “Sherlocks,”
                                                                 work for the court. They do not provide legal
Determining whether external pressure for special-
                                                                 advice but help self-represented litigants with
ization reflects actual current and future needs. The
                                                                 general questions, paperwork, and resources,
business community can be a strong ally for pushing
                                                                 including how to find a pro bono lawyer and fill out
court specialization. However, this also means that
                                                                 forms related to their case, while also educating
particularly strong business groups may promote options
                                                                 litigants on state statutes, rules, policies, and
that prioritize investments in changes that benefit their
                                                                 procedures that may be applicable (within legal
constituency only. Again, it is essential that the courts        limitations).
have—and quickly develop—data to inform stake-
holders and decision makers, especially government               The Coordinator can help anyone who is not
counterparts, about actual filing and processing trends          represented by an attorney with non-criminal
to avoid creating specialization options that may                matters that are filed in county court. Appointments
respond to temporary trends only or create a significant         are recommended and given priority; however
imbalance in the court’s ability to serve all court users        walk-ins are welcome and will be assisted on a first-
equally.                                                         come, first-serve basis. Appointments can be made
                                                                 online, via e-mail, or in person at the court, and
Determining whether the availability of assistance               the court clerk provides assistance in making the
to self-representing litigants is important. The need            appointment.
to provide services to self-representing litigants is not
                                                                 This is a free service provided by the court and has
always seen as a priority at commercial courts, since
                                                                 proven to very popular and helpful for litigants as
companies tend to be able to afford to hire a lawyer
                                                                 well as the court. In 2014, the Sherlocks’ first full year
as part of their cost of doing business. However,
                                                                 in operation, the program had more than 100,000
depending on the country context, the small and even
                                                                 contacts with self-represented individuals.
mid-sized companies that the court serves may not be
able to afford a lawyer; equally important, there is the         Source: Colorado Judicial Branch website,
                                                                 https://www.courts.state.co.us.
consumer, often one of the parties in these disputes,
to consider. Many well-performing courts are providing
and continuously enhancing information and assistance
to self-representing litigants in general. These systems
are also helpful in business cases, but further special
information may be needed. An interesting example              commercial cases may not enhance case processing
of assistance to self-representing litigants can be found      timeliness unless procedures are streamlined, and
in the U.S. state of Colorado. In addition to helpful          that focusing select judges on these cases also tends
information and forms that can be accessed via the             to mean that they are no longer available to handle
courts’ website, each judicial district has a self-help        other cases. The need to balance resource allocation
center that is staffed by Self-Represented Litigant            to specialized commercial courts is not specific to any
Coordinators commonly referred to as “Sherlocks” (see          particular country, but it tends to be a more prevalent
box 2).                                                        issue in developing countries, where pressures from
                                                               influential parts of the business community can be
Weighing the costs and benefits of specialization.             strong, while small entrepreneurs, consumers, and other
The choice for a particular form of specialization will also   court users, especially those looking for court assistance
need to be weighed in relation to the costs associated         to settle family matters or neighbor disputes, have
with its implementation. Even if the creation of a special     relatively little influence. Any specialization effort has
bench alone is chosen, it is important to understand that      to consider its potential impact on other court areas in
designating specialized, trained judges to handle select       terms of resource allocation and service delivery. Such




                                                                    Good Practice Area: Court Structures and Proceedings      11
     specialization should generally be considered as an          better planning and implementation of changes and are
     effort to improve court operations overall, and lessons      also an important vehicle for balancing potential negative
     learned should inform future plans for enhancing all         public reaction to commercial court specialization. A
     court operations across a country.                           very well-informed public education campaign should
                                                                  accompany the planning and implementation of any
     Counteracting the potential negative effects of              specialization. Ideally, this kind of campaign would
     specialization. Studies in the United States and other       also include information about future plans to extend
     countries have shown that the creation of some forms         beneficial lessons to other courts.
     of court specialization, especially a separate specialized
     court, can trigger negative consequences related to the
     quality of judicial decisions and the resource allocation    Good practice examples
     to the rest of the courts. The potential negative public
     perception of preferential treatment for (select) business   Although a relatively large number of countries have
     communities is an important issue to address, as will be     implemented specialized commercial courts, it is
     further outlined in the next section. In addition, judges    surprising that few case studies are readily available to
     who have been exclusively handling a narrow scope            identify and report on particularly good implementation
     of business cases, such as bankruptcies or intellectual      examples. Available reports from numerous specialized
     property rights, tend not only to become too familiar        commercial courts from less well-documented
     with the equally specialized private lawyers appearing       jurisdictions, such as Uganda, Ghana, Tanzania, India,
     before them but also to develop “tunnel vision,” that        or Saudi Arabia, as well as internationally recognized
     is, they lose track of other legal trends and innovations,   centers of judicial excellence, such as Singapore, Hong
     leading to stagnant decision making that can eventually      Kong, and South Korea, provide evidence for the
     result in judgments that are less relevant to legal,         effectiveness of such specialized courts but offer little
     economic, and societal trends. Experiences from various      detail to fully elucidate what exactly was implemented
     countries, including the United States, the United           and what did or did not work. In other cases, experiences
     Kingdom, Australia, France, and Germany, which have          from commercial courts well known for their good
     decades of experience in providing specialized court         performance, such as the Copenhagen Maritime and
     services, have shown that this is a problem that can be      Commercial Court, are simply not well documented. As
     managed well by appropriate selection, rotation, and         a result, there are clearly more existing good practice
     performance-management systems.                              examples that could be promoted if the appropriate
                                                                  information were available. Notwithstanding this limita-
     Managing public perceptions and expectations.                tion, the commercial courts below present effective
     Any changes in court—or any other government                 examples of specialized court implementation that have
     agency—operations and services require that the target       performed well over time.
     beneficiaries and the general public understand a) the
     benefits of the specialized system, and b) how to use the    The Delaware Court of Chancery. Established in 1792,
     new system to reap those envisioned benefits. Courts         this court is one of only three pure equity courts in
     and relevant ministries that involve all stakeholders in     the United States and focuses mainly on business and
     the design and initial pilot processes tend to develop       corporate law. Its jurisdiction includes cases involving
     a stronger communication strategy to ensure that all         fiduciary duties, alternative entity litigation (limited
     potential users and other participants understand the        liability companies, limited liability partnerships),
     advantages of the special court and to allow feedback        partnerships and business trusts, estates, trustees,
     for further improvements. Recent examples of such            zoning matters, guardianships, and contested wills. This
     extensive consultations include efforts in the United        court has several distinctive features that contribute to
     Kingdom, when changes to the proceedings and cost            its success and popularity. First, its jurisdiction is limited
     structures of the Admiralty and Commercial Court             and purely equitable. As a court of equity, the Court of
     were considered, and Singapore, when the creation            Chancery does not hear criminal cases and rarely hears
     of the Singapore International Commercial Court was          routine civil cases seeking only money damages (such
     proposed. Wide-ranging consultations contribute to           as products liability or automobile negligence cases).




12   Good Practices for Courts
Instead the judges hear major corporate law disputes                        way through to the final decision. The judges tend to be
and business-to-business contract disputes, such as                         interested in engaging with local practitioners and are
disputes between joint venture partners, in a timely                        always seeking feedback and encouraging innovation.
manner. The assigned judge oversees the litigation and                      Few cases go through a complete trial, due to the court’s
manages the schedule until the case is concluded. The                       proactive case management, a general encouragement
Court of Chancery adopted electronic filing early and                       to consider sensible ADR, and commercial realities, that
provides litigants electronic access to case document                       is, the fact that clients tend to understand when early
and a host of other information, inducing court                             settlement and other options are beneficial to them.
decisions. The court’s procedural rules allow the judge
and the parties to tailor litigation as necessary, including                The mercantile courts are working because they are
the use of equitable remedies (such as temporary                            staffed by very able judges, have very good staff, and
injunctions and declaratory judgements, depending on                        apply good case management practices. Until recently,
the circumstances of a particular case.6 Furthermore,                       however, they lacked more advanced technology to
the scholarly culture of the court emphasizes the                           support their operations. In 2016, this limitation began
expression of varying opinions by the judges, resulting                     to be addressed by the government, which is committing
in an extensive body of case law. Third, the geographic                     up to £700 million in investments in technology and
proximity of the court’s five judges fosters a tradition of                 other IT upgrades. In addition, these courts, especially
collaboration and collegiality, allowing them to consult                    the court in London, are testing new, shorter processing
with each other on new and complex issues that arise                        and trial options for cases that can be fairly tried on the
in their cases. (see Hannaford, Rottman, and Gonzalez                       basis of limited disclosure, summary assessment of cost,
2000). Today, he court applies a variety of approaches                      and oral evidence if the parties agree to it. There are
to processing different case types efficiently, including                   also consultations under way to introduce some form
voluntary mediation and confidential binding arbitration.                   of fixed fees or cost-capping—and not just of court
It offers a range of e-services and uses ICT solutions                      fees—in order to enable the court to recover its cost
extensively to manage its significant caseload.                             to the extent possible and also to encourage parties
                                                                            to settle early. Another procedural option that is so far
The London (and Greater England and Wales)                                  underutilized is the so-called “early neutral evaluation,”
mercantile court(s). Set up in the 1990s, the 10                            in which a judge who is not otherwise part of the case
specialist mercantile courts created in England and                         gives a nonbinding indication of its merits at an early
Wales handle business disputes that require specialized                     process stage before motions are placed and before it is
judges but fall outside the scope of the Commercial                         assigned to a trial judge, is being reviewed to increase
Court in London, which handles commercial cases that                        its use when feasible (see below under section 4). An
involve very high value and international cases, or the                     additional increasingly employed option puts experts
jurisdiction of the Chancery Division. These 10 courts                      together in the witness box to reduce the back-and-
provide regional commercial court services, particularly                    forth procedure during contested issues. There is also
to small and medium-sized enterprises but also to large                     significant focus on the cost of litigation and its impact
national and international businesses. Although other                       on access to justice and how this can best be addressed
commercial courts, such as the one in Singapore, may                        (Langdon-Down 2015).
have more advanced technology and shorter processing
deadlines, these mercantile courts stand out for their                      The Commercial Court of Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire. After
willingness to innovate and work with other stakeholders                    the post-electoral crisis of 2011, resolving a commercial
to develop good processes even when budgets are                             dispute in Abidjan took 770 days, according to Doing
tight and the economy puts additional pressures on the                      Business data. Civil courts were backlogged, and
courts and businesses alike. All of these courts are well                   commercial cases were stuck among the flood of civil
administrated, and the ease and speed of procedures                         cases. In 2012, to provide more suitable responses to
are recognized by litigants. One of the advantages is                       business disputes, a stand-alone commercial court
that the same judge handles a case from filing all the                      was created in Abidjan, and professional judges were



6	 For further information about the court, its rules and services see http://courts.delaware.gov/chancery/




                                                                                   Good Practice Area: Court Structures and Proceedings   13
     appointed to work with newly recruited lay judges.                            FIGURE 5.	 Côte d’Ivoire introduced a commercial court
     Today, it takes 525 days to resolve the same dispute                                                                                 and cut the time to enforce contracts
     in Abidjan (figure 5). Similar results can be observed
     in virtually all of the Sub-Saharan African economies                                                                                                Total time cut by 245 days
                                                                                                                                    800
     that have introduced a commercial court. In the 16
     economies in the region that have launched such courts                                                                         700
     over the past 10 years—Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,




                                                                                       Time to enforce a contract (calendar days)
     Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Lesotho, Liberia,                                                                         600
     Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Rwanda, Senegal, the
     Seychelles, Sierra Leone, and Togo—the average time                                                                            500
     to resolve the standardized case measured by Doing
                                                                                                                                    400
     Business was reduced by about 2.5 months.
                                                                                                                                    300

                                                                                                                                    200

                                                                                                                                    100

                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                             Filing and            Trial and
                                                                                                                                                                                   Enforcement
                                                                                                                                               service            judgment

                                                                                                                                                           DB16       DB12


                                                                                   Source: Doing Business database; http://www.doingbusiness.org/data.
                                                                                   Note: The white arrows indicate the decrease in time for the trial
                                                                                   and judgment and enforcement phases. The blue arrow indicates
                                                                                   the decrease in the total time.




     1.2 AVAILABILITY OF A SMALL CLAIMS COURT OR SIMPLIFIED PROCEDURES FOR SMALL CLAIMS

     Background

     In many countries, the complexity and formality of the                        and has since been spreading worldwide, both changing
     legal system, along with the often high cost associated                       the way that justice services are delivered and increasing
     with litigating even simple disputes, can be prohibitive                      access to justice. To date, according to Doing Business
     to many court users and can collectively operate to                           2016 data, 128 out of the 189 economies included in
     impede access to court services. To respond to these                          the study have small claims courts or proceedings.7
     factors as well as address the increasing resources                           Across regions, OECD high-income countries as well as
     expended by courts in addressing simple disputes and                          countries in Latin America and the Caribbean have the
     the need to more efficiently resolve them, judiciaries                        highest number of courts and simplified procedures for
     began developing special courts and proceedings as                            small claims—91 percent of these economies display
     early as the 1600s in England. This movement ultimately                       this feature (figure 6).
     made its way across to North America by the early 1900s




     7	The Doing business methodology assess hether a small claims court or a fast-track procedure for small claims is in place. A score of 1 is assigned
       if such a court or procedure is in place, it is applicable to all civil cases and the law sets a cap on the value of cases that can be handled through
       this court or procedure. If small claims are handled by a stand-alone court, the point is assigned only if this court applies a simpliﬁed procedure.
       An additional score of 0.5 is assigned if parties can represent themselves before this court or during this procedure. If no small claims court or
       simpliﬁed procedure is in place, a score of 0 is assigned (World Bank 2016, 153).




14   Good Practices for Courts
FIGURE 6.	 Share of economies with a court or procedure for small claims


 Share of economies with a court
 or procedure for small claims (%)

       100
        80
        60
        40
        20
         0
             Latin America      OECD                    Middle East &    East Asia    Europe &      Sub-Saharan
                                           South Asia
              & Caribbean    high income                North Africa     & Pacific   Central Asia      Africa


Source: Doing Business database, http://www.doingbusiness.org/data.
Note: This figure is based on a sample of 189 economies.




Small claims courts are generally specialized courts                                 and increase public trust in the judicial system. These
created by law with specific duties and powers to                                    courts/proceedings specifically provide a segment of
adjudicate and resolve small-value disputes. Special                                 court users with a cost-effective and efficient alternative
proceedings or tracks established in some countries,                                 that does not require them to undergo the customary
especially in Europe, represent another option, where                                adjudication process and incur the high cost often
small claims are processed by the first instance courts                              associated with resolving disputes. However, despite
applying a different set of or simplified procedural                                 the existence of special proceedings for handling small
rules. When developed well and based on user needs,                                  claims in many economies worldwide, establishing
caseload, court capacity, resources, and court efficiency                            actual small claims courts with dedicated judges and
in handling simple disputes, small claims courts and                                 staff who apply simplified and less formal procedures
simplified proceedings/tracks can enhance court-user                                 in processing small disputes has proven to be a more
experience, provide greater access to services, reduce                               effective option for courts users.
caseload, enhance efficiency, free up court resources,




                  KEY ELEMENTS                                          LESSONS LEARNED                                  GOOD PRACTICE EXAMPLE
                                                        •	 Study of needs, demands, case data,
 •	 Defined and limited jurisdiction
                                                           recources, ADR services, etc., guiding
    (subject matter and monetary
                                                           the selection of the most appropriate
    thershold)
                                                           specialization option (stand-alone                     •	 The Danish Small Claims Procedure
 •	 Affordable services with defined and                   court or proceedings)
    lower-cost fee schemes and options                                                                            •	 The New Zealand Dispute Tribunal
                                                        •	 An enabling legal framework that
    for legal aid                                                                                                 •	 The Los Angeles County Small
                                                           clearly details specialization rules
 •	 Simplified processes and informal                      and processes                                             Claims Court
    proceedings                                                                                                   •	 The Singapore Small Claims Tribunal
                                                        •	 Regular review and adjustment of
 •	 Shorter time frames for completion                     the monetary threshold                                 •	 The Washington, DC Small
    of case events and speedy resolution                                                                             Claims Court
                                                        •	 Wide accessibility to targeted services
 •	 Availability of support mechanisms to                  and information for all court users
    litigants, including information and
                                                        •	 ADR services that are provided
    services
                                                           throughtout the case process




                                                                                              Good Practice Area: Court Structures and Proceedings         15
     Key elements
                                                                                 Affordability. Affordability is another key element
     Simplicity, informality, affordability, and speed are                       of all small claims courts/proceedings. Driven by the
     the cornerstones of small claims courts and simplified                      need to provide greater accessibility and a suitable
     proceedings/tracks. Regardless of the mechanism,                            dispute-resolution forum especially to those with limited
     which should vary from one jurisdiction to another                          financial means, the cost of filing and processing a case
     based on needs and resources, establishing small claims                     in these alternative venues is generally significantly
     courts and proceedings can serve to reduce the burden                       lower than in regular first instance–level courts. Detailed
     of litigation and free up the courts to more efficiently                    fee schedules are generally outlined by law with fee
     and effectively resolve larger and more complex cases.                      amounts directly related to the cost of the claim. For
     Based on a review of well-performing small claims                           instance, the Washington, DC Small Claims Court rules
     courts/proceedings in Singapore, New Zealand, Canada,                       stipulate that for claims of US$500 or less, the cost for
     the United States, Denmark, and the United Kingdom,                         filing a new claim is US$5; for a claim of US$500 or more
     among many other countries, a number of common                              and up to US$2,500, the fee is US$10; and for claims
     elements are key to their success.                                          over US$2,500 and up to US$5,000, the fee is US$45. A
                                                                                 similarly graduated approach is also used in the United
     Limited jurisdiction: subject matter and monetary                           Kingdom when filing a small claim (see box 3). Other
     threshold. Small claims courts are generally limited to                     countries such as Denmark go so far as to provide for a
     resolving simpler civil disputes involving some type of                     fee schedule for lawyers’ fees that directly correlates to
     debt recovery rather than large, complex commercial                         the number of hours spent on the case.
     disputes. In some jurisdictions, simple traffic fines,
     landlord-tenant cases, or other simple matters may be                       Various forms of legal aid also work to provide greater
     handled in a small claims court. For example, Denmark                       accessibility and affordability. These include free
     has instituted a debt-recovery proceeding for parties                       legal help, representation, and advice; fee waivers
     who are not contesting an issue but simply wish to                          and exemption schemes; and the acceptance of self-
     recover a claim. Family disputes, including divorce and                     representation. In the United Kingdom, for example,
     custody cases, bankruptcy, defamation/libel or slander,                     parties can receive legal aid if they meet a means test
     tax disputes, and so on, are generally not within the                       that considers income and capital, and help is even provi-
     jurisdiction of small claims courts or proceedings. In                      ded in determining whether the necessary criteria have
     addition, the monetary threshold is typically limited                       been met. If a party does not qualify, he or she may still
     and low. The Doing Business 2010 report indicated that                      be entitled to receive free legal advice from the Citizens
     in most economies, the threshold for small claims is                        Advice Bureau or legal drop-in clinic.8 The Washington,
     generally fixed by courts at 20 percent or less of income                   DC Small Claims Court applies a comparable means-
     per capita (Doing Business 2010). In the Washington,                        tested fee waiver scheme; a party who cannot afford to
     DC Small Claims Court in the United States, the limit                       prepay the filing fees can request a waiver by filing a
     is currently set at US$5,000. The small claims court                        motion with the court. In the Los Angeles County Small
     in Ontario, Canada has a threshold of Can$25,000,                           Claims Court, a similar waiver request can be granted,
     while the Singapore Small Claims Tribunal has a cap of                      provided the party is receiving public benefits and does
     S$10,000. The latter, however, provides that the tribunal                   not earn enough income to pay for the household’s
     may still adjudicate cases in which the amount in dispute                   basic needs. Denmark provides an even greater level of
     is up to S$20,000 if both parties consent in writing. This                  access to assistance. A claimant in Denmark can apply
     flexibility and leeway in handling smaller claims is also                   for means-tested legal aid; apply for public subsidies,
     provided by other courts such as the New Zealand                            which if granted, will pay for a portion of lawyer fees;
     Dispute Tribunal, where small claims are handled.                           and access the “Advokatvagten,” an entity that provides
                                                                                 free advisory legal services to anyone across the country.9


     8	 Citizen Advice Bureaus are independent entities that exist across the country and provide free, confidential, and impartial advice and information
        to individuals in need. Legal Drop-in Clinics are operated by LawWorks, a charity that connects volunteer lawyers with people in need of legal
        advice who are not otherwise eligible for legal aid and cannot afford to pay for a lawyer.
     9	 For more information on the Advokatvagten, see http://www.advokatvagterne.dk/other-languages.




16   Good Practices for Courts
                                                                a case and submit their defense (and so on) verbally.
  BOX 3.                                                        Other jurisdictions allow judges to question witnesses
  Small Claims Mediation Services, Manchester                   and provide assistance to parties if need be. The
  County Court, United Kingdom                                  simplicity of processing a case is buttressed by the
  In 2005, a pilot program was established offering free        informality with which litigants interact with the courts.
  and voluntary in-house mediation services in small            In Sweden, the entire process, from filing to issuance
  claims. In 2006, an evaluation of the pilot scheme            of a judgment, is informal. The parties are not required
  indicated that the services provided achieved a               to use any particular forms to file a claim; no special
  high settlement rate (86 percent) and that the                rules of evidence apply; written witness statements can
  parties expressed a strong level of satisfaction with         be submitted only in limited circumstances; and the
  the mediation services and mediators (93 percent).            form and content of judgments need not comply with
  The pilot was rolled out across the United Kingdom,           any particular rules or guidelines. In other jurisdictions,
  including Wales. Some of its main features included           such as New Zealand, Singapore, and Los Angeles,
  the use of telephone mediation (70 percent of all             California, self-representation is mandatory. In fact,
  mediations were conducted by phone at the time                according to the Doing Business 2016 report, only 12
  of the evaluation) and judicial support. Based on a           of the 128 economies in which a small claims court or
  survey of 3,000 users who were contacted in 2009,             fast-track procedure is in place mandate that parties be
  98 percent were satisfied or very satisfied with the          represented by a lawyer during such disputes. Most of
  services of the mediators and 94 percent stated that          the economies that do so are in the Latin America and
  they would use the services again.                            Caribbean region.

  The Manchester Small Claims Mediation Pilot                   Speedy resolution. In addition to using a simpler legal
  program was awarded the European Commission                   framework, small claims courts/proceedings generally
  for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ) European Scales         apply short time limitations for the completion of action
  of Justice award in 2006.                                     by the court and litigants. Some courts, such as the
  Source: United Kingdom, “Her Majesty’s Court Services Civil   Singapore Small Claims Tribunal, have developed even
  Court Mediation Service Manual” (London: Civil Justice        shorter time limitations for certain actions. For claims
  Council and Judicial Studies Board, 2009).                    filed by or involving a tourist, for example, the court will
                                                                set the case for mediation within 24 hours of filing. To
                                                                ensure speedy resolution of non-tourist small claims, the
                                                                tribunal schedules consultation (mediation) between 10
Simplified rules and informality. Small claims courts/          and 14 days from the date of filing for company claims
proceedings are premised on the use of straightforward          and within seven days from filing for consumer claims.
procedures that are easier for litigants to understand          If a party is not present at consultation and a default
and follow and do not require the parties to rely on the        judgment is entered, the party has 30 days from the
assistance of lawyers. As evidenced in many jurisdictions       date the order was issued to file a motion to set the
(for example, in New Zealand, Washington, DC, and               judgment aside. If the consultation fails, a hearing with
Singapore), small claims courts are often governed by           the referee (the judge in the Small Claims Tribunal)
specific rules that are easier to apply and are separate        will generally be scheduled within seven days of the
and apart from the rules of civil procedures. Even in           consultation. Tribunal decisions may be appealed to
countries that have not developed separate rules for            the high court on points of law after applying to the
small claims, such as Austria, Germany, and Portugal,           district judge for leave to appeal within 14 days of the
the law requires the use of simplified proceedings in           referee’s order. Notice of Appeal must be filed within
small claims matters. Generally, the regular rules of           one month of the district judge’s order granting leave to
civil procedures do not apply to the processing of              file it. Other countries such as Denmark set small claims
small claims. Notification can often be carried out via         cases for one hearing, after which the judges have 14
telephone (by calling the opposing party), personally           days to issue their judgment, making the processing of
by notice delivery, through a call from the court clerk         such cases highly efficient. Similarly, in Norway, once the
to the opposing party, or via a notice by mail. In              case is filed and not resolved through mediation, the
Norway, the rules allow unrepresented parties to file           judgment must be issued no later than three months




                                                                      Good Practice Area: Court Structures and Proceedings     17
     from filing. Other countries with small claims tracks           cases can be established instead. Once one of these
     such as the United Kingdom require that 70 percent of           options is instituted, regular reviews of small claims
     small claims be heard by the court within 30 weeks (from        caseload and an assessment of the effectiveness of the
     receipt to final hearing).                                      court or special proceedings should be undertaken to
                                                                     ensure that it is meeting the needs of court users as well
     Access to services and information. More so than in             as to identify areas for improvements.
     other types of civil disputes, accessibility to information
     and services is key. As such, providing as much                 Having a proper governing legal framework. Like
     information as possible to self-represented litigants in        other specialized courts, the key to the success of small
     various formats and languages and assisting them in             claims courts rests on having a clear and detailed legal
     processing and resolving small claims are necessities.          framework that leaves no room for varying interpretations,
     Access to online information, including forms that              confusion, or delays. A solid legal foundation for
     must be filed, procedural guidelines, checklists, and           processing small claims cases should clearly outline
     other information, can greatly enhance a court user’s           the following: 1) the subject matter jurisdiction, which,
     experience, as can instructional videos on processing           may be simple, small value contractual matters or other
     cases from filing to enforcement of judgments; the              simple case types frequently filed; 2) the monetary
     availability of court hotlines and centers that users can       jurisdiction, specifying a maximum threshold above
     personally access for assistance; implementation of IT          which the disputes would have to be filed in regular first
     tools such as e-filing and e-payment; and the provision of      instance courts; 3) the court’s cost scheme, including
     online remote access to court calendar case information.        filing and other fees required of litigants; 4) the
                                                                     availability of legal aid and the provision of fee waivers
                                                                     or exemptions, as well as the procedures for applying
     Lessons learned                                                 for these mechanisms; 5) the processes and procedures
                                                                     to be used by the parties for completing major case
     Assessing the need, demand, and options for small               events such as filing and notification as well as the time
     claims courts and simplified proceedings. Even                  frames for their completion; 6) the availability of e-filing
     though establishing and operating small claims courts           (in Singapore, for example, despite its availability,
     can save judicial resources, creating and running them          parties in small claims cases cannot e-file); 7) if and when
     requires financial and human investments. The decision          parties can be represented by counsel (considering that
     to establish these courts or special proceedings should         simple matters tend to pose few legal issues, in many
     be based on a careful study of the type of cases that           economies, this is not permissible); 8) the use of ADR,
     could be assigned to small claims processes to benefit          the discretionary power of the court to refer cases to
     court users and free up court resources for more                ADR, and any requirement that the parties attempt
     complex commercial disputes. Also needed are a                  ADR (most often mediation) before proceeding to trial;
     series of detailed reviews of: (i) the legal framework for      9) the effects of reaching a settlement prior to trial and
     processing commercial cases to identify whether the             the enforceability of such agreements; 10) evidentiary
     establishment of a small claims court is permissible; (ii)      matters, including how evidence can be presented
     commercial caseload data for at least three–five years          to the court and at trial; 11) the right to appeal, as in
     (including, for example, filing trends by case types and        some economies, the judgments of a small claims court/
     causes of delays); (iii) existing ADR mechanisms and their      proceedings are final and cannot appealed, while others
     effectiveness in resolving smaller cases and those where        allow appeals to higher courts; 12) the issuance of
     the parties are not represented by counsel; and (iv) user       judgments—how and when; and 13) any other matters
     needs. A determination of the required human and                affecting the processing of a case.
     financial resources will also have to be made to identify
     the initial cost of establishing a small claims court as well   Regularly updating the monetary threshold across
     as the projected future resources needed to maintain its        all court levels. The monetary threshold for small
     operations. Based on the results of this extensive review,      claims should be regularly reviewed and adjusted to
     a decision can be made to establish a stand-alone small         account for trends in case filing by case types, inflation,
     claims court, or in the event that the caseload is too          economic growth, and other local factors. Failing to
     small to warrant a court, special proceedings for small         regularly review the monetary threshold can have a




18   Good Practices for Courts
negative impact on the courts’ caseload, efficiency, and                   resolving small claims in some jurisdictions. For example,
allocation of resources. This was evident in Uruguay in                    the Washington, DC court’s settlement rates in cases
2004, where the threshold was not updated and raised                       going through mediation have ranged from 58 to 73
to account for the growth in per capita income. The                        percent over the past five years. To ensure that parties
failure consequently resulted in an increase in workload                   are provided with various options, the DC court also
at the district courts and processing delays, since small                  allows cases to go through arbitration if mediation has
commercial cases that would have been resolved quickly                     failed, provided all parties consent. Although the model
by the justice of the peace court as originally intended                   may vary from one jurisdiction to another, the success of
were being handled by the district court. According                        ADR in resolving small claims cannot be overlooked (See
to the Doing Business 2012 report, more than 19 eco-                       good practice example 4 further below).
nomies have updated the monetary threshold for their
courts and proceedings since 2003 (Doing Business
2012). In 1996, the United Kingdom tripled the threshold                   Good practice examples
for small claims following a study initiated by Lord Harry
Woolf that argued that doing so would enhance access                       Many countries provide good examples of how small
to civil courts (Woolf 1995). The threshold has since                      claims can be handled and resolved either by establishing
been regularly increased to accommodate the needs of                       courts or developing simplified proceedings or tracks.
the courts and other justice stakeholders.10                               A jurisdiction’s approach to small claims varies and is
                                                                           generally based on the local context. The examples
Providing access to information. It is essential to                        included below were selected based on the level and
provide access to information in paper and online                          ease of services provided and their effectiveness in
formats and in various languages, depending on the                         handling small claims cases and providing access to
ethnic diversity of court users. The information provided                  justice services.
in well-performing courts is always clear, detailed, and
targeted specifically to the small claims court’s users and                The Danish Small Claims Procedures were established
includes: guidelines, procedural rules, copies of the law                  in 2008. Small claims are filed in the district courts,
governing small claims, handbooks on the processing                        which have jurisdiction over claims in which the disputed
of cases, checklists that help court users to identify if                  amount does not exceed DKK 50,000 (approximately
the court has jurisdiction and the type of claim they may                  US$7,500) without interest and cost. The parties may
file, forms that must be filed with the courts to process a                request damages or other types of relief, for example,
case, brochures explaining court services, legal                           vacating a lease. Defendants must contest the claim, and
glossaries, and useful links to helpful organizations.                     if the only issue is to compel the opposing party to fulfill
In Singapore, information on small claims courts is                        it, the parties are provided with simplified debt recov-
provided in Malay, Mandarin Chinese, and Tamil, the                        ery procedures that they can use instead. The Danish
most commonly used languages in the courts. The                            model for handling small claims represents a unique
Washington, DC Small Claims Court has an online live                       approach that provides judges with greater authority
chat function that allows any member of the public to                      over how cases are processed while significantly reduc-
submit inquiries and obtain answers in real time. For                      ing the burden on litigants and generally eliminating
users who may not be technologically savvy, the court                      their apprehension about going to court or representing
operates a resource center that is open to the public.                     themselves.

Providing ADR services. Providing access to a variety                      Unlike in other judiciaries, cases before a district court are
of ADR services throughout the case process and even                       decided by one professional judge and two lay judges.
before a claim is filed (as is the case in Washington, DC) is              These judges are proactive in helping the parties prepare
effective in increasing the settlement rate and reducing                   for the case and guiding them while remaining impartial;
a court’s caseload. Although mandatory mediation is                        in fact, the court has a duty to advise the parties on
not a best practice in all cases, it has been effective in                 legal issues and assist them with presenting evidence.



10	 For the current monetary threshold, see https://www.justice.gov.uk/courts/procedure-rules/civil/rules/part27#27.2.




                                                                                  Good Practice Area: Court Structures and Proceedings      19
     This level of judicial involvement helps parties avoid the               enactment).12 The monetary threshold has been regularly
     need for legal representation. Following a review of the                 increased to reflect inflation rates, growth in per capita
     pleadings and evidence submitted, the court prepares                     income, and other economic and local economic factors,
     a record of the case that is then sent to the parties for                as well as the rising caseload. Second, the tribunals are
     review. Assuming the parties have nothing to add, the                    focused on promoting early settlement by mandating
     court sets the case for a hearing. Only one hearing is set               a consultation (that is, mediation) that is presided over
     and the claim is generally resolved, and the issuance of a               by the tribunal’s registrar shortly after the claim is filed.
     verdict within 14 days of the hearing makes the process                  Failure to attend can result in dismissal or the issuance
     highly efficient. Applying the small claims procedures is                of a default judgment. If no settlement is reached, a
     also within judges’ discretion, and if they deem a case                  hearing before the referee (the tribunal is presided
     to be too complex, the procedures will not be applied.                   over by referees rather than judges) is scheduled,
     To further reduce the potential financial burden created                 providing a second opportunity for the parties to settle.
     by hiring a lawyer, if a party chooses to do so, attorney’s              Only after these attempts are exhausted will the claim
     fees in small claims are fixed based on the amount of                    be adjudicated. Third, the tribunals aim to meet the
     time the lawyer spends on the case.                                      needs of users. Online access is provided to brochures,
                                                                              guidelines, and detailed information on how to proceed
     The Los Angeles County Small Claims Court and the                        with each case process (for example, court fees, aspects
     New Zealand Dispute Tribunals are good examples                          to consider before filing a claim, mediation services, how
     of how a court can provide litigants with services and                   to prepare the case before a hearing, what to do and
     information that essentially reduce (or eliminate) the                   expect during the hearing, how to enforce the court’s
     need to physically go to court. Unlike many other well-                  order, how to file an appeal and debt recovery plans,
     performing courts that have yet to provide online services               and so on) as well as to every form that may be used by
     such as e-filing and e-payments to self-represented                      litigants.
     parties, both of these courts provide this capacity. In
     addition, the Los Angeles County Small Claims Court                      Unlike other courts, the tribunals go a step further in
     provides litigants with online access to a case calendar                 assisting users by ensuring that all forms are accessible
     that can be searched by case number or location and                      in editable (MS Word) and PDF formats, with a detailed
     date; a case summary function allowing parties to obtain                 brochure as well as an “Arrow Guide” for each form out-
     case information by searching by case number and court                   lining how each item must be completed. A seven-part
     location; and a party locator allowing one to search a                   video series in Windows Media Video (WMV) format is
     case by party name. Similarly, the New Zealand Dispute                   available online and provides viewers with an overview
     Tribunal provides for the e-filing of claims, counter-                   of the required procedures, from filing to enforcement
     claims, and requests for a hearing as well as online                     and appeal. These videos are available in Mandarin,
     access to information and guidance on how to process                     Malay, and Tamil. Also, links to service providers, such
     a case. The tribunal can also allow defendants who                       as the Legal Aid Bureau, the Law Society of Singapore,
     cannot attend a court hearing to request appearance via                  the Community Mediation Center, and other potentially
     telephone conference. The websites of both courts also                   useful resources, are included on the website. Certified
     provide good examples of how information and online                      interpreters in Chinese, Tamil, and Malay are provided,
     services should be presented to court users.11                           and access to free interpretation services is also avail-
                                                                              able to parties who speak other languages. The tribunals
     The Singapore Small Claims Tribunals (SSCT). The                         also continuously capture user feedback on all services
     success of these tribunals is the product of many factors.               and assistance tools provided online. This is achieved
     First, they are governed by a detailed legal framework,                  through a short online user survey that seeks to assess
     the Small Claims Act of 1985 that has been regularly                     the utility and ease of using the materials and tools pro-
     reviewed and amended (more than 10 times since its                       vided on the website. Although e-filing has yet to be



     11	 For more information on the Los Angeles County Small Claims Court, see http://www.lacourt.org/division/smallclaims/smallclaims.aspx; on the
         New Zealand Dispute Tribunal, see http://www.justice.govt.nz/tribunals/disputes-tribunal.
     12	 The Small Claims Act was reviewed and amended in 1992, 1995–98, 2001, 2005, 2008, and 2014–15. The tribunals’ case volume has steadily been
         growing since their establishment in 1985, when 3,788 cases were filed; by 2001, 33,768 cases had been filed.




20   Good Practices for Courts
provided to all users in small claims, the tribunal has     List, a legal glossary, and to information on e-filing
worked to enhance remote access to reduce the burden        and e-service, which is mandatory for those parties
that litigation places on court users in an increasing      represented by counsel. A comprehensive list of all court
number of cases. Moreover, since 1998, parties in small     forms and legal aid providers is also available online.
claims cases have been able to attend consultations/
mediations and hearings via video link and telephone        The court also operates the Small Claims Resource
conferencing, while defendants have been allowed to         Center, which is staffed by attorneys from the
admit claims filed against them via telephone.              Neighborhood Legal Services Program and law students
                                                            who are supervised by attorneys from surrounding law
The Washington, DC Small Claims Court was created           schools. In terms of access to ADR services, the court
by law in the early 1930s and is governed by a clear        uses a multi-door approach that is based on providing
and detailed set of rules: the Rule of Procedure for        and facilitating various ADR options at every stage.
the Small Claims and Conciliation Branch. Much like         This approach has demonstrated a significant level of
the Singapore Tribunal, the DC Small Claims Court           success; as noted above, since 2011, the settlement rate
provides an impressive level of access to detailed          for mediated cases in small claims has ranged from 58
information and services to its users. The court is aware   to 73 percent. Mediation is offered before and after a
of its diverse user population and provides information     party files a claim. Also, access to mediation services
in multiple languages. Also available are court-wide        is provided through the Community Information and
interpreter services—in person and by telephone—and         Referral Program (CIRP), which has been operational since
a list of bilingual employees and their languages (court    1985 and provides mediation free of charge. To ensure
employees speak more than 20 languages). Access             easier access to its services, mediation may be provided
to electronic services is provided, with the exception      in person or via telephone. Parties can also access other
of the e-filing of claims by self-represented parties,      entities providing dispute-resolution services through a
which can only be carried out by lawyers. The “Court        database of over 300 organizations that is maintained
Cases Online” system provides remote online access to       by CIRP. In the event that the case is not resolved after
general case information and all docket entries. The        filing the claim, all cases are scheduled for mediation,
system is searchable by case number or name of parties      although this is a legally discretionary action for judges.
and includes a summary of cases (type, status, and          Cases can also be referred to arbitration during the
date filed); names of parties and their attorneys; case     initial scheduling conference with the judge. To do so,
schedules (next hearing date scheduled); docket             both parties must consent, and once the arbitration
information, including all chronological listings of        begins, neither party can withdraw. The arbitrators, who
officially recorded entries in a case; and financial        may be selected from a list available at the court, will
information involving court fees and payment history. In    manage the resolution of the case, which may last up
addition, through the court’s website, online access is     to 120 days. The arbitration decision is final and cannot
provided to the court calendar and the Active Warrant       be appealed.




1.3 AVAILABILITY OF PRETRIAL ATTACHMENT



Prejudgment or pretrial attachment is a statutory           defendant pending a final judgment. By ensuring that
provisional remedy available in many countries. This        property is protected by the court and immobilizing a
remedy can be requested by a plaintiff/creditor prior       defendant’s assets pending the final judgment, pretrial
to filing a case (for example, in South Korea, France,      attachments protect creditors against fraudulent
China, and Chile), at the time of filing (in Abu Dhabi),    transfers, which, according to studies in South America,
or thereafter (in Singapore and South Korea) in order       are one of the major obstacles to the fair and effective
to secure a claim or protect a particular property—real,    enforcement of judgments (Henderson et al. 2004, see
immovable (real estate), or movable (motor vehicles,        figure 7). Freezing debtors’ assets can also encourage
vessels, aircrafts, and so on)—from being damaged,          debtors to settle early, which can significantly reduce
destroyed, transferred, encumbered, or sold by the          litigation costs and reduce the court’s caseload.



                                                                 Good Practice Area: Court Structures and Proceedings     21
     FIGURE 7.	 Most important obstacle to fair and effective enforcement of judgments




           100
            80
            60
            40
            20                                                                                                Argentina
             0                                                                                                Mexico
                      Slow       Possibility of    Difficulty with   insufficient in-    Difficulties in
                  cumbersome      fraudulent      the notification   junctive power     identifying the
                 and expensive    transfer of      of the debtor      of the courts      assets of the
                      court          assets                                                  debtor
                   procedures



     Source: Henderson et al. (2004).




     According to the Doing Business 2016 report, the vast                                       A well-functioning attachment process protects the
     majority of economies included in the study provide                                         rights of all parties, can contribute to more effective
     litigants with the right to request pretrial attachment.13                                  settlements and court procedures, and greatly improves
     As a statutory remedy, pretrial attachment is governed                                      enforcement effectiveness. Its intent and application
     by the laws in each country, with some variations in how it                                 by courts and litigants are essentially the same
     is implemented and enforced. Despite minor differences                                      worldwide. There are, however, a number of issues
     across economies, however, pretrial attachments are                                         that may significantly affect courts’ ability to provide
     generally granted upon proof that a lawsuit for damages                                     this provisional remedy and thereby effectively enforce
     has been filed or is imminent; an identification of the                                     judgments, including difficulties associated with locating
     property that must be protected; and evidence that                                          and protecting assets. In addition, attachment requests
     there is a risk and a need that would warrant the court to                                  have to be well supported to avoid frivolous requests for
     protect the property and bring it into custody and away                                     freezing assets, since doing so can affect firms’ ability
     from the control of debtors.                                                                to continue their business, endanger jobs, and impact a
                                                                                                 range of business opportunities.




     13	The Doing Business methodology assesses whether plaintiffs can obtain pretrial attachment of the defendant’s movable assets if they fear the
        assets may be moved out of the jurisdiction or otherwise dissipated (World Bank 2016, 153).




22   Good Practices for Courts
              KEY ELEMENTS                               LESSONS LEARNED                            GOOD PRACTICE EXAMPLE
                                              •	 Facilitate the identification of
                                                 debtor’s assets by providing greater
                                                 accessibility to public registers,
                                                 commercial or business registers
                                                 and insolvency registers; and
                                                 legally requiring the registration
 •	 Risk to the assets to be attached and        of immovable and movable
    to future enforcement                        property, ensuring information is
 •	 Ex-parte remedy with very limited            verified before being entered, and
    notice requirements                          electronically linking registers.
 •	 Can be contested by debtors               •	 For countries with large informal
                                                 economies, institute asset disclosure      •	 Courts in the Netherlands
 •	 Limited reach, with protection               requirements and limitations on
    provided for some types of assets            contracting without a formal contract.     •	 The Singapore State Courts
 •	 Liability for damages caused to           •	 Develop electronic information-
    attached property                            sharing tools to facilitate intra-agency
 •	 Defined mechanisms for how to                communication about debtors’ assets.
    attach property and who can do it         •	 Protect impounded property and
 •	 Penalities imposed for violations            introduce modern attachment
    of orders                                    techniques pursuant to an
                                                 evaluation of asset loss history and
                                                 implementation cost.
                                              •	 Protect seized assets and develop
                                                 guidelines to assist entities in charge
                                                 of enforcement.



Key elements

A review of attachment practices and laws across Europe,             Mongolian courts, for example, will grant a pretrial
South America, the United States, Canada, the United                 attachment request if they believe that not doing so
Arab Emirates, Singapore, Hong Kong, South Korea,                    will risk the future enforcement of the court’s judgment.
India, Brunei, and Mongolia indicates that despite some              Failure to comply with the order results in a legal fine. In
statutory differences (such as the kind of property that             Canada (Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba, Labrador,
can be attached; procedures for obtaining attachments;               Newfoundland, Northwest Territories, and a number of
timing of the request to attach; debtor’s right to notice            other provinces), courts will grant pretrial attachments if
and opportunity to be heard; how assets are attached                 they are convinced that there are reasonable grounds to
and by whom; duration of the attachment, if any; and                 believe that the debtor/defendant may be dealing with
liability for damages to attached property), a number of             the property in a way that will likely and seriously hinder
common and core elements exist in all economies.                     the enforcement of the court’s judgment. The court’s
                                                                     order will only attach assets to the extent necessary to
Showing a risk to assets. Pretrial attachments are                   satisfy the amount of the plaintiff’s claim. In the U.S. state
generally premised on the existence of some type of                  of Florida, pretrial attachment is granted upon a show of
risk to the debtor’s assets and a potential impediment               proof that the defendant is actually removing property
to the enforcement of the claim. The extent and type                 out of state or is fraudulently disposing of or hiding
of risk that has to be shown varies between countries.               the property in order to avoid payment of the debt.14



14	 Fla. Stat. Section 76.05 (2016),
    http://www.leg.state.fl.us/Statutes/index.cfm?App_mode=Display_Statute&Search_String=&URL=0000-0099/0076/Sections/0076.05.html.




                                                                            Good Practice Area: Court Structures and Proceedings      23
     In Brunei Darussalam, plaintiffs are required to show                   for the subsistence of themselves and their family.
     under oath that the defendant has the intent to obstruct                In Europe, this limitation has also been outlined in
     enforcement (has removed or is about to remove, has                     the Good Practice Guide on Enforcement of Judicial
     concealed or is concealing, or is transferring property                 Decisions (CEPEJ 2015). In some countries, such as
     to other persons).15 And Dutch courts require that when                 Chile, the law clearly defines the type of assets that
     attaching immovable assets, securities, or registered                   cannot be reached, which include family allowances,
     shares, the plaintiff must show a well-founded fear of                  social security, welfare contributions, life insurance, work
     embezzlement and the threat that the debtor will remove                 equipment, and set percentages of the salary needed
     or dissipate the assets from the jurisdiction (Mierlo and               to cover basic living expenses. Dutch law goes further
     Hoebeke 2011).                                                          by exempting a debtor’s household items such as beds,
                                                                             linens, and clothes for himself and his family, while in
     Providing for a notice to defendant/debtor and a right                  Hong Kong, attachment may be partially lifted based on
     to contest the attachment. As a provisional remedy                      a request by the debtor and valid grounds that there is a
     meant to protect against the disposal of assets, there                  need to pay for business, living, or legal expenses (Mierlo
     is usually a sense of urgency when requesting pretrial                  and Hoebeke 2011). In countries where attachments
     attachments, and courts will generally grant them quickly               can be granted prior to filing the case, the courts have the
     and without notice to the defendant or a hearing, with                  authority to entirely lift them for failure to file a lawsuit.
     some exceptions in a few of countries. In Hong Kong,                    In the Netherlands, attachments cease automatically if
     pretrial attachments are granted ex parte, without notice               the case is not initiated or at the expiration of a period of
     and immediately in cases of an emergency. Similarly,                    time indicated by the court order. Likewise, attachments
     Irish courts grant it without notice and on the same day                in China are lifted if the plaintiff does not file the lawsuit
     in urgent matters, while Indian courts provide notice                   within 30 days.
     to the defendant unless they believe that such notice
     would defeat the purpose of attaching the property. In                  Debtors are also protected against any damages caused
     the Netherlands, a hearing is held only when a judge                    by this process. In many countries, the risk of damage is
     intends to reject the request; otherwise, an attachment                 addressed by requiring claimants to provide security and
     is granted solely on the written information submitted to               by holding them liable for damages to debtors’ assets
     the court (Mierlo and Hoebeke 2011).                                    that are unjustifiably suffered as a consequence of the
                                                                             attachment. In Germany and Hong Kong, for example,
     In addition, debtors generally have the right to contest                courts can make the enforcement of an attachment
     an attachment. The European Commission suggested                        order conditional on the claimant providing security for
     that “the permissible grounds of objection should differ                any potential damages incurred. Requiring security to
     depending on whether the attachment is granted on the                   compensate for wrongfully attaching property is also
     basis of an existing enforceable right or independently of              required in the United States. To further protect against
     any such.” The Commission also suggested that “where                    damages to debtors’ assets, some courts impose liability
     an attachment is granted prior to the commencement                      on creditors for damages regardless of fault or upon a
     of judicial proceedings in the principal action, it will not            showing of bad faith. In Germany, for example, if the
     be upheld if the creditor does not raise the principal                  attachment order is set aside after being enforced, the
     action within a specified time period (e.g., one month)”                claimant is liable for all damages suffered by the debtor
     (Commission of the European Communities 2006, 9).                       as a result of the attachment regardless of fault. In
                                                                             India, however, the claimant is not liable for damages
     Acknowledging limitations, effect on debtors’                           provided the order was sought in good faith; if the court
     assets, and liability for damages. Although pretrial                    determines the order was sought in bad faith, it can
     attachments aim to protect plaintiffs’ right to enforce                 order the payment of damages.
     judgments, debtors are also protected to a certain
     degree. In most countries, pretrial attachments cannot                  The effect of attachment on the right of creditors over
     reach debtors’ basic assets, those that are necessary                   debtors’ assets also varies between jurisdictions. For



     15	 See “Brunei Darussalam Country Report,” International Conference on Enforcement of Civil Case Judgment in the Context of Dynamic Regional
         Economic Integration, July 26–29, 2015, Bangkok, http://www.led.go.th/inter/pdf/2_Brunei.pdf.




24   Good Practices for Courts
instance, in Germany, the seizure of the assets (tangible              registers. In other jurisdictions such as South Korea,
personal property, real property, or claims) creates an                creditors must provide a security deposit to the court in
attachment lien in favor of the claimant over the seized               the form of a cash deposit, surety bond, or negotiable
property only, and in Mexico, an attachment order creates              instrument. To ensure that creditors can enforce a final
a preferential right to salaries, alimony payments, tax                judgment, courts in several countries (for example,
claims, and previously recorded liens or encumbrances,                 Singapore) may order the sale of the property attached
regardless of these variations. In many other countries,               if it is perishable. The proceeds of the sale are then
attachment orders do not create a preferential right or                retained by the sheriff or paid into the court pending the
lien on the property attached (Australia, Netherlands,                 outcome of the trial.
Denmark, Canada, India, Ireland, and Hong Kong,
for example).                                                          As to immovable property, specifically real estate, the
                                                                       overriding method of attaching the property is to enter
Effecting attachments. The growing use of new                          a notation into real property registers. For example, in
communication technologies in the justice field is                     Chile and Estonia, attachment of real estate is completed
supporting the securing of attachments via more                        once the order is noted in the respective land registers.
simplified mechanisms. The computerization of                          In Singapore, immovable property is seized or attached
enforcement procedures and the implementation of                       by the sheriff of the Supreme Court or the bailiff of the
protective measures can significantly save time, money,                state courts by registering the court order under the
and efforts for the parties. Information exchanges by                  Registration of Deeds Act, the Land Titles Act, or the
electronic means between the various bodies involved                   Land Titles (Strata) Act.16
in the attachment process are used primarily in attaching
bank accounts, immovable property, and vehicles (this                  Violating attachment orders. Failure to comply with
is done, for example, in Armenia, Denmark, Georgia,                    the restrictions outlined in a pretrial attachment order
Portugal, and the Czech Republic) (CEPEJ 2015). The                    can amount to both a criminal offense and an unlawful
CEPEJ, among others, has encouraged the Council                        tortuous act under civil and criminal law. This principle
of Europe member states to use electronic methods                      of punishing debtors is also addressed in Europe by
and other options that do not require physical interim                 the CEPEJ’s Good Practice Guide on Enforcement of
possession to secure an asset, provided that these                     Judicial Decisions, which provides that appropriate
methods also safeguard the debtor. The latter includes,                penalties should be imposed to stop or punish debtors
among other concerns, protecting the confidentiality                   for wrongful obstruction and for concealing or damaging
and integrity of any information passed on.                            assets they continue to use during enforcement
                                                                       proceedings (CEPEJ 2015).
The process of actually effecting the attachment
generally depends on the asset involved. Frequently,
there are different procedures in place for bank accounts,             Lessons learned
movable and immovable property, and perishable
goods. In the majority of economies, and with regard                   Identifying debtors’ assets. As previously stated, when
to tangible assets, debtors are generally provided with                requesting a pretrial attachment, plaintiffs are generally
the ability to continue to use the assets during court                 required to detail the assets/property in question (for
proceedings unless there is a risk of destruction upon use             example, the laws in the Netherlands require that assets
(CEPEJ 2015). In the Netherlands, once an attachment                   be defined by nature, location, and distinctive marks).
order is issued, movable assets are effectively attached               Unless the claimant is requesting the attachment of
as soon as the order is served upon the debtor, who                    known assets or those that are the subject of the dispute
is then prohibited from removing the assets from the                   (such as movable property that was involved in a breach
jurisdiction pending judgment. Where registers for                     of contract), identifying the debtor’s assets poses a
movable property exist (such as for cars, boats, vessels,              unique problem to creditors. This issue can also be
aircrafts, and so on), attachment is effected once the                 problematic during the enforcement of a final judgment
writ is served on the debtor and entered into the public               but to a lesser degree, since enforcement agencies


16	 Singapore State Court Act, Chapter 321 and Supreme Court Debtors Act, Section 17.




                                                                              Good Practice Area: Court Structures and Proceedings   25
     and officials are generally entitled to greater access to
     information than individual creditors. A good practice                        BOX 4.
     promoted in the EU and other regions is that at least in                      Most Problematic Dimensions of
     the case of bank accounts, the creditor does not have to                      Enforcement in Descending Order
     provide a specific account number (Commission of the
     European Communities 2006). Nonetheless, locating                             •	   Searching for assets
     assets remains a problem. Research from Mexico,
                                                                                   •	   Sale of assets
                                                                                   •	   Speed of enforcement
     Argentina, Peru, and the EU indicated that the inability
                                                                                   •	   Supervision
     to locate assets was at the core of enforcement problems
                                                                                   •	   Seizure of assets
     (Henderson et al. 2004; Alekand 2008). An assessment
                                                                                   •	   Cost of enforcement
     conducted by the European Bank for Reconstruction
     and Development (EBRD) of the Commonwealth of                                 Source: Colman and Bradautanu (2014).
                                                                                   Note: Information based on the Enforcement Agents
     Independent States (CIS) countries, Mongolia, and                             Assessment conducted in 2013 by EBRD.
     Georgia also indicated that the greatest problems
     during enforcement are generally related to identifying
     debtors’ assets (Colman and Bradautanu 2014, see
     box 4).

     In the majority of economies, information on debtors’                      necessary for enforcement proceedings.17 In Germany,
     assets can generally be obtained through two                               debtors are required to attend a hearing or provide
     mechanisms: 1) requiring debtors to disclose their assets                  information regarding their assets if enforcement has
     through an asset declaration process; or 2) accessing                      been unsuccessful; failure to do so is punishable by
     records, mainly contained in registers. With regard to                     detention (Henderson et al. 2004). To support creditors,
     the former, compelling debtors to provide testimony as                     the German courts also maintain registers of entities and
     to the whereabouts of the assets is beneficial primarily                   individuals who have pending actions against them, have
     for the enforcement of the final judgment rather than                      failed to comply with court orders, or are in bankruptcy.
     the pretrial attachment phase. In Estonia, where                           These registers are accessible to potential creditors
     enforcement is carried out by bailiffs, the Enforcement                    and assist them in determining the creditworthiness of
     Code provides them with the authority to demand                            potential debtors. They also serve to urge debtors to
     that debtors submit the oral and written information                       comply with court orders and have their names removed



     FIGURE 8.	 Registers and databases most commonly accessed by enforcement agents in searching for assets


      Cadastre of immovable property                        Visa and passport office
      Register of legal entities/enterprises                Register of pledges of movable property
      Tax service                                           Central depository/registers of shareholders
      Register of citizen                                   Commercial banks databases
      Road police                                           Notaries’ databases
      Customs authority                                     Mining register (common only in Mongolia)
      National/social insurance service

     Source: Colman and Bradautanu (2014).
     Note: Information based on the Enforcement Agents Assessment conducted in 2013 by EBRD.




     17	 Estonia Enforcement Code, Section 26,
         https://www.riigiteataja.ee/en/eli/516092014002/consolide, and Bailiffs Act, https://www.riigiteataja.ee/en/tolge/pdf/530102013002.




26   Good Practices for Courts
from the register. Other countries, such as the United                          However, their utility to creditors is undermined if
Kingdom, Greece, Spain, and Portugal, also require                              registration of title is not required. According to
debtors to disclose assets, though the laws in Spain and                        studies conducted in Latin America, in countries
Portugal do so only to the extent necessary to satisfy the                      such as Peru, where land registries are incomplete
claim (Hess 2004).                                                              and not determinative of legal ownership, creditors
                                                                                encounter difficulties when attempting to identify
The second and most commonly used mechanism to                                  ownership for purposes of attaching property. In
identify debtors’ assets is to access publicly available                        Mexico and Argentina, however, where land registers
information contained in registers. Because creditors                           are well developed and have the full faith and credit
at the pretrial attachment stage do not yet have an                             of the courts, creditors are in a better position to
enforceable order and as such cannot rely on the                                identify and seize property and satisfy judgments
assistance of enforcement agencies or officials, they                           (Henderson et al. 2004). In Europe, computerizing
must rely on publicly available information, most often in                      registers and making them available online have
registers. According to the EBRD assessment conducted                           provided greater access to creditors. In countries
in 2013, registers are an invaluable source of information                      such as Croatia, where there are cadastral and
for creditors and enforcement agencies (Colman and                              land registries, providing online access and linking
Bradautanu 2014, see figure 8). This right to access                            both registries have increased access and reduced
information on debtors’ assets is also recommended                              creditor time identifying ownership and real property
in the Guidelines for a Better Implementation of the                            structures (Madir 2011).18 Additional registers
Existing Council of Europe’s Recommendations on                                 for movable property that may be accessible to
Enforcement (CEPEJ 2009).                                                       creditors include those for motor vehicles, aircrafts
                                                                                and vessels. Automation of these various registers
The most commonly used registers include the following:                         has been shown to improve accessibility, which is
                                                                                the case in Armenia, where requests for information
►	 Commercial or business registers generally in-                               to all state property registers can be made online
   clude information on firms, including legal status,                          (Colman and Bradautanu 2014).
   name or company, date of establishment, company
   capital, sector activity, corporate bodies, and                         ►	 Insolvency registers in some countries (such as
   number of employees, to name a few examples.                               Denmark, Sweden, Portugal, Spain, France, Greece,
   In many countries, these registers are accessible                          and the United Kingdom) are maintained and
   online. In some countries such as the United                               provide invaluable information on debtors’ financial
   Kingdom, this information is centralized in a number                       status. These registers are useful in preventing
   of large national registers (three), while in others                       creditors from seeking pretrial attachment of en-
   such as Germany, there are numerous district-level                         cumbered property and incurring unnecessary costs.
   registers (approximately 400) that are managed
   by local courts. Despite their utility, the reliability                 To ensure that creditors and enforcement agencies have
   of the information contained in registers may be                        access to information on debtors’ assets, registration
   an issue, since in some countries, the information                      of immovable and movable property should be legally
   is not verified before being entered (for example,                      required. The information should be verified before
   in Finland, Ireland, Netherlands, and the United                        being entered into the registers and online access
   Kingdom) or is not accessible to creditors (such as in                  provided. This, together with linking all registers
   Portugal) (Hess 2004).                                                  electronically, can significantly reduce the time for
                                                                           debtors and enforcement agencies to request and
►	 Public property registers generally include land                        obtain information and can help ensure that it is up to
   and other real property registers that provide                          date and reliable.
   information on real property ownership and title.




18	 Land registers contain the records of titles and deeds on land, while cadastres contain information about land properties and their boundaries
    within a certain area.




                                                                                  Good Practice Area: Court Structures and Proceedings               27
     Accounting for the informal economy. In many low-              online data exchange can reduce the time it takes to
     income and even some middle-income countries, the              locate assets and increase transparency (for example,
     informal sector represents a significant portion of the        the Croatia Organized Land Project linked the country’s
     overall economy. According to a study conducted by             real estate registries with its cadaster system and
     the International Labour Organization (ILO) in 14 Latin        provided the information online) (Madir 2011; Kontrec
     American and Carribean countries, approximately 46.8           2012). Data exchange agreements can also serve to
     percent of jobs in those regions are in the informal           prevent fraudulent or unauthorized access, such as
     economy (ILO 2014). In the Europe and Central Asia             access to sensitive data by employees for nonbusiness
     region, the informal economy represents approximately          purposes. With regard to electronic access to data held
     36 percent of the national GDP on average, with a              by private agencies such as bank accounts, developing
     marked difference between EU (18.5 percent) and                data exchange agreements is likely more problematic,
     non-EU (from 15 to 30 percent) countries (ILO 2015).           due to the large number of companies/banks and the
     The informal economy presents many challenges for              complexity of negotiating individual agreements with
     creditors and enforcement agencies alike. Informality          each private institution.
     in business ownership, registration, and employment
     practices (such as payment of wages) makes debtors             Protecting property that is impounded in place. In
     invisible, rendering it nearly impossible for creditors to     most countries, the property attached remains in the
     locate and seize property.                                     custody of the debtor (possessor as custodian) and some
                                                                    form of protection is in place to ensure the property is
     Identifying early on what assets, if any, exist and how        neither tempered with nor sold or hidden. In the Emirate
     debtors operate may reduce the risk associated with            of Abu Dhabi, following older traditions, the property
     transacting with informal business partners. For countries     usually remains in the custody of the debtor and, at the
     with a sizable informal economy, a number of measures          request of the debtor, a guard can be assigned to protect
     may work to reduce the associated risks, such as               it (Gramckow, Ebeid, Melis and Sherman 2014). In other
     requiring that debtors disclose assets, limiting the ability   cases, the property may be seized and impounded
     of businesses and individuals to make deals without a          in a secure warehouse (see below). Both options are
     formal contract, providing simple contract templates that      risky and costly for preserving assets. A relatively safe
     include effective enforcement clauses and repossession         and more cost-effective option is to introduce modern
     options, and requiring state registration and notarization     techniques of attachment, such as the above mentioned
     of these contracts, at least for higher-value assets.          securing of titles in property registries, temporary
                                                                    custody of the title or applying devices that make
     Connecting agencies. Developing electronic data ex-            certain types of property or equipment inoperable (for
     change tools with banks and other institutions to access       example, ignition or steering wheel locks that effectively
     holdings and place court-ordered liens can significantly       make motor vehicles unusable). In most countries the
     increase the efficiency of the attachment process.             courts can impose criminal penalties for moving and/
     In some jurisdictions, asset searches are conducted            or damaging the property. In Germany, enforcement
     by an exchange of letters or e-mail messages with              agents will assess and document the property and
     relevant agencies: banks, the commercial register, the         affix an official seal to property impounded in place,
     real property register, traffic department (vehicles),         indicating court attachment. Simply tempering with the
     stock accounts, or other business interests. Clearly, an       seal alone triggers a criminal charge. When introducing
     exchange of e-mail messages is more efficient than the         any such practices, however, enforcement agencies and/
     traditional letter, but direct electronic data exchanges       or courts should initially evaluate asset loss history and
     (such as the ability to remotely access asset registers        identify the associated costs with implementing any of
     and execute a certain search of property) are even more        the various options available within the context of the
     efficient and effective. To have this capacity, enforcement    jurisdiction.
     agencies should develop bilateral data exchange
     agreements with other relevant agencies and institutions       Protecting seized property. Internationally, only a few
     to access motor vehicle title systems, commercial or           jurisdictions authorize enforcement agencies or officials
     land registers, tax and insolvency registers, and so forth.    (private or public) to remove, physically take possession,
     Linking these registries and entities and providing for        and impound property involved in commercial disputes




28   Good Practices for Courts
to a secure location (such as a warehouse or storage                  where the assets are located. Once filed, the applications
facility) in order to reduce the risk of loss, maintain               are generally granted on the same day, unless there is a
control, and preserve property value. One example                     prima facie case that prejudgment attachment is invalid
is the judiciary in the Emirate of Abu Dhabi, where                   or disproportionate. Because the goal is to secure assets
the courts carry out enforcement and where, in 2016,                  pending the outcome of a dispute, Dutch law allows
the court built a warehouse to securely store seized                  it in both judicial cases as well as those in arbitration.
property pending a final judgment. Such warehouses                    If the claim in the main proceedings is granted, the
or storage facilities must also provide for the security              prejudgment attachment is automatically converted into
and preservation of the seized property until it may be               an executory attachment and the assets attached will
sold pursuant to a judgment, and enforcement entities                 be used to recover on the claim. If the party does not
must have clear guidelines and procedures as well as the              prevail, then he or she will be liable for any damages that
necessary expertise to deal with access to the property               may have been caused to the assets as a result of the
and its maintenance and/or use. Although many well-                   attachment. In addition, prejudgment attachments can
developed and comprehensive guidelines have been                      be partially lifted if the debtor offers alternative security
produced by law enforcement agencies for property                     for the payment of the claim (such as by providing a
seized under criminal proceedings, the same principles                bank guarantee issued by a recognized bank) or can
in protecting property apply also to all civil and                    apply for a summary proceeding and request that it be
commercial enforcement processes. Such guidelines                     removed. At that point, the president of the district court
should ideally be part of a process and procedure                     will lift it unless the creditor’s claim is evidently invalid,
manual for the court enforcement agency and should                    the attachment is disproportionate, or the debtor offers
address property tracking, inventory management,                      alternative security.
maintenance, and proper staffing (Otto 2011). Tagging
the seized property items and conducting a regular                    Singapore state courts. Creditors in Singapore are
inventory should also be addressed in procedural                      entitled to apply for a prejudgment attachment (also
manuals.19 Once developed, the guidelines should be                   called Mareva Injunction or freezing order) to prevent
regularly reviewed and amended to reflect changing                    debtors and third parties (such as banks) from destroying,
needs or legal requirements and also be made widely                   transferring, or handling the debtors’ assets pending the
available to all those responsible for seized property.               outcome of the dispute. To obtain the order, creditors
                                                                      have to provide evidence that they have an arguable
                                                                      case, including that the defendant has assets in
Good practice examples                                                Singapore and there is a real risk to these assets if the
                                                                      injunction is not granted. The creditor is not required
The Netherlands. As in most other jurisdictions,                      to provide security. When the order is granted it does
prejudgment attachment is governed by the Code of                     not change proprietary rights in the assets seized or
Civil Procedures, which allows a creditor to attach a                 provide an enforcement advantage over other creditors.
debtor’s assets, including: assets in the possession of a             A creditor may be required to pay for damages caused
debtor; assets held by third parties (such as funds held              by the order. In addition, search orders can be granted
by a Dutch bank or under another party owing money to                 to 1) prevent defendants from destroying assets in their
the debtor); shares in a Dutch company; and any vessels,              own possession, including orders that require debtors
airplanes, or real estate located in the Netherlands.                 to allow the plaintiff to enter his premises; 2) search
Parties are provided with this right even if they are not             for goods or documents that belong to the plaintiff or
domiciled in the country, but they must initially obtain              are relevant to the claim and remove, inspect, or make
permission by applying with the court president of the                copies thereof; and 3) compel the disclosure of names
competent district court. Obtaining a prejudgment                     and addresses of suppliers or customers. These orders
attachment can also be useful for a creditor who does                 are customarily used in actions involving infringement
not otherwise have jurisdiction in that, once granted, the            of intellectual property rights and abuse of confidential
order will establish jurisdiction within the district court           information. In order to be granted a search order or


19	 For an example of this kind of procedures manual, see the website of the Burbank (California) Police Department,
    http://home.iape.org/resourcesPages/IAPE_Downloads/Property_Manuals/BURBANK-CA_Property_Manual_3-3-06.pdf.




                                                                             Good Practice Area: Court Structures and Proceedings      29
     Mareva Injunction, creditors are specifically required         e)	 Whether the applicant is aware of any issues relating
     to submit an affidavit in support of the application               to jurisdiction, forum non conveniens or service out
     that includes the following information as stated in the           of jurisdiction, and, if so, whether any application
     Singapore State Court Practice Directions:                         relating to these issues has been or will be made;

     a)	 Reason(s) the application is taken out on an ex parte      f)	   An undertaking to pay for losses that may be caused
         basis, including whether the applicant believes that             to the opponent or other persons by the granting of
         there is a risk of dissipation of assets, destruction of         the orders sought, stating what assets are available
         evidence or any other prejudicial conduct;                       to meet that undertaking and to whom the assets
                                                                          belong; and
     b)	 Urgency of the application (if applicable), including
         whether there is any particular event that may trigger     g)	 Any other material facts that the Court should be
         the dissipation of assets, destruction of evidence or          aware of. (Singapore State Courts n.d., part IV).
         any other prejudicial conduct;
                                                                    In addition, litigants have other remedies, including
     c)	 Factual basis for the application, including the basis     filing for: 1) an application for interlocutory injunction,
         of any belief that there will be dissipation of assets,    which can be done at any stage after filing a request that
         destruction of evidence or any other prejudicial           the court require the opposing party to either take or
         conduct, whether there have been any past incidents        refrain from taking a certain action until the trial date; or
         of the opponent dissipating assets, destroying             2) an application for a so-called “Anton Piller order” to
         evidence or engaging in any other prejudicial              request that the court specifically prohibit the opposing
         conduct, and whether there is any evidence of              party from destroying incriminating evidence.
         dishonesty or bad faith of the opponent;

     d)	 Factual basis for any reasonable defenses that may
         be relied on by the opponent;




     1.4 CRITERIA USED TO ASSIGN JUDGES

     Background

     For judicial systems to be trusted and seen as impartial, it   protection of judges’ independence that assignments
     is important to minimize the impact of individual judges’      are made by random systems that apply clear, objective,
     personalities, ideology, opinions, and preferences on          and random assignment criteria that do not allow
     their decisions. Although the law itself, as well as high      for manipulations.
     court precedents and appeals structures, outline, guide,
     and limit judicial discretion to some extent, individual       The random assignment of cases, based on clearly
     judges have the authority to make decisions within this        defined and published objective criteria, to ensure, to
     scope of discretion to express their individual, rule-         the extent possible, the neutral assignment of judges
     based, and independent opinion of a case. This naturally       to cases is therefore internationally recognized as a
     leads to some variation in judicial decisions, and such        best practice for courts (Eisenberg, Fisher, and Rosen-
     variations within margins that reflect different shades of     Zvi 2012). At the same time, neutral case assignment
     societal trends are desired and important. As a result,        requires additional objective reassignment criteria: since
     the selection of a judge or composition of a multi-panel       options need to be available to ensure that cases are
     court influences the outcome of a case, and it is vital for    not allocated to judges who have, or appear to have,
     litigants to have confidence that they have or have not        an interest in a case or who may appear otherwise
     lost because of the decision to assign their case to a         prejudiced, or to reassign a case if a judge becomes sick,
     particular judge or panel. It is equally important for the     leaves the court, or is already overburdened. In those




30   Good Practices for Courts
instances, objective and transparent rules have to be                                           process (World Bank 2016).20 There are no economies in
available to reallocate a case to another judge (Fabri and                                      which assignment of cases is not random in the OECD
Langbroek 2007). Such reassignment, combined with                                               high-income and Europe and Central Asia regions.
the requirement that it is tracked, requires a justification                                    Nearly half of the economies in the Latin America and the
with a note on who made the reassignment, since even                                            Caribbean and Europe and Central Asia regions provide
the best automated random assignment system will still                                          for the automated random assignment of cases. Latin
require occasional manual adjustments in exceptional                                            America and the Caribbean is also the only region in
situations.                                                                                     which automated random assignment is more frequent
                                                                                                than the manual process. All regions, except South Asia,
Random case assignment has been employed for several                                            have at least one economy in which assignment is done
decades using manual processes, including by blind                                              randomly through an automated process (see figure 9).
drawing cases on a weekly or monthly basis. The more
complex a court’s organization and structure become                                             Random assignment is not just an important way to
and the more specialization that is introduced, the more                                        ensure objectivity in case allocation and reassure the
difficult it is to rely on random manual assignments                                            public, it is also critical for limiting opportunities for
and the more rules for variation in randomization have                                          parties and sources inside the court to manipulate the
to be created. Including a rule-based randomized                                                process. The practice of what is called “judge shopping,”
assignment process in a CMS addresses this problem.                                             that is, a party’s efforts to get his or her case assigned
Although almost all economies (172) included in the                                             to a judge who may be perceived to make a more
Doing Business 2016 report provide for the random                                               favorable decision, not only provides unfair advantage
assignment of cases, only 48 have a fully automated                                             to those who know the judges well, it also makes



FIGURE 9.	 Judicial assignment method by region


                             100
                                                                                                10.00                                8.33
                                                          11.76
                              90                                                                                     18.52                                 18.18


                              80
                                     50.00
                              70                          41.18
   Percentage of economies




                                                                             70.59
                              60                                                               65.00

                              50                                                                                     59.26
                                                                                                                                    89.58
                                                                                                                                                           81.82
                              40

                              30
                                     50.00
                              20                          47.06
                                                                             29.41
                                                                                               25.00
                              10                                                                                     22.22

                               0                                                                                                     2.08
                                    Europe &          Latin America &       OECD High       Middle East &          East Asia &   Sub-Saharan &           South Asia
                                   Central Asia          Caribbean           Income         North Africa             Pacific         Africa

                                              Random automated assignment               Random manual assignment                 Non-random assignment


Source: Doing Business database, http://www.doingbusiness.org/data.
Note: The percentages shown in the figure are based on data for 189 economies, though for economies in which Doing Business collects
data for two cities, the data for the two cities are considered separately.



20	The Doing Business methodology assesses whether cases are assigned randomly and automatically to judges throughout the competent court
   (World Bank 2016, 153).




                                                                                                            Good Practice Area: Court Structures and Proceedings      31
     managing workloads across the court difficult. Where                 of this duty limits their time to address more important
     judge shopping is still possible it greatly contributes              court matters and exposes them to significant pressures
     to the perception that judges and the court in general               from parties to make certain assignments—often on
     are corrupt or at least do not deal fairly with all parties.         a daily basis. Random case assignment rules prevent
     Older, generally objective assignment systems that                   parties in most cases from judge shopping, although
     allocated cases to judges depending on the weekday a                 it does not always eliminate it. This might occur, for
     case is filed on, the first initial of the plaintiff, for example    example, when multiple actions are filed in a case arising
     were easy to manipulate and did not provide for even                 out of the same facts and can then be consolidated in
     workload distribution. Particularly when a court clerk,              a courtroom of a judge viewed as the most favorable
     registrar, or chief judge is responsible for making case             (see United States v. Pearson, 203 F.3d 1243, 1264 (10th
     assignments, and when assignment rules are vague, as                 Cir. 2000) in Brown 2010). Interestingly, although most
     was the case in most courts a few decades ago (and still             federal district courts in the United States (but not the
     is the case in some countries), these individuals are often          federal courts of appeals) have a system for ensuring
     seen as susceptible to favoritism and corruption. Even if            the random assignment of cases, this principle is not yet
     this is not the case, the significant administrative burden          written into U.S. federal law.




                  KEY ELEMENTS                                LESSONS LEARNED                        GOOD PRACTICE EXAMPLE

      •	 Clear and transparent random              •	 Inclusive evidence-based
         assignment rules with objective              development and revision of
         criteria for reassignment and                assignment rules
         exceptions
                                                   •	 Publication of clear rules to prevent
      •	 Rule-based assignment exceptions             “judge shopping” and ensure             •	 FYR Macedonia
      •	 Publication of assignment rules and          randomness, especially when             •	 Toledo Municipal Courts (Ohio, USA)
         exception criteria                           the judge changes during the
                                                      proceedings
      •	 Automated system to assign cases to
         be integrated with an electronic case     •	 Management and tracking of party
         management system                            requests to change a judge




     Key elements

     Clear and transparent random assignment rules with                   issued by the judge, clerk, or registrar who is reassigning
     objective criteria for reassignments and exceptions.                 the case that explains the reasons for the change and
     Randomness as the underlining rule for assigning                     the legal arguments that are being considered. To
     cases in itself already requires that specific criteria              increase the transparency and legality of the process,
     for assignment by case type within a particular court                some courts have established that decisions regarding
     are established. In addition, courts have to define                  the reassignment of a case can be challenged by the
     clear criteria for the reassignment of cases in justified            parties.
     situations, such as conflict of interest, illness, or other
     reasons, including workload issues. These reassignments              Studies and experiences in the US and other countries
     should be registered manually or in an automated case                have shown that well designed random assignment
     assignment system to create a record and develop a                   systems that can differentiate between less and more
     database to track reassignment reasons. When manual                  demanding case types, be they manual or automated,
     processes are applied, courts can include a document                 over time will typically result in an even workload among




32   Good Practices for Courts
judges in a particular court. Occasionally, however, as
David Steelman notes, “it can cause problems that may         BOX 5.
require management attention. A court will typically          Civil Case Assignment Rules, U.S. District Court
need to have some adjustment mechanism to deal with           of Vermont
such problems as (a) having a number of difficult cases
                                                             (a) Case assignment. Civil cases are assigned blindly
assigned at the same time to one judge, who may thereby
                                                             and at random by the clerk using an automated
be faced with lengthy trials and need assistance with a
                                                             system. The system supports the following:
short-term work overload; (b) dealing with extended
                                                             (1) Proportionate, random, and blind assignment of
judge illness or absence from the bench; (c) seeing that
                                                             cases;
related cases are assigned to the same judge if they         (2) An approximate equal distribution of newly filed
are suitable for such consolidation” (Steelman 2003,         cases among the active judges of the court and a
2). To deal with such workload issues, effective case        fixed percentage to the senior judges and magistrate
assignment systems include workload indicators (such as      judge as directed by the chief judge and as approved
the number of defendants, the number of plaintiffs, the      by a majority vote of the district judges. Actions may
type of case, the amount of money in dispute) to predict     also be referred to the magistrate judge.
the complexity and related workload requirements of          (3) A high level of security to reasonably avoid
a case. These indicators should be determined based          prediction of the results of any case assignment;
on court data and the experiences at a particular court      (4) A system of credits and debits to adjust for
and should also differentiate by the type of cases they      reassignments of cases among and between judges;
handle (see box 5).                                          and
                                                             (5) A record of all assignments and reassignments
Publication of assignment criteria and objection             made.
rules. One of the underlying reasons for random case         (b) Judge assignment. Civil cases are assigned and
assignment is party and public concern over lack of          distributed among the judges based on percentages
integrity in the assignment process. It is therefore         reflecting each judge’s approximate civil workload:
essential to publish the established criteria for random
assignment, the rules governing the authorization and        •	   Chief Judge 26%
rationale of assignment changes, the persons authorized      •	   District Judge 26%
to request and approve them, and the procedures for          •	   Senior District Judge 22%
adjustment requests and complaints. Moreover, all of         •	   Senior District Judge 19%
these rules, as well as the process by which they were       •	   Magistrate 7%
derived, their justification, who was involved in their
                                                             Source: Adjusted from U.S. District Court (2014a).
development, the reasons for any needed changes,
and how and when to issue a complaint against case
assignments, should also be published, ideally on a
court’s website. As mentioned above, including the
private bar association and key court user groups in a      of random assignment becomes. Furthermore, and
case assignment rules committee will also be helpful,       of critical importance, automation of the random
not only in creating an understanding but also in helping   assignment process means that it is the system that
the court respond to future information needs via public    makes the assignment and not a court clerk, registrar,
education or other events in collaboration with them.       or chief judge, and if the system is well designed, any
                                                            changes are documented within it. This not only means
Automated assignments as part of a case                     that opportunities to unduly change the assignment
management system. As already indicated, random             are significantly reduced it means that those previously
case assignments can in general be easily managed           responsible for these decisions, can now point to the
manually, but the more case types that are involved, the    system and assignment rules when parties want to
more complex a court’s own structure is (for example,       approach them with a request to assign a case to a
multiple specialized benches, courts, locations, and so     particular judge. Considering that those previously
on), and the more complex the random assignment rules       responsible for case assignment, be they presiding
and exceptions have to be, the more helpful automation      judges, registrars or court clerks often spent many hour




                                                                  Good Practice Area: Court Structures and Proceedings   33
     tending to litigants and their lawyers seeking a particular
     assignment decision, introducing firm rules and a                BOX 6.
     system for random assignment frees up their time to              Automated Random Assignment of Cases
     handle other pressing court matters or deciding cases.           in Malaysia
     Furthermore, and not to be underestimate, it relieves
                                                                      The case management system implemented
     them of the pressures parties place on them often on
                                                                      in incremental phases in the courts in Malaysia
     a daily basis. Considering that an increasing number of
                                                                      today provides for an integrated system for the
     courts today are supported by some type of automated
                                                                      management of cases. Linked to an e-filing system,
     CMS, including or adding random case assignment                  it creates a detailed record of the case, allows the
     based on pre-established rules with change-tracking              courts to manage schedules, centralizes case
     options is an option that should not be overlooked               assignments, and provides for access to case minutes,
     (see box 6).                                                     case lists, and court statistics. This combination
                                                                      supports not only the random assignment of cases
     Lessons learned                                                  but any adjustments that have to be made and also
                                                                      creates the information needed to inform further
     Inclusive evidence-based development and revision                adjustment processes.
     of assignment rules. Random assignment rules have
                                                                      Source: Zakaria (2013).
     to ensure that the assignment of a particular case to a
     judge, while based on clear and transparent criteria, is not
     predictable and cannot be unjustifiably influenced, and
     also provide for a relatively even workload distribution
     between judges and panels. At the same time, exception         and complaint processes to ensure that the assignment
     and reassignment rules to accommodate conflict of              rules are transparent, understood, and appreciated by
     interest situations, changes in the availability of judges,    court users.
     and emergency circumstances have to be in place.
                                                                    Rule-based assignment exceptions. No matter how
     In order to develop a meaningful random assignment             well informed and evidence based the development
     scheme, courts should have sufficient case volume              of random assignment rules in a particular court
     and workload data available. There should also be              environment has been, case assignment systems have
     a determination if process reengineering plans are             generally not been able to reflect changes in the
     under way (or are planned for) and how they might              workloads of a court or individual judge over time. The
     influence workloads and related case assignment                nature of litigation in any country means that though
     percentages. The input and active participation of the         some assumptions can be made as to the likelihood
     impacted judges and other court staff are as essential         that certain case types will settle or progress to further
     for meaningful rule setting as are the related case data.      stages, assumptions that can be reflected in workload
     Several courts have created case assignment working            estimates, the actual current workload of a judge can
     groups that not only inform the rule development               be significantly lower or greater than the assumed
     process but regularly monitor implementation, respond          average in a particular week, month, quarter, or, in some
     to internal and external concerns, and suggest revisions       cases, even year. Random case assignment rules thus
     as lessons are learned or circumstances change. Such           have to provide for meaningful options to adjust to
     reviews also help the court identify unusual patterns that     workload fluctuations. In response, some courts in the
     can indicate if plaintiffs are “judge shopping” or if there    United States, for example, have established a scheme
     is unlawful manipulation by internal or external parties.      of so-called “debits and credits,” that is, rule-based
     Suggestions for revisions made by these groups are             options to raise a flag when cases assigned to them have
     helpful in identifying security risks and also opportunities   been withdrawn or additional cases have been added
     to improve the way cases are being distributed in the          to their schedule. Although well-advanced CMSs help
     court. The most effective working groups also consult          with substantiating such determinations and provide
     with representatives of the private bar association and        evidence for reassignment schemes, these kinds of
     other court user groups and counterparts to reflect their      debit and credit schemes also consider the complexity
     needs and concerns, particularly for developing public         of cases added, settled, or withdrawn, a feature that, to
     information material and events and effective feedback         date, is difficult to reflect in automated systems.



34   Good Practices for Courts
Management and tracking of party requests for                         Good practice examples
changes in case assignments. One of the most com-
mon ways for plaintiffs to engage in “judge shopping”                 FYR Macedonia courts. The courts in the FYR
in courts that apply random assignment systems is                     Macedonia’s implemented an Automated Court Case
to argue that a new case they are filing is related to                Management Information System (ACCMIS) that
other cases handled by a particular judge, and that                   provides for random assignment. For this process, the
the new case needs to be assigned to the same judge.                  ACCMIS includes criteria such as the type of judge, the
To avoid this scenario, courts have created different                 urgency or priority of the case (especially for criminal
rules and mechanisms to decide whether a case must                    litigation), the case type, the number of cases assigned
be assigned to a particular judge outside the general                 to each judge (to ensure a balanced distribution of the
random assignment system. In some countries the civil                 workload), and the judges who are on duty. With these
procedures code or court rules provide clear guidance                 criteria, clerks enter the information in the ACCMIS
and when and how cases can be and should be joined.                   and the system automatically and randomly assigns the
Some courts in US jurisdictions where such rules are not              judge who will be in charge of handling the case.21
in place, not detailed enough or not may not be fully
understood by the parties also request, as a general                  Toledo Municipal Courts (Ohio, United States). The
rule, formal and detailed explanations from the plaintiffs            Toledo municipal courts system implemented its Case
of why they believe that the case must be handled by a                Assignment Tracking System (CATS) with a feature to
particular judge. Independent of the availability of clear            assign cases randomly (criminal, traffic, and civil cases).
reassignment rules, a general court rule to require such              This system also includes the option of managing the
written request is helpful for the court to understand party          court calendar according to the availability of the parties
concerns and to swart unjustified future challenges and               in the scheduling of pretrial hearings. The system is
appeals. Based on these used and party explanations,                  managed by the court’s Assignment Office, which is in
courts—ideally using a panel of judges—make a decision                charge of registering the information and assigning the
on reassignment, track this decision and include it in its            cases to the judges. According to the website of the
annual count of reassignment decisions—and ideally                    Northwest Ohio Regional Information System,
also published in an annual report.
                                                                           A calendar is maintained for each judge to manage
To enhance the transparency of these procedures, some                      and organize court events. The availability of the judge,
courts have decided that the decision taken by a judge                     police officer, and attorneys are [sic] confirmed prior to
or panel of judges regarding the plaintiff’s request can                   scheduling a court date. A case consolidation feature
be challenged. In this sense, courts are creating more                     combines an offender’s multiple cases for assignment
steps to ensure that the assignment of cases observes                      to a single judge, reducing the number of required
the established rules and that the public decisions made                   court appearances. As scheduling becomes more
by judges can be contested. In addition, some courts                       efficient, the number of criminal and civil cases pending
have created sanctions to deter “judge shopping.” If                       beyond time guidelines is reduced.
courts determine that lawyers are manipulating the way
cases are assigned (for example, by claiming that a new                    CATS has maximized the efficiency of the Toledo
lawsuit is related to ongoing cases or by presenting                       Municipal Court’s Assignment Office. The primary
similar lawsuits and withdrawing them once they have                       responsibility of the Assignment Office is random
the desired judge), they can sanction the lawyer for                       judge assignment for criminal, traffic and civil cases as
misconduct. Some courts have decided to report these                       well as scheduling pretrial, trials and other hearings.
faults to the bar associations to enable them to impose                    In order to improve the efficiency of the court, single
the corresponding disciplinary measures. However, there                    judge assignment was introduced for criminal and
is no empirical evidence of whether these sanctions                        traffic cases. When a defendant is put on probation, a
reduce or deter “judge shopping.”                                          link is created between the judge and the defendant




21	 For more information on the ACCMIS, see Edusoft, “ACCMIS: Technical Documentation, Business Processes And Process Model Of Automated
    Court Case Management Information System” (Washington, DC: USAID, 2008), http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/pnaeb574.pdf.




                                                                            Good Practice Area: Court Structures and Proceedings           35
          for the length of probation. For any new cases where               Moreover, the Guidelines for Assignment of Judges
          the defendant has entered a plea of not guilty, the                of the Ohio Supreme Court stipulate that, “The Ohio
          defendant will be assigned to the ‘Link Judge’. If a               Constitution and the Revised Code vest the Chief
          ‘Link Judge’ does not exist for the defendant, but                 Justice of the Supreme Court with the authority to make
          the defendant has other pending cases assigned to a                temporary assignments of judges to serve in any court in
          judge, the new case will be assigned to the judge with             the state as established by law in whatever circumstances
          the oldest pending case. Otherwise, a random judge                 the Chief Justice deems appropriate.”23
          draw occurs to determine the judge assignment. All
          housing cases are assigned to the housing judge. The
          ‘Link Judge’ or single judge assignment has provided a
          more effective and efficient case management for the
          offenders, court staff, attorneys and judges.22




     22	 See Northwest Ohio Regional Information Center, 2016, http://www.noris.org/courts/case-assignment.
     23	 The guidelines can be found at http://www.supremecourt.ohio.gov/JCS/judicialAssignment/judgeAssignGuide.pdf.




36   Good Practices for Courts
         2                    Good Practice Area:
                              Case Management

   Case management            The second component assessed by the Doing Business QJPI is related to the case
                              management practices used in processing commercial cases. The five good practice
                              areas that are included in the index are: regulations setting time standards for key court
         Regulations
         setting time         events; regulations on adjournments and continuances; availability of performance
      standards for key       measurement mechanisms; use of pretrial conferences; and availability of an electronic
        court events          CMS. These practices are proven to contribute to effectively and efficiently managing
                              cases and ultimately to improving investor confidence in the courts. Case management
       Regulations on         generally refers to a set of principles and techniques intended to ensure the timely
       adjournments           and organized flow of cases through the court from initial filing through disposition
      and continuances        (Gramckow and Nussenblatt 2013). It enhances processing efficiency, promotes early
                              court control of cases, and provides judges with the tools that may be used to dispose of
       Availability of        a case efficiently. When well implemented, case management techniques can enhance
       performance            recordkeeping, reduce delays and case backlogs, and provide information to support
       measurement            the strategic allocation of time and resources—all of which encourage generally better
       mechanisms
                              services from courts. They can also improve the predictability of court events, which
                              can in turn increase public trust, reduce opportunities for corruption, and enhance the
       Use of pretrial        transparency of court administration. The five areas included in the index represent
        conference
                              some but not all of the many case management techniques that have been developed
                              and implemented in courts over time. The core elements of case management include
                              ensuring early court intervention, establishing meaningful time frames for carrying out
     Availability of an
      electronic case         case event and disposition, instituting early out options for settlements, implementing
    management system         clear adjournments rules, and establishing differentiated CMSs..




2.1 REGULATIONS SETTING TIME STANDARDS FOR KEY COURT EVENTS

Background

As one of the core elements of case management, time         the case process, which allows them to better identify
standards help courts to closely manage and monitor          bottlenecks and devise swift remedial actions. Studies
the processing of cases from filing to conclusion and        in the United States and other countries have shown
measure and assess court performance. Specifically,          that early court control and the use of time standards
time standards set defined targets for the completion of     can reduce case processing times. Depending on
key process steps and events, establish overall goals that   whether the standards apply to the entire case process
judges and lawyers must meet, create the expectation         or individual steps or both, they help in measuring the
of what constitutes timeliness, and are essential to         performance of courts as a whole as well at the individual
eliminating and avoiding backlogs. They also enable          court and judge level.
judges to exercise early and continuous control over




                                                                                   Good Practice Area: Case Management     37
        BOX 7.
        U.S. Model Time Standards for State Trial Courts

        Civil Cases      ►	    General Civil:                                  ►	    Summary Matters:
                               •	 90% resolved within 180 days                       •	 75% within 60 day
                               •	 97% within 365 days                                •	 90% within 90 days
                               •	 98% within 540 days                                •	 98% within 180 days

        Source: Van Duizend, Steelman, and Suskin (2011).




     Such standards also reflect a commitment by the courts                          According to the Doing Business 2016 report, laws
     to complete cases promptly, and they should therefore                           or regulations that set time standards for key court
     also reflect what court users’ regard as a reasonable                           events exist in 111 economies, though these standards
     time for the resolution of case. Their development                              are respected in practice in only 76 of them.24 Time
     may at times be driven and guided by national and                               standards can be an effective case management tool
     government-wide policies to increase court efficiency,                          that can significantly increase overall court efficiency
     as was the case in Estonia, where the government                                as well as empower court leadership and provide the
     established goals for courts for resolving cases (CEPEJ                         necessary detailed data to make well-informed policy
     2015). National standards for case processing have also                         and management decisions. When developed well,
     been developed in Norway and Sweden. In the latter                              with broad participation, input, and consensus from
     country, the government sets yearly court targets after                         the court-user community, judges, and court staff,
     extensive discussions with all courts and the National                          implementation problems can be reduced or avoided.
     Court Administration. In very large countries with                              This participatory approach, along with some other key
     separate Federal and state level court systems, like the                        elements that will be discussed below, ensures that the
     US, where standards are appropriate only at the state                           court’s goals are realistic, developed by consensus, and
     level, and only if they allow for sufficient flexibility to                     enforced. High-performing courts worldwide, including,
     reflect differences in jurisdiction sizes, court and case                       for example, the Singapore state courts, the Singapore
     types, so called model standards have been developed                            Supreme Court, and the UK Admiralty and Commercial
     to provide general guidance across all jurisdictions (see                       Courts, to name a few examples, have developed
     box 7).                                                                         and implemented time standards to help guide and
                                                                                     monitor the progress of cases and increase overall
                                                                                     court efficiency.




     24	The Doing Business methodology assesses whether any of the applicable laws or regulations on civil procedure contain time standards for at
        least three of the following key court events: (i) service of process; (ii) ﬁrst hearing; (iii) ﬁling of the statement of defense; (iv) completion of the
        evidence period; and (v) submission of the ﬁnal judgment. A score of 1 is assigned if such time standards are available and respected in more
        than 50% of cases; 0.5 if they are available but not respected in more than 50% of cases; 0 if there are time standards for less than three of these
        key court events (World Bak 2016, 154).




38   Good Practices for Courts
                KEY ELEMENTS                                     LESSONS LEARNED                                GOOD PRACTICE EXAMPLE

  •	 Assess court resources and capacity,
     including data by case/court type.
  •	 Assess the legal framework to
     determine the extent of changes to
     other legislation that would result from       •	 Reach a consensus on the desirability
     introducing time standards.                       of time standards with stakeholders.
  •	 Review and analyze data by case                •	 Pilot and adjust the time standards.
     and court type and analyze current             •	 Publish the time standards.
     performance.
                                                    •	 Enforce the time standards,
  •	 Set time standards for overall progress           monitor performance and publish
     of cases.                                         performance results.                            •	 The UK Admiralty and
  •	 Set time standards for key case events.                                                              Commercial Courts
                                                    •	 Adjust existing case managment
  •	 Balance expeditious resolution with               systems to allow for compliance                 •	 The Singapore Supreme Court
     attention to cases.                               monitoring.
  •	 Ensure active management by judges.            •	 Regularly review and adjust standards
                                                       and policies to reflect changing
  •	 Enure compliance by raising users’                needs, etc.
     awareness of the benefits of time
     standards and by enngaging with                •	 Implementing a public education
     them throughout the development                   campaign.
     and testing phases, as well as by
     implementing automated systems to
     support easier management by the
     court.




Key elements

To ensure their successful implementation and use,                            enforcement. Effective courts use one or the other or
courts must dedicate time and effort to developing                            both in combination for different management and
realistic standards for different case types and ideally                      reporting purposes. Regardless of the approach, a
also key processing steps, obtaining buy-in from judges,                      number of key elements should be considered for
staff, and court users, and creating a broad consensus                        successful implementation. A review of efforts in a
about the many benefits such standards offer. There                           number of U.S. state courts, the Singapore state courts,
are two main approaches to defining time standards in                         the UK Admiralty and Commercial Courts, and the
courts: one is to set general standards for how long it                       Dublin Commercial Court, as well as a number of other
should take to process cases, broken down by major                            well-performing European courts, including the Swedish
case types (i.e. civil, criminal, commercial, etc.) from                      courts, the Norwegian and Finnish district courts, and
filing through final judgment (or enforcement); 25 and the                    the latter’s Rovaniemi Court of Appeals, identified the
other is to focus on setting more detailed time standards                     below key elements of the successful development and
for each major processing step from filing through final                      implementation of time standards (CEPEJ 2015).



25	 Responsbility for the court judgement enforcement process does not always rest with the courts and is therefore frequently out of the control of
    the courts and not part of their performance measurement system. Even in courts that have this responsibility the data the court collects often
    does not appropriately track the progress and duration of cases filed through the enforcement process. Frequently the enforcement case is
    tracked separately, if at all. This is not helpful in either case since it does not provide the court wih feedback on enforcement outcome, i.e. suc-
    cess in enforcing its own decisions, and users tend to not make a distinction between the courts and court enforcement agencies when it comes
    to judging court effectiveness in getting a case to closure. Since the Doing Business report measure the entire process of case handling from
    filing through enforcement, it encourages courts and enforcement agencies to work together to improve the entire process effectively.




                                                                                                          Good Practice Area: Case Management              39
     Assessing court resources and capacity. Developing                 time standards; and determine the extent to which legal
     and implementing time standards requires financial and             requirements for court practices and procedures may be
     human resources, sufficient data and capacities to assess          contributing to delays and need to adjusted.
     it, and experience to develop meaningful timelines.
     It is also a process that requires time and the will to            Reviewing and analyzing data by case and court
     experiment. For developing meaningful time standards,              type and analyzing current performance. Collecting
     the court should review not only how a more streamlined,           and analyzing detailed case data by case types for
     and possibly more automated, process would impact                  different courts and court levels, broken down by major
     the overall workload and decision-making processes of              case process steps (that is, from filing to first hearing,
     judges, court staff, and others who are interacting with           trial, judgment, and enforcement), are essential when
     the court, but also what counter arguments are being               developing time standards. Different cases require
     voiced and by whom. Concerns over and potential                    different time standards, and specialized courts and
     resistance to standards should not only be closely                 the various court levels have disparate case processing
     considered but also reflected in change plans.                     time requirements. Reviewing how different cases
                                                                        currently move through the system enables the court
     Assessing the legal framework for adjustment needs.                to identify meaningful timelines by case type(s), which
     To reduce development and implementation problems                  case events are taking too long to complete, and which
     that may arise, an assessment of the legal framework               courts have more delays. The analysis will be assisted
     (including laws, decrees or orders, and internally created         by good case data, and a well-functioning automated
     practices and procedures) governing the processing                 system will naturally help too. When good data are not
     of cases should be undertaken to identify the extent               readily available to understand where cases tend to
     to which the laws already provide for time frames for              linger for too long in the process, additional data will
     completion of cases and case events and where they may             need to be collected. A combination of a review of a
     need to be adjusted; clarify the extent of the court’s legal       representative sample of case files, possibly combined
     authority in developing additional and/or more specific            with a Delphi study involving judges and court staff,



        BOX 8.
        Implementing Standards at the Oregon State Courts, US
       Developed based on detailed court data with input from courts acorss the state, the Oregon State courts are
       using the following overall time standards for civil cases:

       ►	   General jurisdiction: Filing to conclusion
            90% of all case resolved within 12 months
            98% of all cases resolved within 18 months
            100% of all cases resolved within 24 months
       ►	   Summary proceedings: Filing to conclusion
            100% resolved within 75 days
       The courts monitor performance according to these standards and produce reports with relevant information
       that is compiled at both the local and statewide levels. The reports are accessible to all judges, the division
       managers, local Trial Court Administrators, the State Court Administrator, the Chief Justice, and the legislature and
       are updated monthly and available on demand. Quarterly reports are published related to all key performance
       measures. The Oregon Judicial Department is working on a dashboard reporting system to make the right
       information available to the right people at the right time. The dashboard reporting system is real-time reporting
       and available via the department’s Intranet site. The tool offers administrators and judges the ability to drill down
       to varying levels of detail to problem solve specific areas.
       Source: Adjusted form Oregon Judicial Conference Standards for Timely Disposition at
       https://www.ojd.state.or.us/web/OJDPublications.nsf/Files/E7j99025.pdf/$File/E7j99025.pdf and NCSC online at http://www.ncsc.
       org/Information-and-Resources/High-Performance-Courts/Case-Processing-Time-Standards/CPTS-States/Oregon.aspx




40   Good Practices for Courts
is a good substitute (for a short description of these
approaches, see Gramckow 2012).26 The result of such                            BOX 9.
review will provide the information needed to establish                         Commercial Court, Dublin, Ireland
initial timelines for testing, facilitate the development of                    A key feature of the Commercial List has been
pilot standards, and select the court where the standards                       the introduction of a system of rigorous case
can be piloted (see box 8).                                                     management that relies on developing and
                                                                                enforcing strict deadlines, which are imposed
Focusing on the overall progress of cases. Developing                           for the exchange of pleadings, correspondence,
and implementing overall standards/goals for                                    presentation of evidence, and legal submissions,
processing cases from filing to disposition by case types                       and penalties or other costs incurred by the court
and monitoring performance against these goals allow                            or other party may be imposed for non-compliance.
courts to effectively assess overall case performance                           The following standards have been published:
across an entire court, or, where applicable, across a
                                                                                ►	From    issue of Notice of Motion for entry until
multi-jurisdiction court system. Used today by many
                                                                                   the return date: 5 days
states in the US (and adapted courts and many other
                                                                                ►	From entry to List to allocation of date for trial
countries), they provide model time to disposition
                                                                                   (whether for full hearing or preliminary issue):
standards by case types developed to provide guidance                              5 weeks
to state courts for developing their own standards. The                         ►	From entry to List to conclusion of case: 6 weeks,
United States in particular has been the leading force                             of which:
for many years in developing such time standards. The                            	 - case settled: 3 weeks
above mentioned latest version of the Model Time                                 	 - cases heard by the court: 8 weeks
Standards for State Trial Courts, for example, was the
result of a comprehensive 40-year review of state and                           Source: Courts Service (Ireland), “The Commercial Court,”
                                                                                http://www.courts.ie/Courts.ie/library3.nsf/(WebFiles)/20CE
local court efforts in developing and implementing                              12A5BD13310B80256FC50059178F/$FILE/Commercial%20
standards. (Van Duizend, Steelman, and Suskin 2011).                            Court%20brochure.pdf.


Focusing on the progress of key case events. Time
standards that cover overall progress are a good first
step and are particularly helpful in educating the public                   track and allows managers better understand and drill
about the court’s efforts to ensure the timely disposition                  down to what is happening in each case and generally
of cases. In courts that rarely face delay issues and in small              in similar cases, to more easily identify specific reasons
claims courts with only a few, simple procedures, such                      for delay, and to take remedial action in a particular case
overall timelines may be all that is needed to keep cases                   and especially for managing similar cases overall (see
on track. However, in order to be able to help a particular                 box 9).
court and individual judges achieve such set standards,
more specific timeline standards for the completion of                      Studies in the United States show that the courts’ ability
key case events become necessary. For example, having                       to control case progress is correlated to their ability
time standards for the completion of specific key court                     to reduce the time to disposition. These studies have
processes and events, such as completion of service/                        also shown that “case processing times and delay can
notification, pleadings, submission of expert reports,                      be reduced where there is a commitment to more
trial and non-trial disposition, issuance of judgments,                     expeditious disposition times and an organized program
and so forth, allows all involved (i.e. litigants, lawyers,                 for achieving this goal.” (Goerdt, Lomvardias and Gallas
experts, judges, court staff, etc.) to better understand                    1991). They further showed that efficient courts move
document submission and action completion timelines                         quickly at every stage of the case, and that lowering
required by the court to ensure the case is moving                          the time to disposition did not rest on addressing
forward in a timely manner. Related case process data,                      one or two pretrial practices but was rather the result
ideally available throughout the case progress are                          of improving the time between events at every stage
essential to help judges and court staff keep cases on                      of the case process. Courts such as the Estonian Tallin


26	 A Delphi Study is a research technique that is used for arriving at a true estimate by sampling expert opinions.




                                                                                                        Good Practice Area: Case Management   41
     Administrative Court have developed time standards                        by judges are essential for effective implementation.
     for all major case events, requiring judges to begin                      It is also important to dedicate time and resources to
     proceedings within 30 days from registration. The UK                      changing the court’s internal culture to one in which
     Admiralty and Commercial Courts have also developed                       judges, court administrators, and staff are playing
     specific time frames for case events. Similarly, the Wayne                a more integral role in managing cases. The Wayne
     County Circuit Court in the U.S. state of Michigan has                    County Circuit Court in Michigan, which has been widely
     been successful in providing effective management by                      recognized in the United States for its effective case
     ensuring that for every case, each event is prescheduled                  management practices and success, has relied heavily
     and the time between events is as short as reasonably                     on providing judges with the various tools (such as time
     possible (Batty et al. 1991). In the district courts in                   standards, early court intervention, pretrial conferences,
     Massachusetts, civil cases are separated under three                      and so on) that allow them to take responsibility and
     different categories based on the type and complexity                     actively manage cases within set standards but in a
     of the case, and time standards are developed for each.                   manner that allows for reasonable and justified flexibility
     For example, one category dealing with contract and                       to reflect the needs of individual cases and litigants.
     tort cases has the following standards: “from Answer to
     Case Management Conference date: not more than 4                          Ensuring compliance. In line with building a culture
     months; from Case Management Conference to Pretrial                       of active management within the courts, similar efforts
     Conference date: not more than 7 months; and from                         should be dedicated to raising the legal and court-user
     Pretrial Conference to trial: not more than 3 months.”27                  community’s awareness of the benefits of time standards.
                                                                               Seeking input and discussing their importance early on
     Balancing expeditious resolution with attention to                        in the development process, as well as engaging with
     court and user needs and fairness. As expressed by                        users during the testing and rollout phase, will help
     the distinguished US legal scholar Maurice Rosenberg,                     create buy-in and ensure compliance. Publication of time
     writing in 1965, and repeated by many since “Slow                         standards is essential and publishing court performance
     justice is bad, but speedy injustice is not an admissible                 reports that show adherence to these standards do not
     substitute.” This means that delay reduction efforts and                  only demonstrate he court’s efforts to be accountable
     efficiency should not overshadow a court’s attention to                   for timely dispersions but helps educating the public
     each case and to the need to deliver fair and substantive                 about time requirements. A study of almost 8,000 cases
     justice to litigants (Rosenberg 1965). As such, seeking                   in the U.S. federal courts that focused on court delay
     and factoring in court and user preparation needs and                     and efficiency also indicated that the most efficient case
     expectations into the establishment of court event                        processing occurred in jurisdictions where the local
     timelines and balancing them with the court’s needs for                   legal community embraced case management practices
     efficiency and other local dynamics will ensure that the                  as guided by the expectations set by the judiciary. It
     standards are realistic, fair and do not infringe on due                  should also be clear that adhering to these timelines
     process. As mentioned before, this also means that it is                  means that judges and court staff have to complete
     important to embed some flexibility in the time standards                 their responsibilities in a timely manner. Automated
     to account for the individual facts of each case.                         systems can be particularly helpful in assisting them
                                                                               to manage their work within set deadlines, not just
     Ensuring active case management. Effective use of                         by streamlining and automating certain activities but
     time standards requires judges in particular to be more                   by sending reminders of upcoming deadlines, thus
     active in managing cases. Studies in the United States                    providing individual court staff and judges with daily,
     have shown that case processing delays can be reduced                     weekly, or monthly prioritized tasks lists and individual-
     when time standards are in place and their application is                 level dashboards to monitor their own activities within
     well understood and taken seriously by judges and court                   timelines. A range of customizable software applications
     staff. Targeted activities, such as training and roundtable               that provide such features is available to courts as well
     discussions, to promote the use of time standards and                     as to law offices to help lawyers manage their cases
     encourage active and continuous management of cases                       within set timelines.



     27	 Massachusetts Court System, “District Court Joint Standing Order 2-04: Time Standards for Civil Cases,” mass.gov,
         http://www.mass.gov/courts/case-legal-res/rules-of-court/district-muni/standing-orders/dist2-04.html.




42   Good Practices for Courts
Lessons learned

Developing and implementing time standards are                 appeals before being rolled out across the country.
straightforward but take time and effort. The following        This approach allows courts to evaluate, adjust, and
sections present some of the lessons learned in this           improve the standards before introducing them into
endeavor.                                                      other courts; it also serves to familiarize judges, court
                                                               administrators, the legal community, and litigants with
Developing consensus and collaborating with justice            the standards and helps build a culture of support that
stakeholders. Obtaining an initial consensus that              is essential once they are fully implemented.
control over the case process is possible and desirable
and then creating a culture of support for using time          Publishing the time standards and performance
standards are both necessary steps for effective               data. Court data in general should be made available
implementation. Capturing external feedback about              to the public for review and scrutiny on a regular basis.
expectations, needs, and perceptions through various           Time standards in particular establish the expectation
mechanisms, such as meetings, targeted surveys, and            that courts will perform effectively, and a mechanism
committees, for example, ensure that the standards are         for measuring performance against such expectations
not developed in a vacuum. In Ireland, the Commercial          should be instituted. Access to the standards and
Court in Dublin established a user group that includes         performance data should be available internally
judges, court registrars, and barristers and solicitors        to judges and staff as well as externally to court
that meets to discuss performance issues. In the Turku         users. Providing wide access to this data promotes
District Court in Finland, judges hold regular meetings        accountability, improves transparency, and increases
with lawyers to discuss and develop a common                   public trust and confidence in the courts. It can also
understanding of time standards and how they can be            serve to educate the court-user community of the
used to improve efficiency. In another district court in       benefits of using time standards. Many courts publish
Finland, the head of each court discusses and reaches          this type of data, together with the time standards, in
agreement with the judges on the targets for resolving         their annual reports. The majority of well-performing
cases. And in Germany at the Stuttgart Regional Court          courts that have developed time standards also publish
of Appeals, the court holds regular meetings with              them online. For example, the Commercial Court in
lawyers to discuss user satisfaction and service delivery      Dublin, the Singapore state courts and the Supreme
issues (CEPEJ 2015). The Danish courts, on the other           Court, and the UK Admiralty and Commercial Courts
hand, implement regular user surveys, while the Finish         all publish their time standards online, as do many
Rovaneimi Court of Appeals collaborates with external          states and the federal courts in the United States.
research institutes to capture user views (CEPEJ 2015).
In the United Kingdom, the Manchester County Court             Enforcing time standards. As indicated in the
conducts three public surveys a year to obtain feedback        Doing Business 2016 report, only 76 out of the 111
from users (CEPEJ 2015). Regardless of the mechanism           economies that have developed time standards are
used to capture user feedback and input, involving             effectively using them. To ensure that the standards
stakeholders ensures that the time standards are realistic     are enforced, interventions from senior judges and/or
and can be maintained and enforced; it also helps to           courts managers are needed. This means that judges
build commitment in the legal community and fosters            and managers have a) the information available that
accountability among all those involved in developing          allows them to identify when deadlines are running
and implementing the targets.                                  out and when court or party actions are required and
                                                               b) that these interventions provide the opportunity
Piloting and adjusting the standards over time. An             for courts to address issues and discuss potential
effective approach to developing time standards is to          remedies (such as reallocating caseload, training
introduce them incrementally by piloting them in one or        judges and staff, implementing targeted awareness
more court(s) within a particular jurisdiction for a limited   activities, promoting active engagement with parties
time. In California, for example, time standards were          to ensure that timelines are adhered to, and setting
piloted and tested in several courts across the state as a     additional fees for violations, see also section 2.4).
part of a court delay pilot program. In Finland, the Quality   Such hands-on approach has proven to be effective in
Project was also tested at a district court and a court of     many courts. In Sweden, for example, the head of the



                                                                                     Good Practice Area: Case Management   43
     district court analyzes pending cases on a regular basis        earlier, raising awareness helps create a culture of
     and inquires as to the cause of any delays; in the Linz         support, which is essential for successful and effective
     District Court in Austria, judges are regularly informed of     implementation.
     their caseload, and regular discussions are held between
     them and the head of the court to identify delay causes
     and potential solutions.                                        Good practice examples

     Monitoring results. Once developed, court managers              The UK Admiralty and Commercial Courts have some
     and/or senior judges must continuously monitor                  of the best and most detailed examples of successful
     performance results in order to assess system as well as        time standards and court case processing rules. These
     individual court and judge performance and to adjust the        courts have achieved control over the pace of its quite
     time standards, workload, or resource allocation scheme         complex litigation through the development of very
     as needed. An effective and functional CMS should               thorough time standards for key events that occur
     facilitate this task by providing reliable and detailed         between case registration and issuance of judgment.
     statistical reports. It is also critical to regularly monitor   The courts have issued the Admiralty and Commercial
     and analyze key data, such as time to disposition, the          Courts Guide with comprehensive information about
     rate of cases disposed as against cases filed, the size         standards and case processing rules. This supplements
     and age of the pending caseload, and the rates at which         the more formal Civil Procedure Rules (CPR) and Practice
     case events are being adjourned, continued, and/or              Directions (PD) for the courts and introduces additional
     rescheduled.                                                    time guidance developed for the purpose of improving
                                                                     court efficiency. The guide is a working document pro-
     Adjusting the case management system (CMS). In                  duced by the court with collaboration and input from
     courts where an automated CMS is implemented,                   its users through the use of users committees. More
     and depending on the functionality of the system,               importantly, it is a living document that is revised, as
     adjustments may be required to ensure it is capturing the       needed, in order to quickly implement changes aimed
     required information to support compliance monitoring           at improving efficiency, a process that does not require
     without the need to manually collect data.                      any formal modification of the CPR or PD. For example,
                                                                     certain practices made possible by emerging technolo-
     Training judges, staff, and lawyers. Targeted training          gies, such as the use of e-mail and electronic filing, have
     on the use of the standards and tracking tools available        been added to reflect technological advancements, with
     should be provided to judges, court staff, and lawyers          detailed guidance specifically provided to users. With
     prior to their rollout. Similar training should also be         regard to time standards, the document identifies many
     implemented when updating them, which will ensure               time limits for intermediate case events and the conse-
     compliance and promote their use.                               quences of failing to meet these limits (HM Courts and
                                                                     Tribunals Service 2014). For example:
     Adjusting time standards and policies. Time standards
     are not static but are a working tool that should reflect       ►	D3.1 states that “a mandatory case management
     the changing needs of the court and the court-user                conference will normally take place on the first
     community as well as any national or government-                  available date 6 weeks after all defendants who
     wide policies. As such, the standards should regularly            intend to serve a defence have done so.”
     be reviewed and adjusted, if need be. In Singapore,
     for example, the Supreme Court regularly reviews and            ►	D3.2 (a) states that “if proceedings have been
     amends its time standards and policies and provides               started by service of a Part 7 claim form, the
     online access to the new or changed versions.                     claimant must take steps to fix the date for the case
                                                                       management conference with the Listing Office in
     Implementing a public education campaign. Informing               co-operation with the other parties within 14 days
     the public by providing detailed information on court             of the date when all defendants who intend to file
     operations and case processing is essential for building          and serve a defense have done so: PD58 § 10.2(a).
     the public’s trust and confidence in the court. Awareness         The parties should bear in mind the need to allow
     activities should be carried out prior and subsequent             time for the preparation and service of any reply”
     to implementing time standards in all courts. As stated           [italics added].



44   Good Practices for Courts
►	D3.3	(a) states that                                               –	 trial practices, including video testimony and
            in accordance with section C3, the Registry will            information technology during trial
            expect a defense to be served and filed by the           –	 pretrial checklists
            latest of:                                               –	a progress monitoring information sheet with a
     (i)	 28 days after service of particulars of claim (as             corresponding deadline for submission (at least
            certified by the certificate of service); or                three days before the progress monitoring date)
     (ii)	 any extended date for serving and filing a defense
            as notified to the court in writing following        The Singapore Supreme Court is similarly managing
            agreement between the parties; or                    and controlling the progress of each individual case as
     (iii)	 any extended date for serving and filing a defense   guided by the 2016 Supreme Court Practice Directions.
            as ordered by the court on an application.           These practice directions are regularly reviewed and
                                                                 amended and are made available electronically. The
       	 (b) If within 28 days after the latest of these dates   online version is easily accessible, searchable, and also
         has passed for each defendant, and the parties          authoritative. The directions specifically identify limits
         have not taken steps to fix the date for the case       on the timing of intermediate case events to ensure
         management conference, the Listing Office will          efficient processing. For example:
         inform the Judge in Charge of the List, and at
         his direction will take steps to fix a date for the     ►	 Entering Appearance: If a defendant is served with
         case management conference without further                 the writ within the jurisdiction, he has eight days
         reference to the parties.                                  after service of the writ to enter an appearance by
                                                                    filing a Memorandum of Appearance with the court.
►	D3.4 states that “if the proceedings have been                    If the writ is served out of jurisdiction, the defendant
  transferred to the Commercial List, the claimant                  has 21 days to enter an appearance.
  must apply for a case management conference
  within 14 days of the date of the order transferring           ►	 Default of Appearance: If the defendant fails to
  them (HM Courts and Tribunal Service 2014, 22–23).                enter an appearance within the time specified in the
                                                                    writ, the plaintiff may enter a judgment against him.
In addition, Appendix 8 of the guide includes a standard            This may be a final judgment or an interlocutory
pretrial timetable with due dates to be entered into                judgment, depending on the nature of the claim.
the CMS for significant events in each particular case.             The court may, however, set aside or vary such a
The guide also outlines specific practices the court has            judgment as it thinks just.
established to reduce the length of trials while at the
same time ensuring that the rights of all parties are            ►	 Defense and Counterclaim: When the defendant
protected and that the final decision is of good quality.           has entered an appearance and intends to defend
A key element of court practice described in the guide is           an action, he is required to file his defense with the
the Case Management Conference (CMC), an event held                 court and serve it on the plaintiff 14 days after the
early in litigation that is intended to summarize issues,           time limited for his appearance, or after service on
assess elements of case complexity, help estimate the               him of the statement of claim, whichever is later.
required court resources, establish a pretrial timetable,
and estimate the duration of trials. Overall, the CMC            ►	 Reply and Defense to Counterclaim: A plaintiff
helps to predict the time to disposition of each individual         may serve on the defendant his reply and defense
case and provides tools (such as an agreed timetable)               to a counterclaim within 14 days after the defense
to help judges manage each case and stay within the                 (and counterclaim) has been served on him.
estimated timeline. In addition, the guide provides
useful practice information for litigants and attorneys to       ►	 Close of Pleadings: Pleadings are deemed closed
help them to process cases in a timely manner, reducing             14 days after service of the reply or service of the
errors and ensuring good quality decisions, such as:                defense to the counterclaim. If neither a reply nor a
                                                                    defense to the counterclaim is served, pleadings are
    –	 the content and format of submissions to the court           deemed to be closed at the end of 14 days after the
    –	 the practice regarding notifications (service)               defense is served (Singapore Supreme Court 2016).
    –	 the practice regarding experts and evidence



                                                                                       Good Practice Area: Case Management     45
     2.2 REGULATIONS ON ADJOURNMENTS AND CONTINUANCES

     Background

     Another caseflow management technique employed                            FIGURE 10.	Workload increase by hearings
     by well-performing courts is the availability of clear
     rules that establish meaningful hearing schedules
     and limit adjournment options.28 Without such rules
     and regulations to enforce them, time standards for
     processing cases become meaningless. The need for
     and value of caseflow management in general and of
     adjournment rules in particular was first established                                                                                       1600
     by a 1977 study based on data from U.S. federal
     district courts (Flanders 1977). The study showed that                                                                    800
     fast courts strictly monitored pleadings, began and                                                       400
                                                                                               200
     completed discovery within reasonable early timelines,
     and promptly initiated a trial if it was needed. Other
                                                                                           2               4               8                16
     studies have demonstrated the direct relation between
     the number of hearings held and resulting workload for                          100             100             100              100
     the court (Graecen at all 2005, see figure 10). Today, it is
     generally recognized that judges have the right to ensure                                         Hearings            Workload
     the timely processing of all cases by employing timelines
     and other well-tested case management techniques and
     allowing adjournments only in exceptional cases. To
                                                                               Source: Adjusted from Greacen Associates
     preserve process fairness, clear adjournment rules and                    Note: Based on a steady caseload of 100.
     the mechanisms to enforce them must be established
     and publicly available. The courts must also ensure that
     established schedules for all court events are realistic and              better known as the Venice Commission, which acts as
     allow all parties reasonable time frames for preparation                  the Council of Europe’s advisory body on constitutional
     (Steelman, Goerdt, and McMillan 2000).                                    matters, stated in its report on the excessive length of
                                                                               court proceedings that member states should first and
     The European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) has stated                      foremost provide adequate means of ensuring that
     that it is the duty of the judge to ensure that cases are                 cases are processed by courts in a reasonable time
     progressing in a timely manner.29 The ECHR implied that                   (Kuijer 2013).
     a special duty rests upon the domestic court to ensure
     that all those who play a role in the proceedings do                      Well-performing courts also recognize that with the
     their utmost to avoid any unnecessary delay, and in that                  right to set timelines and limit adjournments comes the
     sense, it expects a proactive attitude from the judge.                    responsibility that the court itself will proactively ensure
     The ECHR has rejected governmental arguments that                         that parties and lawyers are prepared for court events.
     national courts cannot cope with their workload because                   In any jurisdiction, it is lawyers and not judges who settle
     of inadequate staffing or an insufficient number of courts;               cases, and lawyers do this when they are prepared—
     rather, the ECHR indicated that the state is obligated to                 and they prepare for significant and meaningful court
     organize its legal system in a way to ensure compliance                   events. Establishing the expectation that court events
     with ECHR requirements. In the same vein, in 2006, the                    are meaningful (that is, they will contribute substantially
     European Commission for Democracy through Law,                            to moving the case toward disposition) and will occur as



     28	 The terms “adjournment,” “postponement,” and “continuance” are used differently in various jurisdictions. Postponement often refers to the
         period before a hearing starts, and adjournment or continuance is frequently used when a hearing is already under way. All three terms are,
         however, used interchangeably, and this publication will only use the term adjournment to refer to any such request.
     29	 See ECHR September 24, 2002, Cuscani v. the United Kingdom (appl. no. 32771/96).




46   Good Practices for Courts
scheduled is therefore an important way to encourage                          repeatedly need to prepare for hearings that will not be
the lawyers and parties to be prepared.                                       held. Even the short time it may take to call a case and
                                                                              establish the need to postpone can add up. The effort
If events are continued without good cause, the                               to call the case, hear the reason for postponement, and
emotional and financial costs of litigation tend to                           order a new hearing date may take just 10 minutes of the
increase because of the need to prepare and appear                            judge’s and clerk’s time, but multiplied by 10 cases per
for additional court proceedings. Uncertain court events                      day, it translates into one hour and 40 minutes of time
and options for multiple adjournments without good                            wasted by each of them every day, time that could be
reason can also create perverse incentives for lawyers                        better spent on actually moving the case along toward
and parties to delay the completion of the case beyond                        settlement or a judicial decision. Not surprisingly, the
reasonable timelines (Friesen, Gallas, and Gallas 1971).                      Doing Business 2016 report indicated that only 50 of the
Multiple adjournments also increase the effort and cost                       189 economies measured had detailed rules regarding
to the court; clerks have to prepare files for each potential                 adjournments, and in some of these countries, the rules
hearing, and especially in civil law countries, judges may                    are not strictly enforced (World Bank 2016).30




                KEY ELEMENTS                                     LESSONS LEARNED                                 GOOD PRACTICE EXAMPLE

                                                     •	 Early alternative settlement options
                                                        and other case management
                                                        techniques to support tighter rules
  •	 Evidence-based, clear, detailed, and fair
                                                        on adjournments
     adjournment rules
                                                     •	 Proactive court engagement with                 •	 The Courts of Norway
  •	 Realistic court event, hearing, and trial
                                                        litigants to establish realistic hearing
     calendars that limit the need to request                                                           •	 The Ontario Superior Court of Justice
                                                        schedules and provide for reminders
     adjournments
                                                        of deadlines and schedules                      •	 The Courts of South Korea
  •	 Firm policies to limit continuances and
                                                     •	 Backup judge assignments for
     strict adherence to hearing schedules
                                                        emergency situations
                                                     •	 Education for judges and lawyers and
                                                        an incentive system that discourages
                                                        delaying the process




Key elements

Development of evidence-based, clear, and                                     second for taking evidence, hearing arguments and, if
fair adjournment rules. The Council of Europe                                 possible, giving judgment” (Council of Europe 1984).
Committee of Ministers already advised in 1984 on the                         Any adjournment rules should be outlined with detailed
establishment of a typical court procedure based on                           explanations of what has to be submitted to the court
“not more than two hearings, the first of which might                         and at what time. Such rules are essential not just for
be a preliminary hearing of a preparatory nature and the                      trial dates but especially for pretrial events that focus on



30	The Doing Business methodology assesses whether there are any laws regulating the maximum number of adjournments or continuances that
   can be granted, whether adjournments are limited by law to unforeseen and exceptional circumstances and whether these rules are respected
   in more than 50% of cases. A score of 1 is assigned if all three conditions are met; 0.5 if only two of the three conditions are met; 0 if only one of
   the conditions is met or if none are met (World Bank 2016, 154).




                                                                                                           Good Practice Area: Case Management              47
     submission of documents and other evidence. Ideally,            Effective scheduling of hearings can be straightforward
     the development of adjournment rules is part of the             in most simple cases but becomes a science in cases
     process of setting timelines for court events, since much       that involve multiple hearings, more complex issues,
     of the information needed to inform the development             and/or multiple parties and witnesses. This is a topic in
     of fair and effective adjournment rules is the same that        and of itself and should be appropriately reflected when
     is required to develop meaningful process timelines.            setting standards and deciding on the appropriateness
     Proposed adjournment rules should be developed                  of other case management techniques (see, for example,
     based on case data and judges’ experiences to identify          Steelman, Goerdt, and. McMillan 2000). Today, good
     when and how often such requests are generally made             software exists to implement an effective scheduling
     in which types of cases and the potential complicating          approach that reflects the needs of different case types.
     factors that may generally justify an adjournment.              It is important in the management of hearings not only
                                                                     that the scheduling approach of the court is effective but
     Adjournment rules should be developed in collabora-             that parties are consulted on the dates and are offered
     tion with representatives of affected party groups, that        and can provide alternative dates that accommodate
     is, lawyers, experts, and so on, to ensure that reasonable      other commitments or restrictions if reasonable (see
     justifications for adjournments beyond standard events,         Mackenzie 2013, see box 10). That is why electronic
     such as death of a party, health circumstances, force           assignment of hearing dates tends to initially be “firm”
     majeure, and other complicating issues, are reflected           only in small claims or for the first pretrial event, which
     for different case types and process steps. The rules           may focus on setting a reasonable hearing and trial
     need to spell out exactly when and how adjournments             schedule within the court’s time standards, if the case
     can be requested, the information and supporting                does not settle before.
     documentation that has to be provided (and the court
     may have to ensure that the requester’s privacy concerns        Future events should be scheduled to balance the need
     are protected), and if the consent of the other party is        for the realistically prompt completion of necessary case-
     needed. They will also need to indicate how the court           related activities with reasonable accommodation of the
     will consider the information submitted and what the            conflicting demands placed on the participants’ time.
     likely response or response option may be (for example,         Moreover, these future events should be scheduled
     an adjournment request from a large law firm with               sufficiently far in advance to allow for the accomplishment
     many lawyers may need to explain why another lawyer             of the necessary task, but as soon as possible to support
     cannot reasonably be expected to take the case within           timelines and established adjournment rules and to
     the established schedule). The rules should outline if a        ensure that litigants are aware that all the necessary
     complaint can be filed against the decision and if so,          preparations have to be completed by the next hearing.
     on what grounds. Publication of the rules, ideally on           The court can still anticipate that some cases scheduled
     the court’s website, is key, as is the related training of      for trial may settle or have to be continued, and it must
     judges and lawyers and public information events for            set its trial calendars accordingly, in the same way
     other parties. These rules also need to be clear on the         that airlines or hotels “overbook” and set cancellation
     likely consequences if the court denies the adjournment         fees so they do not lose revenue when people do not
     request, such as the cost, impact on the judgment,              appear. But this approach requires good data to project
     and so forth. To assist courts in the United States with        the likelihood that certain events will or will not take
     the creation of effective adjournment rules, staff at the       place. To simplify scheduling when good data are not
     National Center for State Courts, in collaboration with         available, a court might choose not to overbook, but this
     judges and court managers, developed Model Rules                often means that the court and individual judges may
     for Continuation that are also helpful to courts in other       experience excessive “down time.”
     countries (Steelman 2009).
                                                                     The most effective way to avoid either excessive
     Introduction and maintenance of realistic event,                overscheduling or down time is to develop a “reasonable
     hearing, and trial calendars. Rules limiting                    setting factor” and to utilize practical but firm
     adjournments can work well only if the court schedules          adjournment rules. The determination of a reasonable
     all court events, hearings, and especially trials effectively   setting factor depends on the dynamics of each court.
     and is itself prepared to handle the issues at hand.            It is the lowest number of cases per judge or court




48   Good Practices for Courts
  BOX 10.
  Techniques to Manage Adjournments
  •	 Publishing clear adjournment rules, policies, and practices
  •	 Providing (online) availability of detailed adjournment request forms that include requirements for
     submitting supporting evidence
  •	 Consulting parties and reflecting justified scheduling needs in court hearing scheduling
  •	 Notifying and reminding parties of pending events and the requirements for each
  •	 Reminding and confirming witnesses
  •	 Ensuring the consistent application of rules and publishing actual practice data
  Source: Adapted from Mackenzie (2013).




calendar that allows them to keep the pending inventory          to determine whether a different setting level is better
manageable in terms of the number and age of cases.              (again, supported by good data, if available) (Steelman,
The number of cases to set for trial can be effectively          Goerdt, and McMillan 2000).
determined in a manual or automated environment,
and courts should utilize both historical data and the           Implementation of a firm policy to limit trial
knowledge of judges and other court staff of both cases          continuances and strict adherence to hearing and
and case participant behaviors. Using information from           trial schedules. Rules that limit adjournments need to
case records in the clerk’s office or from the court’s           be enforceable to be effective, and the court has to
automated case management information system, the                be committed to applying enforcement policies. The
court can compare the number of cases scheduled to               Slovak Republic’s Bratislava District Court, for example,
the number actually heard and establish a ratio of cases         is obligated to try to decide a case on the first hearing;
heard to those continued, settled, or dismissed.                 adjournments are allowed only for serious reasons, and
                                                                 they are announced by the judge to the parties and
It is also necessary to determine the likelihood that cases      put on the record (CEPEJ 2006). In Latvia (Riga Central
will go to trial or be disposed by plea or settlement.           District Court), hearings cannot be postponed until new
Factors involved here include the type and complexity            dates are fixed (CEPEJ 2006). At the same time, the court
of the case, the amount at stake (in a civil case) or of the     too has to be prepared to ensure that hearings and trials
possible penalty (in a criminal case), and the practice styles   are held as scheduled, since if case participants are in
of the attorneys concerned. This kind of “optimal setting        any doubt about the arranged timetable, they will not
level” must often be achieved through experimentation.           be prepared. At the Tingrett Nedre Romerike District
A useful way to start is to increase the number of cases         Court in Norway, the court’s case administrator’s work
set and see what happens to the ratio of cases tried,            actively on scheduling cases within the set deadlines
continued, and settled or otherwise disposed. If the             and targets and lawyers are expected to conduct the
ratio improves, the court can continue adding cases until        case within the official time limits. If the lawyer is
it becomes overstretched and unable to handle hearings           unavailable, the administrators push for a transfer of
in a timely manner. The “setting” should result in the           the case to another lawyer at the same firm. This court’s
smallest number of scheduled cases possible to ensure            practice on adjournments is restrictive and mainly
that matters are heard at or near the arranged time and          limited to illness documented by a doctor’s certificate
date, cases that “fall out” are accommodated, and case           (CEPEJ 2011).
progress is sufficient to support compliance with time
standards without leaving the court idle. Because of the         In the United Kingdom, in the Queen’s Bench Division
changing dynamics of the litigation environment over             of the High Court of Justice, the judge can determine
time, the court should regularly reassess trial and fallout      if one of the parties is causing a delay and impose
rates and other factors affecting its scheduling activities,     sanctions or order that party to cover the other party’s
and such empirical experimentation (using case data in           costs. In addition, the judge may order the lawyers to
support, if available) should be repeated periodically           cover the parties’ court costs because of delays and if




                                                                                       Good Practice Area: Case Management    49
     necessary, strike out the claim or defense and award the               hearings, and early evidence disclosure rules needs
     case to the other party. If the court is responsible for the           to be in place. It also means that rules exist that limit
     delay, compensation may be paid to the parties to cover                adjournments for all court events, including these early
     the additional costs incurred, which will be identified                events, and that such rules reflect the needs of each
     by the court’s performance reports and reflected in the                process step. In slow jurisdictions like Italy, for example,
     appraisal of the staff, possibly affecting their pay and               the procedural rules allow lawyers to add new evidence
     promotion prospects (CEPEJ 2011).                                      throughout the process, enabling them to prolong a
                                                                            case with new submissions that require adjournments.
     In Switzerland, in the Judicial District Dorneck-Thierstein            This is mainly because evidence rules are not focused on
     (first instance civil and criminal court), extension requests          early disclosure and settlement of less-contested issues,
     of the parties are generally not granted more than twice               do not effectively forbid the withholding of evidence,
     (according to Art. 81, Civil Proceeding Law of Canton                  and do not set timelines for evidence disclosure before
     of Solothurn from 11.9.1966). In New South Wales,                      trial.31 Pretrial management hearings or conferences
     Australia, Section 66 of the Civil Procedures Act (CPA)                could also address any problems that might need to be
     permits the adjournment of proceedings to a “specified                 dealt with in advance to ensure that the trial will begin at
     day” only in exceptional cases. When an adjournment                    the scheduled time. For example, there may be problems
     is granted, the party responsible is usually ordered to                concerning the presence of particular witnesses, the
     pay the additional costs incurred by the other party                   necessity of bringing defendants to the court from jail,
     (Judicial Commission New South Wales 2014). The Turin                  last-minute issues for the judge to settle with counsel,
     First Instance Court in Italy takes advantage of Article               or other demands on the judge’s time. Any problems
     117 of the Code of Civil Procedure (CCP), which allows                 that can be reasonably anticipated should be resolved
     the judge to take into account parties’ behavior when                  in the pretrial hearings to ensure that participants will
     adjudicating the case. If a party (or his/her lawyer) does             not be frustrated by delays; the court can then reflect
     not cooperate with the expert appointed by the judge                   these needs in its scheduling so key hearings and the
     (for example, by not providing the information the expert              trial can be held on the earliest possible day.
     requires or not agreeing to or attending on the dates set
     for a building inspection or a machine assessment), the                Ongoing clear communication with litigators. In order
     judge can decide the case against the non-cooperative                  to ensure that lawyers—and self-representing litigants—
     party. A new version of Article 96 of the CCP stipulates               can be appropriately prepared for different hearings,
     that even without a particular request, the judge can                  the court should commit to engaging in continuing
     order a party who has submitted frivolous motions to                   open communication with the litigators. The ECHR has
     provide compensation to the other party (Fabri and                     provided some helpful guidance by clarifying that a
     Carboni 2015).                                                         litigant cannot be blamed for using all the procedural
                                                                            avenues that are available and is not required to
                                                                            cooperate actively in expediting the proceedings; rather,
     Lessons learned                                                        the litigant’s duty is only “to show diligence in carrying
                                                                            out the procedural steps relevant to him, to refrain from
     Early and alternative disposition and pretrial                         using delaying tactics and to avail himself of the scope
     management options. As mentioned above, rules and                      afforded by domestic law for shortening the proceedings”
     practices to limit adjournments are part of good caseflow              (as quoted in Mole and Harby 2006). This means that it is
     management practices. They can be effective only if                    not enough that the court possess and publish clear and
     other case management techniques are applied, so cases                 detailed rules for submission for any motions, including
     that can be settled early can move out of the system                   adjournment rules; it must also remind litigants ahead
     and those that come to trial are limited to contested                  of time of deadlines and procedural requirements and
     issues. This means that a range of settlement options                  of the information needed to request adjournments
     (such as ADR, small claims courts), pretrial management                or other schedule changes, which will not be granted



     31	 “Europe’s Civil Courts. The Wheels of Justice Grind Slow.” The Economist, February 20, 2016,
         http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21693252-especially-southern-europe-not-exceedingly-fine-wheels-justice-grind-slow.




50   Good Practices for Courts
if these necessary requirements are not fulfilled. The       hold a hearing as planned. Today’s ICT options may
court should also advise them of the consequences—           provide some alternatives to in-court events that allow
and notify them of related court actions—in case of          the judge to attend via phone or video, if s/he has to
noncompliance with deadlines or other requirements           be at a different location but has the time to attend
and ensure that requests for extensions or schedule          to the matter. If the judge is not available due to the
revisions are handled consistently.                          unexpected duration of other cases, illness, or the like,
                                                             the only option to avoid postponement is reassignment
Well-performing courts tend to be proactive in ensuring      to another judge, if that is allowed and feasible. Few
that lawyers and all parties are prepared and appear.        courts have the luxury of keeping one judge unassigned
If there are requirements or steps that need to be           each day to deal with disruptions in the daily trial
taken prior to the hearing (such as the disclosure or        schedule. If the chief judge of a multi-judge court carries
filing of documents), deadlines should be set and            a lighter caseload in order to deal with administrative
clearly identified in the hearing notice. Lawyers have a     responsibilities, he or she may be able to serve in this
professional duty to keep track of deadlines and hearing     backup capacity.
dates, but a reminder notice from the court a few
weeks before a hearing may result in fewer last-minute       More often, the most practical way to provide backup
requests for postponement. Although this places an           judge capacity is for all the judges of a multi-judge
administrative burden on the courts, the effort and cost     court help one another. This approach requires a
of providing a reminder is offset by averting unnecessary    system to quickly determine which judge can help an
adjournment requests and the related costs. Techno-          overburdened colleague and to arrange for case files
logy can be especially helpful in sending electronic         and case participants to be brought to the courtroom
reminders and allowing parties to automatically add the      of the alternate judge. Judges may simply communicate
hearing date and location to their electronic calendars.     directly to each other to ask for assistance or develop
Some courts require parties to identify the witnesses        “judge teams”; alternatively, the chief judge and court
they intend to call, and if a summons is sought, the court   manager may have the means to monitor the court
may request proof that it was delivered a certain number     calendar to determine which judge might be available
of days prior to the hearing.                                to step in when needed.

In Ireland, judges in high courts often use what are         The provision of backup judges is easiest in a multi-judge
called “positive call overs.” These occur after the          court with all judges in the same building, but it can be
pleadings have been closed and a notice for trial is         managed with judges who sit in different locations. In
served by either party. Although the case will have been     rural courts in which judges sit alone in adjacent towns
certified as ready for trial by one or both sides and thus   or counties, a reciprocal assistance agreement may be
placed in a list to fix dates for trials, frequently there   necessary. In rural areas where judges ride circuit, the
are outstanding unresolved procedural issues, usually        provision of backup judges may have to be coordinated
the discovery of documents. In a “positive call over,”       through state or regional court administrative centers.
the legal representatives of the parties are required to     In the Barry County Trial Courts in the U.S. state of
attend court to confirm that their case remains “live” and   Michigan, a court long recognized for its innovative
inform the court if they are ready to proceed. Problems      procedures, the judges have developed an approach
causing delay in progressing a case are frequently           to caseflow management that includes an agreement to
brought to light in these call overs, and the judge can      schedule all the trials to start on the same day of the
make appropriate orders directed to any party perceived      week. If any of the judges finds that s/he has two cases
to be in delay in any requisite procedure. A case in which   on the calendar that have not settled and are ready to
the parties fail to appear can be struck and reentered       go to trial concurrently, it is agreed that one of the other
only by order of the court (CEPEJ 2006).                     judges would, if not in trial already, take the second trial
                                                             of the overbooked judge. As a result, the Barry County
Provision of “backup” judges. The court itself has a         Trial Court has firm trial dates. Attorneys in any particular
responsibility to adhere to set hearing schedules, but       case know that it will be tried on the date scheduled—
even the best prepared and organized court experiences       if not by the originally scheduled judge, then by one
an occasion on which a judge may not be available to         of the others. The circuit court backlog that existed in




                                                                                    Good Practice Area: Case Management      51
     1995 has been eliminated, and the pending inventory            but also in ensuring that the new methods are reflected
     for all three judges has dropped. Knowing that the court       in training and ethics or performance requirements. The
     is willing and able to reach trials on the first scheduled     timely preparation and handling of cases should be
     date, attorneys are much more likely to resolve cases          viewed as a lawyer’s duty in serving his/her client and
     by negotiation (Steelman, Goerdt, and McMillan 2000).          violations as a performance and possibly ethics concern
                                                                    that may trigger professional sanctions. For example, in
     Judicial attitudes and judicial training. Judicial             the United States in 2015, in response to allegations that
     attitudes toward keeping timelines and limiting                he lied about his mother’s death and his own health to
     adjournments will be equally important. Since judges           try to justify discovery delays and support a continuance
     have to ensure that judicial proceedings before them           of a hearing in two separate cases, an Illinois lawyer had
     comply with the reasonable time requirement, engaging          to resign from the Illinois Bar (see Corsmeier 2015).
     them early on to develop timelines and adjournment
     rules is valuable in creating buy-in for these stricter
     approaches. Judges also have to be provided with               Good practice examples
     appropriate training to better understand the impact
     and benefits of such changes, and judicial performance         Courts of Norway. There are a number of key reasons
     systems should be adjusted to reflect related case             why Norwegian courts have a reputation for efficiency.
     management skills and attitudes. Experiences in Italy          These include: a) only one main hearing/trial is held in
     indicate that judicial performance systems, including          each case, whether criminal or civil; b) the main hearing is
     promotion schemes, can influence a judge’s incentive           scheduled within days after the case has been registered
     to manage adjournments and keep cases within set               by the court; c) in civil cases, a preparatory meeting is
     timelines. If a judge’s managerial effectiveness is not        held between the judge and the parties’ counsel soon
     considered in performance reviews and promotions,              after the case is registered; d) the meetings are generally
     some judges, especially ambitious younger ones who             held as telephone conferences; and e) the parties’
     may not be as vested in the “traditional” approaches,          counsel is expected to set up a timetable for the main
     have few incentives to clear their dockets. Conversely,        hearing and to limit the hearing to contested issues only
     in many countries, it tends to be more difficult to get        (Fabri and Carboni 2015). The Nedre Romerike Tingrett
     longer-serving judges to disavow the more “lenient”            District Court, for example, schedules planning meetings
     practices of the past, a situation that may require specific   in all civil cases shortly after the case has arrived at the
     guidelines and attention from the head of the court and        court. The lawyers and the judge—but not the parties—
     call for the need to be reflected in performance systems       participate, and the meetings are supposed to plan
     (Fabri and Carboni 2015).                                      all necessary steps until the disposal of the case. The
                                                                    meeting also clarifies the claims of the parties, their
     Attitudes, ethics, and rules for payment of lawyers.           main supportive arguments, and the evidence they offer.
     Another important factor is lawyer attitudes and               During the meeting, the progress of the case is planned,
     payment structures. Some countries limit the hourly fee        deadlines are established, and the dates and number of
     that lawyers can charge for a given service or stipulate       days needed for the main hearing set.
     that they be paid by individual case events rather
     than for the full process, which can make stretching           All evidence must be ready before an established
     out a case the only way to earn more.32 Ensuring that          date, and the parties must plan their collection and
     lawyers understand the need for—and benefit of—case            presentation of evidence accordingly. The hearing date
     processing time standards and limits to adjournments is        is set according to the general time standards used by
     one of the reasons why the local bar association should        the courts, which is six months for ordinary civil trials and
     be consulted and seen as a partner in establishing             three months for small claims (i.e., claims with a value
     effective court process rules. Bar associations that           of less than the equivalent of €15,000). Scheduling for a
     support these measures will be essential not only in           later date requires special justification and is expected
     educating lawyers of the benefits of these approaches          to be rarely done (CEPEJ 2011). Similarly, the Frostating



     32	Ibid.




52   Good Practices for Courts
Lagmannsrett Court of Appeal sends letters to both
counsel to indicate deadlines for new submissions,             BOX 11.
evidential lists, and input for the appeal proceedings.        Ontario Courts: Factors Considered in
Letters are followed by telephone calls to decide on the       Adjournment Requests
date and duration of the hearing. A week or two before         Factors supporting the denial of an adjournment:
the appeal hearing, the judge contacts the lawyer directly       •	 a lack of compliance with prior orders;
(by e-mail) to define a detailed joint timetable for the         •	 previous adjournments that have been
appeal hearing (presentation of witnesses and so on).               granted to the requester;
This is a time-saver because it obligates the lawyers to         •	 previous peremptory hearing dates;
talk to each other and agree on practical arrangements           •	 the desirability of having the matter decided;
(CEPEJ 2011).                                                       and
                                                                 •	 a finding that the requester is seeking to
Ontario Superior Court of Justice. In an effort to limit            “manipulate the system by orchestrating
adjournments while ensuring fair and reasonable court               delay.”
processes, the courts of the Ontario region in Canada          Factors supporting the granting of an adjournment:
follow new guidelines established by the Ontario Superior        •	 the consequences of the hearing are serious;
Court of Justice after several studies and extensive             •	 the requester would be prejudiced if the
consultations with all courts and external court users              request were not granted; and
were conducted. This is one of the busiest trial courts          •	 the requester was making honest efforts to
in the world, operating in 52 locations across Ontario,             avoid an adjournment (for example, honestly
in addition to numerous satellite locations. Its practices          seeking to exercise a right to counsel).
follow case law established by the Ontario Appeals             Other factors to consider:
Court in 2009, which provided a non-exhaustive list of           •	 the timeliness of the request;
procedural and substantive factors to consider when              •	 the reasons for being unable to proceed on the
assessing adjournment requests (see box 11). When                   scheduled date; and
a matter has been adjourned, parties are responsible             •	 the length of the requested adjournment.
for ensuring that all the materials for adjournment are
available at least one week before the new hearing date,       Source: Law Society of Upper Canada v. Igbinosun, 2009
                                                               ONCA 484, at paragraph 37,
including any documents that have to be submitted. If          http://www.canlii.org/en/on/onca/doc/2009/2009onca484/2
there are prior endorsements, orders, or judgments             009onca484.html.
that are relevant to a continuing matter, parties are
encouraged to file an “Orders Brief” containing the
relevant material. Between 12 and 2:30 p.m. two days
before the hearing date of a long or complex motion or
application, the court recommends that a representative      South Korean courts. The South Korean courts have
of the moving party come to the Civil Motions Office         a strong reputation for good case management. The
and organize the court file to ensure that all relevant      court has exclusive authority to manage its cases, the
documents are provided in the form required (Ontario         ICT infrastructure and legal framework to support it,
Superior Court of Justice 2014). Many courts across          and a CMS that provides for up-to-date case status
Canada discourage postponement or adjournment                information. Courts can and do hold one or more
requests. For example, the Human Rights Tribunal of          preliminary session to clarify issues that are in dispute
Ontario (HRTO) has issued a practice direction outlining     and to review the evidence before formal hearing dates
that requests for adjournments, particularly at the last     are set. Subsequently, the court holds several short
minute, are a significant impediment to fair and timely      hearings (usually at four to six week intervals) until it can
access to justice; as such, the tribunal will grant them     determine that it has received and reviewed sufficient
only in extraordinary circumstances, such as illness of      information to pass judgment, which is immediately
a party, witness, or representative. Absent exceptional      announced at the end of the last hearing. Different from
circumstances, the HRTO will not grant adjournments,         other jurisdictions, there is no concentrated trial period
even when all parties consent (Mackenzie 2013).              where the case is heard continuously over days or weeks.




                                                                                    Good Practice Area: Case Management      53
     At the closing of the hearing or hearings, the court          cannot hold a party in contempt for disobeying an order
     announces its judgment. The court consults with the           or direction in civil proceedings, it has several options
     parties and/or their legal representatives to determine       to manage such situations, including to refuse to accept
     the schedule for the proceedings, including deadlines         submissions or motions if a party fails to abide by the
     for submission of briefs, dates for preparatory meetings,     due dates set by the court (see Article 147, Korean
     examination of evidence and witnesses, court hearings,        Civil Procedures Act [KCPA]). If a party causes delay
     and announcement of the judgment. At the same time,           intentionally or through gross negligence, the court can
     the court does not have to follow the parties’ requests       refuse to consider the party’s arguments (see Article
     for setting the procedures schedule. Although the court       149, KCPA) (Chung and Seo 2016).




     2.3 AVAILABILITY OF PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT SYSTEMS

     Background

     In order for a court to verify that it is meeting legal and
     organizational performance standards and delivering             BOX 12.
     the needed quality of court services in a timely and cost-      Five Core Court Quality Performance Areas for
     effective manner, practical and meaningful measurement          Improved Court Service Outcomes
     systems need to be in place. Solid performance                  •	   Access to justice
     measurement systems, be they manual or automated,               •	   Expedition and timeliness
     are important not only to help the court track and meet         •	   Equality, fairness, and integrity
     its performance goals but also to support resource              •	   Independence and accountability
     management, provide the evidence needed to support              •	   Public trust and confidence
     budget requests, and communicate the court’s efforts
                                                                     Source: TCPS, CourTools, and International Framework for
     to the public. Modern performance measurement                   Court Excellence.
     approaches underline the need to distinguish the
     quality of court outcomes from measures to assess
     the functioning of internal procedures, programs, and
     activities. Good practice examples from around the            Kong, and Australia followed, as did courts in several
     globe therefore measure the outcomes as well as the           continental European countries, Latin America, and
     results of a court’s operation to inform improvement          other regions soon after. The TCPS provided measures
     needs. The need to measure a range of elements poses          and standards against which courts could conduct self-
     challenges for courts, not only in terms of creating the      assessments for the purposes of internal evaluation and
     required systems and capacities but initially in selecting    self-improvement in five key performance areas: access
     meaningful measures to better understand the many             to justice; expedition and timeliness; equality, fairness,
     different aspects of court performance in a particular        and integrity; independence and accountability; and
     court environment (Clarke et al. 2008).                       public trust and confidence (see box 12). They focused
                                                                   the court’s attention on good performance not simply
     Using lessons from the private sector and other               as an internal court matter but also as a dynamic that
     government agencies, the development of meaningful            affects those who appear before the court and the ways
     and practical performance measures that can be                operations could be improved for court users.
     integrated into a court’s daily operations began
     in earnest with the introduction of the Trial Court           Although this was an important development, it proved
     Performance Standards (TCPS), first in the United             to be difficult, if not impossible, for most courts to
     States and Canada (see BJA 1997). Building on these           implement all 68 measures that the TCPS established
     efforts and other well-established quality performance        across 22 standards for assessing court operations
     measurement approaches from the private sector,               within the five core performance areas. Even though
     courts in Singapore, Ireland, the United Kingdom, Hong        several individual courts in the United States, Canada,




54   Good Practices for Courts
and elsewhere used the TCPS or experimented with               in the performance measures, this diffusion has again
them, only the state of Washington managed to                  led to some confusion, less clarity about what should
implement the standards statewide in all its trial courts.     be measured, and more operational complexity and
An important lesson to learn from this well-researched,        demands on resources that smaller courts in particular
comprehensive, and collaborative effort, which brought         have difficulties meeting.
together court managers, judges, external experts, and
stakeholders from the federal and state levels and from        Courts in other countries have also gone through various
different court types, is that the desire for comprehensive    cycles of performance measurement approaches, and
data collection should not neglect what different courts       tools more applicable to courts outside the United
across a jurisdiction are actually able to implement and       States have been developed (see, for example, ICCE
use—not just once but over time.                               2014). The Singapore trial courts were among the first
                                                               to apply and electronically publish a scorecard approach
Taking this lesson to heart, court management                  early in the new millennium. The court continues to
professionals and experts in the United States came            develop its internal performance measurement and
together again to develop the CourTools. Released in           reporting systems and has become significantly more
2005, the CourTools emerged as a more manageable               focused on what it is publicly reporting (see Singapore
way to measure court performance. They integrated              State Courts 2015).
the five above-mentioned core performance areas with
relevant and more practical measurement concepts from          This raises the important question of what a court needs
other successful private and public sector performance         to measure to be able to inform internal management
measurement systems that could apply to the majority           about improvement needs. In addition, it is important
of courts in the United States (see NCSC 2005). The            to determine what is required for other court objectives,
CourTools provided a focused set of 10 core indicators         such as developing and supporting budget requests
linked to overall court performance goals and offered          and encouraging a healthy public trust level in the
concrete measurement tools that are widely applicable.         courts. Another important consideration is how
This more targeted and practical approach has proven to        performance information is actually used in the daily
be more effective, and its use has soared in the United        management of court operations, who has access to
States and Canada and inspired similar approaches in           what type of information, and how this information is
other countries. One somewhat unusual but very telling         applied by judges, court staff, court managers, and the
indicator of the success of CourTools is that today, several   court’s judicial leadership. Performance measurement is
commercial vendors of case management software offer           helpful only if it is applied to inform all court activities
options to integrate select CourTool measures into             and operations: case management, judicial decisions,
their applications. These systems collect the required         resource and budget management, and ultimately
data and provide the resulting management reports              service delivery to the “clients” of the courts.
automatically, as the CourTools are currently used in
enough courts to sustain a market for this commercial          Reflecting these essential implications of performance
software addition.                                             measurement, the Doing Business QJPI measures
                                                               whether the court (and other relevant enforcement
At the same time, the CourTools did not address some           agency) is able to generate and publish any performance
very particular data requirements for performance              measurement reports that monitor the progress of cases
measurement in the increasing number of specialized            through the court and also provide related information
trial and appellate courts that have emerged in the            about compliance with established time standards. A
United States and in many other countries. As a result,        score of 1 is assigned if at least two of the following
further performance measures for specialized dockets           four reports are made publicly available: (i) time to
and courts have evolved. In the United States, there           disposition; (ii) clearance rate; (iii) age of pending cases;
are now CourTool-based performance measures for                and (iv) single case progress. A score of 0 is assigned
child dependency cases, drug court and appellate court         if none or only one of these reports is available (World
performance, domestic violence cases, mental health            Bank 2016a). In 2016, at least two of these reports were
issues, and adult criminal courts. Although the different      published in 71 of the 189 economies the report tracks
case types and court responsibilities have to be reflected     (World Bank 2016).




                                                                                      Good Practice Area: Case Management      55
                   KEY ELEMENTS                               LESSONS LEARNED                        GOOD PRACTICE EXAMPLE


      •	 Meaningful and measurable                 •	 Selecting a few focused measures
         performance goals and practical              that can be tracked over time
         measurement schemes                                                                  •	 The Supreme Court of Victoria,
                                                   •	 Creating judicial understanding
      •	 Collaborative process for setting court                                                 Australia
                                                      and support for court performance
         goals and performance indicators and         measures to promote responsibility      •	 The Florida State Courts
         designing data collection strategies         for good court management               •	 The Dutch Courts
      •	 Regular performance reports and data-     •	 Ensuring that appropriate resources
         based management capacities                  are available to collect, review, and
      •	 Performance reports and results              report performance data




     Key elements

     Establishing meaningful and measurable court                         court must decide what its most essential performance
     performance goals and practical measurement                          goals should be and then choose related measures that
     schemes that fit the court. The TCPS, the CourTools,                 can realistically be collected over time. For analyzing
     the International Framework for Court Excellence (IFCE)              performance measures, the court may also need to look
     (see below under “Good practice examples”), and similar              for other influences, such as resource misalignment,
     data clusters are helpful instruments in determining                 outdated legislation, and so on, and may also choose
     what a court or court system might want to measure                   to include measures collected by others. These can
     to best inform its own performance management and                    include one or several of the international indices that
     accountability measurement processes. All of these tools             contain court-related measures, such as the World
     focus on the five above-mentioned core performance                   Bank’s Doing Business report and World Development
     areas that are essential for any court and its users.                Indicators, Transparency International’s Corruption
     Depending on the context of the jurisdiction, other                  Perception Index, or local public perception surveys to
     measures may be also important. As outlined, specialized             provide further context to the analysis. The Singapore
     courts will need to collect additional or subsets of data            state courts, for example, include their performance
     to assess performance in their focus areas. The needs of             results on several of these international indices in their
     a particular location may also call for other performance            annual reports (see Singapore State Courts 2015). As
     data needs. For example, if corruption is a significant              long as the methodological limitations of these indices
     concern, related data, especially experiences and                    are understood, they can provide helpful additional
     perceptions of court users, will be important to collect;            information, though they cannot replace the court’s own
     if judicial independence is in question, related inquiries           performance measurement system.
     in surveys of judges and court users may be helpful.
                                                                          Creating a collaborative process for setting court
     Here again, it is important to consider the difference               goals and performance indicators and designing data
     between input, output, and results when performance                  collection strategies. Some overall court performance
     is to be measured. Corruption or lack of resources may               goals, such as fairness and timeliness, tend to already be
     explain unusual delays or unreasonably high appeal                   expressed in constitutional and other legal frameworks
     rates and can be important to track, but neither is                  that guide the courts. Others, such as user satisfaction
     necessarily the core performance indicator that shows                goals, are specific to the particular court. The overall
     how much delay there is and which cases and courts                   performance goals and exactly how they should be
     are most impacted or how many and what types of                      measured will still need to be defined by each court. As
     justified appeals are filed and for what reasons. The                part of the process, it is critical that all groups impacted




56   Good Practices for Courts
by the choice of performance measures, the data                           before them, processing trends, and comparison
collection requirements, and the results are consulted                    information that shows how their own caseload is
in the design of a good measurement system to ensure                      proceeding in the context of the entire court. This allows
that they understand its importance, are committed to                     them to take action if delays increase and to flag issues
achieving its goals, and willingly contribute to the data                 that they cannot resolve on their own for the chief judge
collection and analysis. Through the collective work                      or a court manager to provide additional resources or
of all members of the judicial process, from judges to                    reallocate cases. If court leadership alone has access to
administrators to clerks, courts can better assess and                    such performance reports, individual judges are left with
recognize the areas within their system that require                      only a limited understanding of potential case
attention and improvement.                                                performance issues and have fewer incentives to actively
                                                                          monitor and manage their own cases.
A good practice employed by well-performing
courts is to engage in a court-wide strategic planning                    Disseminating performance reports and results.
process that not only sets goals, objectives, and core                    Beyond active use of performance information to
performance measures but also creates committees to                       monitor case progress and address potential issues
oversee data collection design, implementation, regular                   early on, it is also good practice to publish regular
review of the results, and the formulation of response                    performance reports and the court’s responses to the
steps. The Florida state courts, for example, in 2002                     problem areas. It is not just a matter of making the
created a Commission on Trial Court Performance and                       court more transparent but an important element for
Accountability. Consisting of judges from several circuit                 informing the public about the court’s commitment to
courts and a Supreme Court liaison, the commission                        ensuring good performance. This is one way to create
reviews performance data and reports and proposes                         trust and provide a solid basis—and potentially broader
policies and procedures to improve the efficient and                      support—for any requests for additional resources if
effective functioning of Florida’s trial courts. It also                  the court can no longer manage the caseload within
develops and reviews comprehensive performance                            the timelines and/or provide other much-needed
measurement, resource management, and account-                            court services.34
ability programs.33

Developing regular performance reports and data-                          Lessons learned
based management capacities. To ensure that the
performance data are regularly reviewed and used                          Selecting a few focused measures that can be collected
to inform performance gaps and develop response                           over time. The experience of creating the extensive
mechanisms, performance report prototypes should be                       set of measures included in the TCPS for the U.S. trial
developed for use by individual judges, administrative                    courts is telling. When too many data points have to be
staff, and the court’s leadership. Such reports can be                    collected to provide regular performance measurement
manually created from case files, registration ledgers,                   information, few courts will have the resources to maintain
and similar court documents. The production of the                        the process. There have been similar experiences in
needed performance reports can be effortless if this                      other sectors. For regular performance measurement,
function is appropriately reflected in the CMS design.                    determining key performance areas and collecting
Court leaders and managers as well as individual                          just one or two measures in each are part of the most
judges may need some training to interpret the reports                    effective approach. More data may be needed when
and develop and capture the operational adjustments                       special cases or problems have to be tracked, but these
indicated. Ideally, individual judges receive regular                     are the exception. The CourTools are a good example of
reports about the progress and age of the cases pending                   how to limit measurement to core information.



33	 For information on the Commission on Trial Court Performance and Accountability at the Florida state courts, see
    http://flcourts.org/administration-funding/performance-accountability/trial-court-pa.stml.
34	 For examples of helpful public information about court performance, see the website of the Dubai courts at
    http://www.dubaicourts.gov.ae/portal/page?_pageid=292,663857&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL; or South Africa (2015).




                                                                                                     Good Practice Area: Case Management   57
     Creating judicial understanding and support for court                     support (Langbroek 2010). This is another reason why
     performance measures to promote responsibility for                        performance measures should be developed collectively
     good court management. Effective court performance                        and why systems should be created that allow judges
     measures are used by judges, court staff, managers,                       to review the performance data and manage their
     and chief judges throughout the court system. In                          workloads. Moreover, these measures should be part of
     many countries, judges’ traditional opposition to                         any training programs, individual performance review
     performance measures in general, as well as their own                     systems, and ongoing consultations about the results
     active engagement in managing and tracking their                          and needed adjustments.
     own caseload for good performance, often rests on
     their understanding of judicial independence and their
     concern that such measures would interfere with it. The                   Good practice examples
     fact that courts are also part of the state organization,
     however, means that courts and judges are accountable                     The Supreme Court of Victoria, Australia. The
     to political decision makers—and ultimately, the                          Supreme Court of Victoria monitors its performance
     public—for their performance. In many countries, it is                    in terms of the efficiency, effectiveness, and quality of
     still the ministry of justice that has the responsibility to              its administrative operations. The court also closely
     inform parliament about the state of affairs of the courts                monitors its performance in relation to the initiation of
     and to request and justify judicial budgets. Although                     new cases, conclusion of cases, clearance rates, and the
     quality-control policies tend to stress the accountability                backlog of cases pending, and evaluates the needs of
     of any state organization, active quality management is                   court users and jurors to continually improve operations.
     the courts’ mechanism for reinforcing their autonomy in                   It publishes annual aggregate data for the entire court,
     their relation to other state powers, ministries of justice               as well as breakdowns for the court of appeal and the
     included. Getting to this understanding sometimes                         trial division. The Supreme Court of Victoria was the first
     takes considerable time and effort, good training,                        in Australia to become a member of the International
     and the ongoing involvement of judges in the entire                       Consortium for Court Excellence (ICCE), the group that
     management cycle, including budget processes.                             developed the IFCE, which includes a framework of core
                                                                               values that are aligned with seven areas of excellence.35
     Ensuring that appropriate resources are available to                      In addition to monitoring the above data, the Supreme
     collect, review, and report performance data. The                         Court regularly assesses its own performance against
     implementation of quality enhancement policies may                        the IFCE to ensure it is tracking well in its application of
     put courts and judges under considerable pressure to                      the model.36
     increase timeliness and improve their performance.
     Accurate registries of relevant data and proper                           Florida state courts. In 2002, similar to the efforts that
     information management are required for a judiciary                       had evolved on the national level earlier, the Florida state
     council or a ministry of justice to understand how well                   courts created a Commission on Trial Court Performance
     a court is operating. These are not easy undertakings,                    and Accountability to set up a state-wide consultative
     particularly in a large country or jurisdiction with many                 process and formed a group of local judges and court
     courts. In addition, registries that reflect set performance              managers to develop, review, maintain, and adjust
     data require time and effort to create, maintain, and                     quality performance measures and related systems
     update. Without investments in data collection and in                     for all court levels throughout the state. The Supreme
     systems enabling court management to use the data to                      Court established commissions for trial court and district
     benefit local courts, it would be very difficult for central              court of appeal performance and accountability. The
     court administrators to initiate improvements. When                       commissions propose “policies and procedures on
     this data collection also focuses on the quality of court                 matters related to the efficient and effective functioning
     hearings and judicial decisions, there is a risk that it will             of Florida’s courts” and support the “development of
     affect judicial independence and thereby lose judicial                    comprehensive performance measurement, resource


     35	 The seven areas are court management and leadership; court policies; human, material, and financial resources; court proceedings; client
         needs and satisfaction; affordable and accessible court services; and public trust and confidence.
     36	 For information on the Supreme Court of Victoria, see http://www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/home/about+the+court/court+performance.




58   Good Practices for Courts
management, and accountability programs.”37 In                                  as part of a concerted effort to strengthen the operations
addition, a Court Statistics and Workload Committee                             and performance of the judiciary. The quality standards
is responsible for developing related information and                           selected are: impartiality and integrity; expertise;
engaging with all courts to gather feedback and response                        treatment of litigants and defendants; legal unity
mechanisms if case performance becomes problematic.                             (sentencing consistency); and speed and promptness
These groups also develop and update a Compendium                               (Langbroek 2010, 17). These standards are measured
of Trial Court Standards and Best Practices, create Circuit                     by a set of data elements and collected for each court
Profiles, and actively support the implementation of and                        via an automated system. The Netherland’s Council for
adjustments to the Trial Court Integrated Management                            the Judiciary is responsible for analyzing the data and
Solution. Judges from the relevant courts are members                           developing the needed data reports for each court and
of these commissions and committees, which are staffed                          the judiciary overall to help with tracking case progress
by the Court Services Unit of the Office of the State                           as well as overall performance information. A significant
Courts Administrator.                                                           impetus for establishing this system, called RechtspraaQ,
                                                                                was the increasing pressure on the courts to become
The Dutch courts. The courts in the Netherlands apply                           more cost effective. As a result, quality management
a national set of quality standards for the functioning of                      for the Dutch courts is not just a tool for effective
the courts. Building on lessons from the United States                          management but also for better performance, including
and other countries, the standards were developed by                            financial performance, for which it is accountable to the
judges and court staff in collaboration with researchers                        Council and the Ministry of Justice (Langbroek 2010).




2.4 USE OF PRETRIAL CONFERENCES

Background

Initially developed in the United States in the 1930s with                      as Australia, a court registrar) and the parties following
the introduction of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedures,                      the filing of a claim that aims to define and narrow down
the practice of using pretrial conferences as a case                            the issues in dispute, thus clarifying evidentiary matters
management tool has spread worldwide and is currently                           to be tendered by the parties and working toward a
implemented in varying ways in many countries.38                                settlement. Studies in the United States and Europe
According to the Doing Business 2016 report, 87                                 have shown that pretrial conferences are successful in
economies included in the study have instituted a                               reducing backlog, increasing efficiency, and cutting the
form of pretrial conference that satisfies the indicator’s                      length of trials. In many instances, cases brought before
methodology.39                                                                  a court could be disposed of before trial, provided the
                                                                                court has the necessary information to make such a
The use of pretrial conferences is widely recognized as                         determination. It is at the pretrial conference stage that
an effective tool for assisting courts in managing and                          a judge is able to obtain detailed information about a
promptly resolving cases and promoting preparation and                          case to determine how best to dispose of it and create a
early settlement. Generally, a pretrial conference is an                        realistic and firm roadmap for how it will be processed.
informal meeting of the judge (or in some countries such



37	 Florida Courts, “Performance & Accountability,” http://www.flcourts.org/administration-funding/performance-accountability.
    http://flcourts.org/administration-funding/performance-accountability/trial-court-pa.stml.
38	 See “Federal Rules of Civil Procedure,” http://www.uscourts.gov/rules-policies/current-rules-practice-procedure/federal-rules-civil-procedure.
39	 The Doing Business methodology assesses whether a pretrial conference is among the case management techniques used before the compe-
    tent court and if at least three of the following issues are discussed during the pretrial conference: (i) scheduling (including the time frame for
    filing motions and other documents with the court); (ii) case complexity and projected length of trial; (iii) possibility of settlement or alternative
    dispute resolution; (iv) exchange of witness lists; (v) evidence; (vi) jurisdiction and other procedural issues; and (vii) the narrowing down of conten-
    tious issues. A score of 1 is assigned if a pretrial conference is held in the competent court in which at least three of these events are discussed
    and a core of 0 if not discussed.




                                                                                                             Good Practice Area: Case Management               59
     There is also consensus in Europe about the significance             causing unnecessary delays, reducing the likelihood
     of using pretrial conferences along with other case                  of settlement, prolonging trials, and even leading
     management techniques in reducing caseload, delays,                  to frivolous cases and appeals. Pretrial conferences
     and costs. This movement was due in part due to Lord                 eliminate many of these risks by empowering courts to
     Woolf’s report on access to justice in England, which                have early control over the process. Generally, pretrial
     recommended that procedurals changes emphasizing                     conferences aim to do the following:
     early settlement and providing greater control to
     judges were needed in order improve access to justice                ►	 Simplify disputed issues and eliminate frivolous
     and court efficiency (Woolf 1985). This resulted in the                 claims
     codification of the use of early control mechanisms.                 ►	 Gather information, identify the merits of the
     The Civil Procedures Rules currently provide judges                     dispute, and formulate issues
     with authority over case management, including issuing               ►	 Encourage and discuss the possibility of settlement
     orders on their own initiatives and providing additional             ►	 Develop schedules and set deadlines for case
     directions for the lawyers aimed at effectively disposing               events and the submission of pretrial documents
     of cases. In 2001, the changes and the introduction of                  and evidence
     judicial control were evaluated, which indicated that the            ►	 Obtain admissions of facts
     culture of litigation had shifted from overly adversarial            ►	 Resolve evidentiary matters and disputes
     to more cooperative and that there had been a drop in                ►	 Set dates for future conferences and set trial dates
     the overall number of claims issued and an increase in
     pretrial settlements. This trend can also be seen in other           Regardless of how they are implemented across the
     countries such as Norway, where the introduction of                  globe, pretrial conferences have a number of common
     pretrial conferences resulted in settlements in 80 percent           elements that will be presented in the following
     of the civil cases in the district courts. Denmark, Finland,         sections, along with lessons learned in implementing
     and Ireland have also implemented similar approaches.                them. In addition, several good practice examples
                                                                          from a variety of countries will shed some light on the
     Conversely, the less information the judge has about                 different ways in which countries with civil and common
     a case early on, the more likely that parties will be                law legal systems have approached the use of this case
     able to manipulate the process to their advantage,                   management tool.




                   KEY ELEMENTS                               LESSONS LEARNED                        GOOD PRACTICE EXAMPLE



                                                   •	 Encourage active and continuous
      •	 Early and continuous control of case         participation by lawyers and parties
         progress by judges                           in order to develop realistic orders.   •	 The U.S. Federal Courts

      •	 Realistic, meaningful, and binding case   •	 Actively engage with experts, as they   •	 Norway District Courts
         events and pretrial conference orders        often represent a cause of delay.       •	 District Courts, Western Australia
      •	 Early disposition and settlement and      •	 Train judges in actively managing
         limited scope of trials                      cases and conducting pretrial
                                                      conferences.




60   Good Practices for Courts
Key elements

Ensuring effective early and continuous control of              Promoting early pretrial disposition/settlements and
case progress by judges. For pretrial conferences to            limiting the scope of trials. One of the cornerstones
be effective, early and continuous control is required to       of pretrial conferences is the focus on encouraging and
ensure that the case is progressing without delay and           driving pretrial settlements. The conference provides
that frivolous claims are being disposed of effectively.        a forum for presenting information, identifying and
In the United States, for example, federal rules require        disposing of unsubstantiated claims, agreeing on
that pretrial and trial conferences be held, the former         uncontested issues, and ascertaining the merits of a
after filing and as needed thereafter and the latter within     claim in an informal setting guided by the judge.
weeks of the trial date. Trial conferences in particular
provide an added measure of control over trials by
ensuring that they are streamlined and short. They also         Lessons learned
provide another opportunity for the court to facilitate and
promote settlements. In the district courts in Denmark,         Active and continuous engagement with the
pretrial meetings must be held at the early stages of the       attorneys. The participation of lawyers and parties,
claim so that the judge and the parties can agree on            when permitted, contributes to developing realistic time
the development of the case. A similar practice takes           frames for case events. Many countries (such as Australia)
place in Ireland in the High Court, where the parties are       require that the parties be present, which can facilitate
required to attend a conference immediately after the           and increase the likelihood of settlements, especially
filing of the defenses to clarify the issues and focus on       in commercial cases. In Norway, where the parties are
timely processing and reducing costs. Continuous and            not required to attend pretrial conferences, the lawyers
active judicial control over case management, however,          are obligated, according to their code of conduct, to
places a greater burden on the courts and requires              consult with the client and relay their concerns to the
resources as well as judicial capacity.                         court. In the United Kingdom, feedback on timing and
                                                                case management orders is sought from the parties.
Developing realistic, meaningful, and binding case              The broad engagement of all those involved in a case
events: In countries where pretrial conferences have            ensures that all interests are factored into the court’s
been effective, the scheduling orders issued by the             order and that no undue burden is placed on the parties.
court at the conclusion of the conference are realistic         The end result is an understanding of and agreement on
and binding on all parties. These orders reflect: 1)            how the case will progress.
participation and agreement by all parties, lawyers, and,
at times, the experts; and 2) the balance between the           Active involvement of experts. Expert-related issues
court’s desire to expeditiously resolve the case and to         are a major cause of delay in many jurisdictions. These
avoid imposing undue and unreasonable demands on                issues may range from untimely submission of expert
the parties. The result is a document with meaningful           reports to the submission of unfocused and badly
and binding dates for case events, which is essential           written documents that require clarifications, as well as
for creating the expectation that these events will take        the failure to provide expert testimony during hearings.
place as scheduled. This is beneficial for both the courts      The lawyers, to manipulate the progress of a case,
and the litigants, as firm dates operate to increase            can also use dilatory tactics that rely on expert issues.
settlements, improve the likelihood that the lawyers            By mandating the participation of the experts in the
will be prepared for trial if the case cannot be settled,       pretrial conference and in the presence of the lawyers
and eliminate the possibility that lawyers or experts will      (and parties if allowed), a court is able to address all
manipulate the case process. The court is also personally       evidentiary matters and identify realistic deadlines for
authorized to issue sanctions on its own, including by          expert actions. The existence of a scheduling order
imposing fees and costs for failure to participate, failure     with such deadlines creates a sort of contract between
to appear, failure to be substantially prepared or to           the court and the experts, which can significantly
participate in good faith at the pretrial hearing, or failure   eliminate delay.
to obey a scheduling or other pretrial order.




                                                                                      Good Practice Area: Case Management    61
     Training of judges. Pretrial conferences confer a great        out discovery; eliminating unfair procedural tactics by
     deal of authority on the judges to exercise control over       lawyers; enhancing the preparation of the case and
     the management of cases, including by mediating them.          presentation of evidence at trial; and improving the
     This power, in order to be exercised effectively and fairly,   overall transparency of the proceedings. They have also
     must be based on a good understanding and knowledge            been integral in encouraging settlements by providing
     of case management techniques and case preparation             lawyers with a “reality check” on the merits of their cases
     requirements for the parties. In many countries, judges        that may lead to early settlement. As outlined in Rule
     do not have this knowledge or the opportunity to               16 C (2) of the U.S. Code, the issues determined at the
     acquire it through training prior to serving on the court.     conference may include:
     Instead, preparatory and ongoing judicial training is
     often limited to legal issues. This, in addition to the        ►	 “Formulating and simplifying the issues, and eliminating
     view of many judges that their work should be limited              frivolous claims or defenses
     to applying the law, can be detrimental to the court’s         ►	 Amending the pleadings if necessary or desirable
     ability to effectively implement pretrial conferences and      ►	 Obtaining admissions and stipulations about facts and
     other case management tools. Countries such as the                 documents to avoid unnecessary proof, and ruling in
     United States, where case management is effectively                advance on the admissibility of evidence
     used, provide judges with preparatory training in case         ►	 Avoiding unnecessary proof and cumulative evidence
     management as well as access to resources (for example,        ►	Determining the appropriateness and timing of
     the Federal Civil Litigation Management Manual and                 summary adjudication
     the Elements of Case Management: A Pocket Guide to             ►	 Controlling and scheduling discovery
     Judges) that offer successful approaches and suggested         ►	 Identifying witnesses and documents, scheduling the
     practices. Mediation skills must also be acquired in order         filing and exchange of any pretrial briefs, and setting
     to effectively promote and facilitate settlements. Well-           dates for further conferences and for trial
     performing courts (such as the District Court of Western       ►	 Referring matters to a magistrate judge
     Australia), in recognition of the importance of training       ►	 Settling the case and using special procedures to assist
     judges in mediation skills, provide ongoing training and           in resolving the dispute when authorized by statute or
     require accreditation.                                             local rule
                                                                    ►	 Determining the form and content of the pretrial order
                                                                    ►	 Disposing of pending motions
     Good practice examples                                         ►	 Adopting special procedures for managing potentially
                                                                        difficult or protracted actions that may involve complex
     The U.S. federal courts. The Federal Rules of Civil                issues, multiple parties, difficult legal questions, or
     Procedures were the first to establish and introduce the           unusual proof problems
     concept of pretrial conferences as a case management           ►	 Ordering a separate trial of a claim, counterclaim, cross
     tool.40 Since their enactment, federal judges have                 claim, third-party claim, or particular issue
     been empowered with the authority to actively control          ►	 Ordering the presentation of evidence early in the trial
     and manage the progress of cases at the pretrial and               on a manageable issue that might, on the evidence,
     trial stages. Pretrial conferences may be held after               be the basis for a judgment as a matter of law or a
     the filing of the case, and trial conferences can be               judgment on partial findings
     held shortly before trial. Each serves a purpose, but          ►	 Establishing a reasonable limit on the time allowed to
     both collectively enhance the court’s efficiency in                present evidence; and
     streamlining the case process. Pretrial conferences            ►	 Facilitating in other ways the just, speedy, and
     initiate the case management process, involving                    inexpensive disposition of the action.”41
     the litigants in establishing an appropriate plan for
     a just and speedy resolution of the case. They are an          Pretrial conferences can also be utilized to address
     effective tool for planning, coordinating, and carrying        attorney fees early on, which reduces the possibility of




     40	Ibid.
     41	 Ibid, 16(c)(2).




62   Good Practices for Courts
a dispute arising between the parties at the conclusion                     be resolved within six months, while small cases must
of the case.                                                                be concluded within three months. Additional success
                                                                            factors include the inclusion and consideration of the
Much like the earlier pretrial conference, trial confer-                    parties’ feedback in setting deadlines and estimating the
ences (convened prior to the start of a trial) provide an                   timing of future procedural steps and the participation
additional control mechanism through which judges                           of experts in the meetings.
are empowered to streamline trials by establishing the
ground rules. They can also consider limits on the length                   District courts, Western Australia. The court is guided
of the trial, clarify procedural issues, preview the evi-                   by an ambitious goal of resolving civil cases within 12
dence, and narrow down the issues to be presented at                        months from filing and allowing only two to three cases
trial. This tool has been effective in reducing the length                  out of every 100 go to trial. To achieve this goal, the court
of trials as well as increasing pretrial settlement rates.                  has developed and implemented an approach based
                                                                            on a detailed legal framework that calls for active case
Unlike in other many other countries, pretrial and trial                    management with a commitment to pretrial settlement
conferences in the United States are governed by a clear                    and a focus on capacity building.
legal framework that fosters active case management
and control by judges. To ensure effectiveness, various                     The rules stipulate that when the parties make their first
types of sanctions are provided to foster active partici-                   appearance, the court registrar can summon them to
pation and avoid obstruction by lawyers and parties. For                    attend a case management hearing that must be set
instance, sanctions can be issued for failure to appear                     within 14 days of the issuance of the summons.43 During
at the pretrial conference or for being unprepared to                       the hearing, the registrar reviews all the documents filed
participate. In extreme violations, the rules require a                     with the courts; establishes the complexity of the case;
judge to order the party and attorneys to pay reasonable                    determines the need for interlocutory proceedings; and
expenses, including the other party’s attorney fees,                        assesses the parties’ readiness for trial. In addition, the
because of noncompliance. In addition, the focus on                         judge may issue procedural directions to facilitate the
training and providing access to resources ensures that                     efficient and expeditious resolution of cases and dis-
judges have the requisite capacity for and understanding                    pense with all or some of the pleadings. The directions
of case management.                                                         may also require the parties to file an additional plea-
                                                                            ding; dispense with interlocutory applications; direct
Norway district courts. In the district courts, planning                    that experts confer with each other to identify differences
meetings in all civil cases are scheduled within days after                 and resolve as many issues as possible; and direct
the case is filed. Lawyers are required to participate                      some or all the parties to confer to settle the case, and
and may also do so via telephone. The meetings aim                          failing settlement, to resolve as many issues as possible
to: plan all steps necessary to process the case until its                  and identify those to be tried. Once the case is assigned
disposition; clarify the claims and supportive arguments                    a trial date, it is set for a pretrial conference presided
and evidence; set deadlines for case events; and set the                    over by a court registrar who also acts as mediator.
date of the final hearing (trial).42 The overall effectiveness              Attendance is mandatory, and rarely will the parties in
of the Norwegian model for managing cases rests on a                        a commercial dispute ask to be excused. The parties
holistic approach to efficiency that not only requires early                are required to attempt to settle in good faith. If the
pretrial conferences but also places limitations on the                     registrar is not satisfied that a party is ready for trial, he
number of hearings held in civil cases (judges are limited                  or she may adjourn the conference or amend any case
to holding one hearing, which is usually at the end of the                  management direction previously made. To promote
process when all information and documents have been                        settlement, all discussions and admissions made during
reviewed, settlement options eliminated and the judge                       the pretrial conference are confidential and inadmissible
is prepared to conclude the case) and implements time                       in trial.
standards for resolving disputes. Major civil cases must



42	 See Act of June 17, 2005, no. 90 relating to mediation and procedure in civil disputes (The Dispute Act),
    http://app.uio.no/ub/ujur/oversatte-lover/data/lov-20050617-090-eng.pdf.
43	 See “District Court Rules 2005” of the Western Australian Current Regulations, http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consol_reg/dcr2005236.




                                                                                                        Good Practice Area: Case Management       63
     This active and elaborate case management approach                      development and capacity building of its registrars.44
     has proven to be effective. According to the court’s                    Conducting the bulk of the mediations, registrars must
     annual statistics for 2014, only 71 out of the 4,800 civil              undergo an accreditation process and are continuously
     cases filed, or 1.7 percent, proceeded to trial, with a total           and regularly offered mediation training. For cases that
     of 2,390 pretrial conferences held at which mediation                   could not be settled prior to trial, the court’s active
     was carried out by the registrars. In 2015, court data                  management approach succeeded in narrowing down
     showed that only 51 out of the 4,663 cases filed, or 1.1                the disputed issues and evidentiary matters, which
     percent, proceeding to trial. The high settlement rate was              resulted in a reduction of the length of trials.
     also due in part to the court’s focus on the professional




     2.5 AVAILABILITY OF AN ELECTRONIC CASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM




     Traditionally, a case management system (CMS) is the                    Considering the advancements of technology and
     combination of the practices and techniques that support                the continually decreasing cost of computer systems,
     manual caseflow management, such as timelines,                          automation of at least the basic case management
     pretrial conferences, adjournment rules, and so on,                     processes to track caseflow is within reach of almost any
     using paper forms and files. The automation of case                     court that has access to steady electricity, a relatively
     management processes and broader introduction of ICT                    sound infrastructure, and a workforce that can manage
     into the judicial system greatly facilitate effective case              simple computer entries. These basic systems are not
     management. With the advancement of technology, the                     very complex, and they can already greatly increase
     automation of such systems has become increasingly                      court efficiency and accountability. Moreover, they are
     common. A good electronic CMS reflects and supports                     no longer very costly; indeed, when well designed, they
     the various caseflow management techniques and                          can reduce operational costs. At the same time, they
     principles applied to different case types at a particular              require a solid assessment of current operations, the
     court. If appropriate case management techniques are                    desire to develop optimal processes, and a commitment
     developed and translated into a CMS, the system can                     to deliver good court services. They also require time
     effectively track the status of cases and their position in             and commitment to design a good system from the
     the court process, support the development of caseload                  court itself—no software developer, whether a local
     and possibly workload statistics and management                         expert or an international software company, can design
     reports, and monitor case processes, all of which                       a well-functioning system unless the court’s leadership
     contribute to performance monitoring. Regularly                         and relevant court users are extensively involved in
     gathered statistics on the flow of cases through the                    the design, testing, and rollout. And no CMS, even
     court process can identify process bottlenecks and case                 the most sophisticated automated one, can deliver
     delays, which together can inform needed resource and                   results if the data it collects are not translated into
     process adjustments. A CMS can provide judges with                      management reports that those in charge are actively
     the information needed to control timely processing                     using and responding to. This is the essence of good
     and produce a complete and reliable case record. Since                  case management: establishing effective procedures,
     such a system helps establish and preserve case records                 verifying that they are adhered to, and responding when
     (see USAID 2009), it can also facilitate and likely reduce              things do not develop as they should (for more detailed
     appellate reviews (Gramckow and Nussenblatt 2013).                      information, see Gramckow and Nussenblatt 2013).




     44	 For more detailed court data, see a list of the court’s recent publications at
         http://www.districtcourt.wa.gov.au/P/ps_publications.aspx?uid=8413-9020-9299-8705.




64   Good Practices for Courts
The Doing Business 2016 report established that a                              a system was, however, available to lawyers in only 37
form of electronic CMS with the elements used in the                           economies (World Bank 2016a). There is clearly room for
indicator’s methodology was available to judges in                             advancing these systems in many countries.
41 economies of the 189 evaluated.45 Access to such




                KEY ELEMENTS                                      LESSONS LEARNED                                 GOOD PRACTICE EXAMPLE

  •	 Planning and definition of scope               •	 The primacy of reengineering
  •	 Mapping and designing efficient case           •	 The need for legal changes, user
     processes                                         buy-in, and capacity building to be
  •	 User groups to guide development,                 reflected.
     implementation, and adjustment of the          •	 User-guided definitions of system
     system                                            functions that reflect different case
  •	 Participatory development and                     and court types and levels
                                                                                                         •	 The Courts of South Korea
     adjustment of functional system                •	 A focus on change management and
     requirements and standards                        on eliminating manual procedures                  •	 Austrian Courts and Justice System
  •	 Effective implementation structure and         •	 Phased system development to
     secure funding                                    accommodate testing and reflect the
  •	 Continuous internal user training and             needs of different case types, courts,
     external user support                             and users
  •	 System maintenance, backup, and                •	 CMS as one part of a broader court
     security plans                                    and justice system ICT strategy




Key elements

Planning and defining the scope of the envisioned                              goals, fully understand what is involved in designing
system. Developing an automated CMS that fits the                              and implementing such a system, and are aware of the
needs of a particular court or even entire court system                        impact the desired changes will have on all involved.
requires careful planning, effort, and time. The more                          This means that the court (that is, court leadership,
complex the envisioned system and the more courts                              judges, and key court staff) must be able to clearly
involved, the greater the effort that will be needed.                          articulate its needs, goals, and objectives; it also means
Before automation begins, it is fundamentally important                        that the court should fully comprehend that processes
that the court(s) have a clear vision of their automation                      have to be optimized first before any automated system



45	 Since electronic CMS vary significantly in scope and complexity, the Doing Business methodology defines – and scores the existence of such
    a system in the following way: first, reflecting the fact that individual judges need to be actively managing their cases, one point will be given
    if judges within the competent court can use an electronic case management system for at least four of the following purposes: (i) to access
    laws, regulations and case law; (ii) to automatically generate a hearing schedule for all cases on their docket; (iii) to send notifications (for
    example, e-mails) to lawyers; (iv) to track the status of a case on their docket; (v) to view and manage case documents (briefs, motions); (vi) to
    assist in writing judgments; (vii) to semiautomatically generate court orders; and (viii) to view court orders and judgments in a particular case.
    Second, reflecting the court user needs and service delivery focus of the court, another point of 1 is assigned if lawyers can use an electronic
    case management system for at least four of the following purposes: (i) to access laws, regulations and case law; (ii) to access forms to be sub-
    mitted to the court; (iii) to receive notifications (for example, e-mails); (iv) to track the status of a case; (v) to view and manage case documents
    (briefs, motions); (vi) to file briefs and documents with the court; and (vii) to view court orders and decisions in a particular case (World Bank
    2016, p.154).




                                                                                                           Good Practice Area: Case Management              65
     can be developed that actually makes a difference in
     court operations. Moreover, the court must be able                        BOX 13.
     to identify the processing and automation changes                         Automation: Where to Start?
     that can be made within the existing legal framework                      The civil caseload tends to be the largest in many
     and resource capacities and the amendments that                           courts across the globe. Starting automation there
     will be needed. Ideally, the court reviews its business                   is thus likely to have a significant impact on court
     procedures, maps the flow of key case types through the                   operations. Automating civil case procedures also
     entire court process from filing through final judgment,                  tends to be less difficult, since there are fewer
     assesses and evaluates operations and management                          important information elements that need to be
     systems in place, and determines whether there is a                       tracked than in criminal cases, and the need to link
     need to redesign processes before embarking on major                      information to other agencies is lower. Courts in
     automation.46                                                             jurisdictions as diverse as Abu Dhabi and Mongolia
                                                                               are among those who have opted for automating
     In addition, the court will need to have reliable case                    civil cases first.
     data to determine where automation can have a
                                                                               When fewer resources are available, targeting
     significant impact and what functions and/or case types
                                                                               a smaller but still high-impact caseload, such
     should have priority. Automating all court processes                      as commercial cases, can be very effective to
     for all case types is such a complex undertaking that a                   demonstrate the benefit of automation. Morocco
     phased approach is needed. Some courts have chosen                        and Serbia are countries that have successfully
     to automate their civil caseload first, which for many                    taken this approach.
     courts represents the largest court function (see box
     13). Automating larger caseloads means the system can                     When resistance to changing processes is high
     have a greater impact on the court’s operations. In other                 and staff and other resource capacities to support
     instances, courts have started with a smaller subsection                  automation are initially low, focusing on the
     of cases, such as commercial cases, for example, to                       automation of only a few court processes where
     keep the initial design effort manageable. Automating                     impact can be seen quickly is a good option. For
     other case types subsequently becomes easier, since                       example, Egypt piloted the creation of a one-stop
     procedures and data requirements are similar and the                      filing counter in the North Cairo First Instance
     design can build on and learn from the first automation                   Court, which has the highest caseload in the
                                                                               country. The impact was significant, since the new
     effort. The decision to identify where to start and how
                                                                               filing process required only three steps in one
     complex a system to develop has to especially consider
                                                                               location, instead of over 40 actions that had to be
     staff abilities, training requirements, and other end-
                                                                               conducted in various offices across the court.
     user needs and capacities, as well as whether current
     court facilities and other infrastructure can support the                 Source: Gramckow and Nussenblatt (2013, 10).
     envisioned automation. IT development costs as well as
     likely future use and maintenance must be considered
     equally. The results of the planning process will have to
     clearly state the circumstances under which automation                 how operations can be simplified, streamlined, and
     would add value to court operations and the options                    adjusted to increase both internal efficiency and user
     for streamlining and automation that are available                     friendliness (for a detailed account of how this can best
     (Gramckow and Nussenblatt 2013).                                       be undertaken, see Gramckow and Ebeid 2016a). The
                                                                            initial process and organizational review conducted
     Mapping and designing efficient case processes.                        during the planning phase will have determined
     A key requirement for designing a good CMS—and a                       which procedures will be automated and when, as
     step that can be taken by any court aiming to improve                  well as the information the system should capture for
     its performance—is a review of how cases are currently                 operations and management, information exchange,
     moving through the court. This will help identify if and               and interconnectivity requirements.




     46	 For an overview and helpful tools to conduct such case mapping process, see Gramckow and Ebeid 2016a.




66   Good Practices for Courts
The initial review will also help define the capabilities     changes for the system, as well as resource adjustments,
the software needs to provide and the data it must            active user groups should focus on developing the
maintain. Based on this preliminary identification of the     needed functional standards and specification details
scope of the system, a detailed review of the operations      for the development and future adjustments of the
and processes to be automated has to be conducted,            electronic system. Clearly, these functional specifications
with several objectives. First, it should point out process   should be based on and reflect any process modifications
inefficiencies, design better operations and procedures,      that resulted from the earlier analysis of the business
and identify any need to adjust rules and legislation         flow models. If inefficient procedures are automated,
as well as any resource requirements. Second, to              the result will be a correspondingly inefficient system
be successful, this process will also result in the           that may benefit to a certain extent from automation but
development of procedural and information standards.          will not be a more effective process.
Finally, and equally important, full functional standards
and technical specifications have to be developed for         The development of functional standards for what the
each implementation phase.                                    system is supposed to support and deliver is crucial but
                                                              not always well understood or appreciated by those
Creating (internal and external) user groups to inform        who need to define them, court staff and judges. Many
and guide the development, implementation, and                are new to the design of a good CMS—this is not a
future adjustment of the system. The creation of a            skill tough in law school. Younger generations more
user group to guide the system development process            familiar with various ITC applications, social apps and
and work hand in hand with the software developers is         coding may find the thought processes required for this
essential for:                                                process easier. But if they, the judges, court staff—and
                                                              external users who are supposed to use the system—
•	   defining and communicating the scope and nature          are not defining in detail what the system needs to
     of the proposed system                                   do for them, the software developers will. Overall, the
•	   communicating its own processing and information         process starts with identifying data requirements for
     needs and system-related functional requirements         each of the different functions the system is expected
     to vendors or system designers                           to perform, such as case initiation, case maintenance,
•	   informing process, resource, legislative, and other      and calendaring. For each function, the needed range
     change needs and change process options                  of data has to be defined, which tends to cluster around
•	   providing a benchmark for evaluating and selecting       four core data types: (1) person-related data (defendants,
     software, if a new software system is to be procured     parties, and attorneys), (2) time-related data (processing,
     (Webster 1996).                                          decision making, and hearings), (3) case data (history,
                                                              event, statistics, and records), and (4) financial data (fees,
These groups should be comprised of experienced               fines, resources, maintenance, and services, including
and committed representatives of all key internal and         incarceration). Each of these data sets relates to the other,
external users the system will be designed to serve.          creating a relational database. These relationships have
This will involve judges, court staff, court managers, and    to be defined when building a CMS that will successfully
leaders. Depending on the focus of the system, judges         retrieve and store information (Steelman, Goerdt, and
and staff from different court types at different court       McMillan 2000). Even when the functional specifications
levels should be involved. External users should also         have been developed, additional areas for process
be engaged if the system will be available to them in         improvement may be identified in the process and may
some form. Considering that the design of the system          be considered for possible inclusion (see Kujanen and
is just the first step and that testing and implementation    Sarvilinna 2001, 41) but there needs to be time when
will require adjustments, such user groups should be          the desire for continuous adjustment has to stop, when
available as long as the system evolves.                      the functional standards developed so far are declare
                                                              “good fit”, coded, tested and the system goes life. It
Ensuring participatory development and ongoing                is easy to understand why court users continuously
adjustment of functional requirements and standards           have further ideas for enhancing the system or why
for the system. Based on a solid caseflow mapping             court leaders demand further changes; as the system
process that ideally would have also resulted in              is used, it should evolve, but functional specifications
streamlined procedures, court rule and legislative            and related system changes cannot be constantly made



                                                                                     Good Practice Area: Case Management       67
     even if system adjustment cost were not an issue.                          system, are involved in providing feedback for further
     Functional specifications are not unlike court rules,                      improvements, and have sufficient IT support (such as
     they respond to the legal environment, processing                          help desks and hardware and software support), and that
     requirements and (internal and external) user needs over                   there are structures in place to ensure that the system is
     time. Just like court rules, they need to be set, and there                used. Managers will need to motivate staff to use the
     needs to be a system in place that provides for captur-                    system and have mechanisms in place to enforce this
     ing adjustment suggestions, reviewing them and                             goal. Initially, a transition phase that allows for learning,
     adjusting them at regular intervals. A thoughtfully                        system reliability, and effective backup to create trust in
     assembled, inclusive user group to not just design                         the system will be important, but the concurrent use of
     the system but continuously manage this adjustment                         the old manual and the new automated systems is not
     process is what well-performing court have created.                        advised and should not be tolerated. Employing both
                                                                                systems increases the workload and does not make the
     A CMS links the data types as they are needed                              processes more efficient, thereby essentially wasting all
     throughout the court process to individual functions                       the investments made.
     and decisions and compiles them into reports. To
     assist courts in the United States with this complex                       It is equally important to ensure that funding is available
     and time-consuming design process, a group of court                        not only for the design, testing, and early implementation
     professionals, including judges and court managers,                        of the system but for ongoing maintenance and user
     from different courts on the federal and state levels                      capacity building. A CMS requires at minimum some
     came together to develop functional standards for                          adjustments each time the relevant procedural and
     different case type management systems.47 These                            related substantive laws are amended. If funding for
     standards outline a set of functional requirements that                    such changes is not available, the system can become
     a system should at minimum be able to provide; they                        outdated quickly. Similarly, as users become more
     also offer a base in relation to which courts can review                   familiar and comfortable with the system and as internal
     the requirements of their jurisdiction, ensure that core                   procedures continue to be identified for streamlining
     elements are not missed, and eliminate the need to                         or increased user friendliness, system changes will be
     focus on the general functions each court has to fulfill                   needed. Without appropriate funding, the system will
     for each court step. This allows courts then to identify                   be stagnant and less effective in a short period of time.
     if the “standard” system is sufficient or if adjustments
     are desired or required, thereby saving them time and                      Providing continuous internal user training and
     helping them design systems that meet their own needs.                     external user support. One-time training of internal
     The specifically crafted functional system requirements                    users, court staff, and judges in the use of the system is
     and related information captured to develop the                            often part of the contract with the system developer. This,
     system’s enterprise architecture will not just be the basis                however, is not enough. Training for internal users has to
     for building the system but will also support ongoing                      be provided on an ongoing basis; it also needs to cover
     adjustments as laws change, user needs shift, and                          more than how to use the system and focus on how to
     demands grow.                                                              utilize the information and reports the system provides.
                                                                                Judges, and especially court managers, chief judges,
     Creating an effective implementation structure and                         and judicial councils (and ministries of justice, where
     securing funding. Developing a system that meets the                       applicable), need to understand how to employ the
     needs of the organization and its internal and external                    system to generate information and reports for planning
     users requires more than the involvement of a user group,                  and managing their work, tracking performance, and
     however. It also requires that all who will eventually use                 informing managerial decisions and resource allocation
     the system are able to participate in its development,                     requests. Courts that are enabling external users, lawyers,
     understand its benefits, and ultimately, actually utilize the              other agency counterparts, and other litigants to use the
     system as envisioned. More than appropriate training,                      system, whether for tracking case status or filing cases
     this requires that users are committed to using the                        and other information electronically, should also aim to



     47	 For more information about the history and current status of functional standards for court technology in the United States, see the website of
         the National Center for State Courts at http://www.ncsc.org/Services-and-Experts/Technology-tools/Court-specific-standards/History.aspx.




68   Good Practices for Courts
provide related information support and training. High-         system, which automated document development and
performing courts, such as the Singapore state courts,          other routine procedures, provides alerts and reminders
the South Korean courts, and others, regularly provide          of the timelines (Zakaria 2013).
step-by-step online help as well as training for external
users and help desk assistance.                                 The need to anticipate legal framework changes,
                                                                user buy-in, capacity building, and other transitioning
Arranging system maintenance, backup, and security              requirements. If legislative changes are required to
plans. From the beginning, courts should consider and           allow for certain automation options, for example, new
recognize the effort and resource requirements needed           timelines for more efficient procedures or the submission
to maintain the system, provide effective backup to avoid       of e-documents and e-signatures, automation plans will
data loss, create an effective disaster response plan,          need to reflect the time needed to pass new legislation.
and ensure the security of the system and the data. The         This is one reason why phased approaches are not only
South Korean courts, for example, have a completely             helpful but often a necessity. If enabling legislation is
dual (in some parts, even triple) system to ensure that         lagging, the system may not be possible as envisioned,
users do not experience system outages (Gramckow                at least in the short run, but a phased design can provide
and Ebeid 2016). Data backup to avoid data loss has             more time to ensure that all internal and external users
to be frequent, and the ever-evolving cyberattacks on           are on board, can participate in the design, and can use
many organizations, including courts, require increased         the system effectively. Understanding user resistance,
response capacities. In the United States, for example,         developing constructive measures to overcome it, and
courts continuously exchange information on the latest          building training, help-desk, and other support functions
cyber threats and how best to respond (see McMillan             also require time, resources, and planning.
2016). Publishing general information about the court’s
efforts to ensure a secure and reliable system is an            As courts develop or update their technology, selecting
important element in creating user trust in the system’s        and implementing a highly configurable CMS also
reliability.                                                    requires that courts and a core group of internal and
                                                                external users have the capacity to inform the system
                                                                design and the selection of a vendor. Choosing an
Lessons learned                                                 appropriate system depends on accurately judging its
                                                                configurability capabilities, and developing good user
The priority of reengineering. As mentioned above,              requirements depends on capturing process-oriented
automating the case process without reengineering               needs to take advantage of those capacities. If courts
will not be very successful. Not only are inefficient           do not have their own IT staff with a solid understanding
processes that tend to be more complex more difficult           of the various needs and the ability to work with the
to automate, but if processes are not streamlined, the          different user groups in this process, another agency,
inefficient duplication of efforts, repeated hearings, and      such as a ministry of justice, may be able to assist to
unnecessary process steps are likely to persist. If timelines   some extent. In the end, however, the court has to
for case processing are not established and enforced,           make an effort to develop the capacities of at least
if adjournments continue to be widely granted, and if           some judges and court staff to actively engage in the
options to fast-track small cases are not available, courts     process, not just once but over time. This is one of the
will continue to be clogged. The successful automation          reasons why the South Korean courts were so successful
experience in Malaysia, among others, is credited with          in creating a globally recognized system—they focused
building on an earlier backlog clearance program that           on creating the needed capacities among judges and
began with tracking all cases, monitoring court and judge       court staff.
performance, concentrating all administrative matters in
administrative units, and thereby relieving judges from         User-driven development of clear and detailed
administrative burdens. This was followed by the creation       definitions of system functions that reflect different case
of strict processing timelines in the New Commercial            and court types and levels. The functional standards
Court in Kuala Lumpur, clear scheduling hearings, and           specify exactly what a court CMS must be able to do.
limited options for adjournments. Building on improved          Although many court functions cut across most case
processes and better workload distribution, the e-court         types (such as monitoring speedy trial rule dates for




                                                                                      Good Practice Area: Case Management     69
        BOX 14.
        The Next Generation Case Management System for U.S. Federal Courts
       When the U.S. federal court system embarked on an effort to develop its next generation case management
       and e-filing system, it was able to draw upon a broad number of internal and external users who already had
       experience with the existing system and understood well what they needed and wanted from a new one. By that
       time, 700,000 attorneys and others had filed court documents over the Internet.

       According to the courts’ website, “the requirements-gathering phase of the NextGen project ended in March
       2012, as groups of judges, chambers staff, clerks, court staff, and AO [Administrative Office of the Court] staff
       identified and prioritized more than 400 functional requirements. Those requirements elicited more than 6,000
       comments from the courts. The project also received input from the bar, academia, government agencies, and
       others.”

       AO developers then began the “design, coding, testing, and implementation of NextGen. The goal [was] to
       further improve efficiency and integration among the appellate, district, and bankruptcy systems; achieve greater
       consistency, especially for external users; collect more case-related statistics; and share data with other Judiciary
       systems.”.
       Source: “Improving Court Case Management, Financial Systems, and Statistical Reporting,” website of the United States Courts,
       http://www.uscourts.gov/statistics-reports/improving-court-case-management-financial-systems-and-statistical-reporting.




     criminal cases) and even most court types and levels,                       type, testing and adjusting it, and then building on this
     including specialized or appeals courts, each major                         effort for the next case type is a more meaningful process
     case type has some unique requirements that need to                         and often takes less time overall, since the second group
     be reflected in the system. In order to ensure that the                     can focus on the few procedures that are different.48
     system comprehensively meets a court’s needs, each
     function must be examined separately for each case                          At the same time, gathering not just caseflow but
     type (see box 14).                                                          also management requirements is never an easy task.
                                                                                 Moreover, the result is often incomplete information
     For instance, the calendaring of traffic cases in many                      because 1) management requirements are difficult to
     countries requires an interface with traffic police officer                 discover from judges and support staff, and 2) shortcuts
     duty schedules who may need to appear as witness, a                         are often taken due to time and budget constraints,
     feature not needed for civil trial calendaring in general                   which then reduce data and implementation quality.
     jurisdiction trial courts; complex commercial cases may                     Conventional approaches to software development
     regularly require the involvement of experts, a feature                     rarely capture the kinds of interaction needed between
     not needed in most small claims cases. This is another                      judges, support staff, and IT professionals to achieve
     reason why a phased implementation is helpful, as                           the goal of designing a highly user-friendly system that
     automating all the different case types simultaneously                      responds to the many organizational layers and needs
     is highly resource intensive and can be a significant                       of a court. This requires another level of information,
     burden on the internal and external users who will need                     especially if the system also needs to track tasks in work
     to provide input. If multiple user groups are working                       queues to help measure and manage user performance.
     in parallel to provide input for the development of a                       Most CMSs in place in courts today capture only limited
     system, they are likely not only duplicating efforts but                    staff and judge performance measurements or are
     possibly developing conflicting recommendations.                            restricted to counting activities at a rudimentary level
     Starting instead with a concentrated effort for one case                    (such as the overall percentage of cases disposed within



     48	 For a helpful source in developing functional standards, see the National Center for State Courts online at
         http://www.ncsc.org/About-us/Committees/Joint-Technology-Committee.aspx.




70   Good Practices for Courts
set timelines). A system that tracks the duration of finer   to ensure it meets the needs of the end users. In other
tasks (for example, the percentage of pretrial hearings      words, for each data entry or search screen, in order
by case type held within set timelines and so on) and        to create a user-friendly workflow process, multiple
how long it takes before a user performs them, would         sessions are needed with all internal and external court
improve management’s ability to analyze overall work         user groups. Managing this dynamic process requires
flow and inform ongoing improvement needs, including         that users also understand that the first version of the
the need for training or system adjustments.                 system will just have to be “good enough for now,” and
                                                             that, within practical limits, any element can be revisited
Focus on change management and on eliminating                later. If users were to expect a perfect system that
manual procedures. As mentioned above, the planning          meets everybody’s needs from the very start, the design
process should have identified the requisites of all         process would never end (Mathias 2010, 5).
internal and external users, including what they will
need to understand and use the system effectively.           Many courts that have a good automated CMS have
The development, testing, and rollout require ongoing        also opted to use a few pilot courts to experiment
engagement, feedback, and special effort to overcome         with a new application. This helps to identify whether
resistance to the new system. This necessitates              further system adjustments need to be made, to
not only early user engagement in the process but            better understand training and user support needs,
ongoing communication about design, testing, and             and to plan and budget for a realistic rollout to other
implementation steps. It also requires clear policies        courts (Gramckow and Nussenblatt 2013). All of the
regarding the use of the system. Although the initial        most advanced systems that have been successfully
continued use of manual (paper-based) processes as           implemented, such as those developed by the courts in
a backup may be prudent, clear policies should be in         South Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, Norway, and Austria,
place to ensure that they are phased out as soon as          were developed in phases. In Malaysia, for example,
possible. Performance systems should be adjusted to          the CMS and the queue management system were first
incentivize the use of automation, and sufficient training   deployed at the Kuala Lumpur Court complex and then
has to be provided to enable users to make the most          gradually extended to four other court centers. The
of the new system and to understand its benefits. Help       e-filing system was the last part that was implemented
desks and service bureaus have to be created to assist       in those courts that had both systems. This ensured that
users and address system issues, and also to capture         e-filing was effectively linked to the CMS and allowed for
user experiences so that they are reflected in further       sufficient time to engage with external users to certify
support functions as well as system adjustments. System      that their system needs were reflected appropriately
performance has to be monitored and adjustments have         (Zakaria 2013).
to be made as needed. The courts in Malaysia—and
all courts that have developed effective systems that        CMS as one part of a broader court and justice
are widely used—engaged all end users in the design,         system ICT strategy. A CMS that is developed in close
carried out extensive training of internal and external      cooperation with all internal and external users, is based
users of the system, and provided help options after the     on solid assessments, has followed a reengineering
system was online (Zakaria 2013).                            process, and has strong leadership support will likely be
                                                             successful in improving court processes and services.
System development in phases to accommodate                  At the same time, it can only be as successful as its
testing and reflect the needs of different case              surroundings allow it to be. Legislation, processes, and
types, courts, and users. The need for an iterative as       all users need to be geared toward appropriate system
well as interactive CMS development approach has             use, and the overall ICT environment also has an impact
been experienced by many courts. Judges, support             on its effectiveness. Ideally, the system is supported
staff, and other key users must be involved in defining      by a broader court ICT strategy and also by a similar
system requirements and in reviewing whether the             government-wide strategy. A court that does not have
design and end-system meet them. This stage of               a forward-looking ICT strategy, that is, one that places
system development is time consuming, because each           CMS development into a context of reengineering and
individual element of just one case type for a particular    other ICT developments, will likely end up with a system
court usually requires multiple user-developer sessions      that is not as efficient and well connected as it could




                                                                                   Good Practice Area: Case Management     71
     be. A government-wide focus on e-government can              Today, the continuously updated and expanded system
     make budget requests for developing, expanding, and          covers all case types and provides for e-filing and
     maintaining the system easier, and as other government       easy information exchange with the Ministry of Public
     agencies increase automation and e-solutions,                Administration and Safety and the Prosecutor’s Office,
     knowledge and resources can be shared and information        and also links with several registries, the National
     linked across agencies. Courts with limited resources will   Statistics Office, banks, and others. Web-based
     rarely be able to advance their own ICT solutions unless     applications provide easy online access to information,
     they can build on government-wide ICT infrastructures.       cases, and court services to court users. To give those
     Mongolia, for example, was only able to effectively link     with little or no online access the same level of services,
     all its courts after the government had connected all        “over 1,000 automated self-service machines were
     administrative centers across this vast country via fiber-   installed throughout the country in local government
     optic cabling (Gramckow and Allen 2011).                     offices. Other tools include the E-Trial homepage
                                                                  where users can file cases and request service for all
                                                                  types of cases online and a ‘Court Auction Information
     Good practice examples                                       System’ that is linked to the Case Management System,
                                                                  the Bailiffs Consolidated System and the Registration
     South Korean courts. South Korea’s successful                System allowing users to participate in real property
     automation of its courts was part of a long-term agenda      auctions held by the court online” (Gramckow and
     to reform the judiciary that reflected similar efforts in    Ebeid 2016, 5). Although offering significant online
     other government sectors. Started in 1979 by a group of      services, the court is also very conscious of privacy and
     judges aiming to better manage their cases and based         information security concerns and provides systems that
     on a feasibility study that outlined how technology          reflect the security needs of Korean society. With its ever-
     might be used in the courts, the new system evolved          evolving, judge-driven, and user-focused approach, the
     from the availability of a simple case database into         Korean court system continues to be among the best in
     several comprehensive and integrated IT solutions for        the world when it comes to automation.
     judges and court users. The engagement and strong
     sense of system ownership, as well as the ongoing reform     Austrian courts and justice system more generally.
     processes of the South Korean judges, continue to be         Another very well-developed court CMS that was
     major drivers of the many achievements made. Since           carefully improved over time and is part of the wider
     2011, South Korea has ranked 2nd out of 189 economies        judicial system is the Automation of Court Procedures
     in the enforcing contracts indicator. Recognizing            (ACP) scheme in Austria that supports all courts and
     early on that technology can be an effective tool for        Public Prosecution Services. The system was developed
     providing services, improving efficiency, and helping        and managed by the Austrian Ministry of Justice in close
     judges, the court adopted a three-pronged approach           collaboration with judges, prosecutors, and other internal
     to systematically develop the use of technology in the       and external users. Many case types and processes (such
     judiciary. With users’ needs at the forefront, carefully     as summary proceedings) are now fully automated,
     studied incremental steps were taken to introduce            while others are just coming online. Court notices and
     technology based on rigorously testing, evaluating, and      judgments are created automatically and dispatched
     improving upon each solution over time. In 1986, nearly      via a central mailing facility. Submissions, applications,
     a decade after the results of the study on the use of        and dispositions are transmitted electronically and court
     technology in the courts were made available, the first-     fees are also collected electronically. The system also
     generation CMS software for civil cases was launched.        provides the needed statistics for tracking performance
     Since then, the CMS has been rolled out in all courts,       and managing the courts and prosecutors’ offices. It
     expanded to other case types, continuously improved          is built with internal operations in mind but also offers
     upon, and later transitioned into a web-based system         many functions for court users, including a range of
     (Gramckow and Ebeid 2016, 1–2).                              online help tasks (E-Justice Austria 2014).




72   Good Practices for Courts
          3                         Good Practice Area:
                                    Court Automation

    Court automation                As just discussed in the prior section, court automation opens new avenues for courts
                                    to deliver their services more effectively and goes well beyond implementing an
                                    internal CSM system. When done well, automation is based on proper needs and
         Ability to file            capacity assessments of all internal and external users and builds on streamlined and
       initial complaint
                                    user-friendly processes as well as other government (and even NGO and commercial
         electronically
                                    counterpart) systems and efforts. As ITC solutions and hardware have become more
                                    affordable and as new technologies become more prevalent and offer more options
        Ability to serve            for citizens to use e-services, courts too continue to develop and implement new
            process                 ways to manage their work and deliver justice. In addition to the previously outlined
         electronically             automation of CMSs, the Doing Business 2016 report assessed the availability of
                                    four important e-solutions available to court users that can contribute greatly to the
         Ability to pay             enhanced efficiency, access, transparency, and accountability of courts, namely, the
           court fees               ability to file a complaint electronically, the ability to serve process electronically, the
         electronically             ability to pay court fees electronically, and the electronic publication of judgments.

        Publication of       These are, of course, not the only good ITC practice areas related to court automation.
         judgments           Other options, such as video and audio recording of hearings, video arraignments
                             and testimony, online auctions, and many other ITC solutions, are increasingly used
                             in courts today. As mentioned in section 2 above, automated CMSs enable courts
                             to streamline and better manage their cases. In addition, the four good practice
areas covered here are among those that appear to make the greatest difference in helping courts provide their
users with less-complicated and timelier processes and create greater predictability in court event schedules and
outcomes. Each of these options requires resources and implementation capacities, but if well developed and
effectively implemented, they save the court and its users time and resources, improve court record reliability, and
increase access to information and accountability. Yet, to date, automation of court processes is not as widespread
as one might think. Doing Business research shows that the four measured features of court automation are the
least available good practice across all regions. Worldwide, only four economies—Estonia, the Republic of Korea,
Lithuania, and Singapore—display all the court automation features measured by Doing Business. In these four
countries, sophisticated CMSs for use by both lawyers and judges are also in place. In 74 of the 189 economies
measured, none of these features are automated (see figure 11).


FIGURE 11.	 Percentage of economies using select e-court services by region
                             Economies with e-filing   Economies with e-service   Economies with e-payment    Source: Doing Business
South Asia                             0%                         0%                       18.2%              database, http://www.
                                                                                                              doingbusiness.org/data.
Latin America & Caribbean            5.9%                      20.6%                        8.8%
                                                                                                              Note: Percentages shown
East Asia & Pacific                 11.1%                      18.5%                       14.8%              in the figure are based on
Europe & Central Asia               19.2%                      19.2%                       53.8%              data for 189 economies. For
                                                                                                              economies in which Doing
Middle East & North Africa           5.0%                       5.0%                       10.0%              Business collects data for
Sub-Saharan Africa                   4.2%                       2.1%                        4.2%              two cities, the data for the
                                                                                                              two cities are considered
OECD high income                    35.3%                      26.5%                       58.8%              separately.




                                                                                                   Good Practice Area: Court Automation      73
     3.1 E-FILING

     Background

     Generally, electronic filing is understood to be the                      globe and not just for short periods of time; countries as
     process of transmitting documents and other court                         diverse as Serbia, Morocco, Germany, and many others
     information to the court through an electronic medium                     have struggled with this, sometimes for years.
     rather than on paper. Being able to file cases online
     means that lawyers and litigants do not have to come                      As shown in the introduction, e-filing is the least
     to court to submit all the needed documentation                           frequently implemented good practice tracked by the
     and that courts have all the necessary documents,                         Doing Business 2016 report. Today, electronic filing
     authentications, and confirmed signatures in a legally                    of the initial complaint is allowed in only 24 of the
     acceptable format to make the case file record readily                    189 economies included in the report (World Bank
     available for further processing, thereby saving time and                 2016a).49 Perhaps because of this, e-filing is becoming
     effort for the court, its staff, and users. As simple as this             an increasingly common reform effort; in the past five
     sounds, for electronic filing to be possible, effective,                  years, Doing Business recorded 13 reforms focused on
     and user friendly, a number of elements have to come                      introducing an electronic filing system for commercial
     together that go beyond court IT capacities.                              cases. In fact, the introduction of electronic filing was the
                                                                               most common court reform effort recorded in the 2015
     The offer to parties and litigants to simply send the                     report and among the most common in 2016.
     documents required for case filing by e-mail is not
     enough and does little to help the court become                           Part of the reason why it has taken many countries
     more efficient. Legal requirements alone mean that all                    longer than expected to establish an effective and user-
     documents that are submitted have to be authenticated                     friendly e-filing system is that many elements need to
     and in a format that cannot be changed by others;                         be considered and come together in a well-sequenced
     in addition, signatures must be confirmed and the                         manner. The legislative framework has to allow and
     authority of those submitting the documents verified.                     facilitate electronic filing, filing procedures need to
     This requires authorizing legislation, authentication                     be streamlined, and software, hardware, and human
     systems, and IT capacities on the part of both the                        resource capacities need to be in place at the courts and
     courts and the user to accept and verify submissions.                     among their users.
     Furthermore, unless the documents submitted can be
     electronically transferred into the court’s automated                     Fortunately, today, there are many good examples around
     system and used to establish the record of filing and                     the globe from which to learn, and the introduction of
     further court actions, the initial information received will              e-filing as a natural part of enhancing court services is
     have to be reentered, reconfirmed, and reauthorized                       not as challenging as it once was. Courts considering
     at the court. This would essentially increase court staff                 the introduction of e-filing or interested in optimizing
     effort (and increase data entry error potential), since                   their current system have many places to turn to. One
     they would have to enter the filing information into                      important lesson shared by all courts that embarked on
     the court’s system and also manage the electronically                     this venture is that the introduction of e-filing takes time
     submitted documents. Unfortunately, such duplicative                      and has to be part of a broader process to improve court
     quasi-electronic filing systems have been and continue                    service delivery that embraces new technologies and
     to be the reality in quite a number of courts around the                  focuses on the end user.




     49	 The Doing Business methodology assesses whether the initial complaint can be filed electronically through a dedicated platform (not e-mail
         or fax) within the relevant court (World Bank 2016, 155).




74   Good Practices for Courts
              KEY ELEMENTS                             LESSONS LEARNED                         GOOD PRACTICE EXAMPLE

                                           •	 E-filing needs assessment and
 •	 Electronic signature and identity         streamlining of filing processes
    verification systems                   •	 Understanding time and effort
 •	 Simplification of signature and           requirements and the need for
    notarization requirements                 sequencing
 •	 E-document size rules that reflect     •	 Enabling legislation and case
    storage and transmission capacities       management system to be in place first    •	 The Florida State Courts

 •	 Enabling legislation for e-signature   •	 Linking e-filing as an integral part of   •	 The Courts of South Korea
    and e-document filing and published       the case management system                •	 The Singapore State Courts
    e-filing rules                         •	 Planning for the transitioning phase      •	 The Malaysia Courts
 •	 Links to document management              (from paper to e-system) and initial
    and case management system and            workload increase
    e-payment                              •	 Publishing a user guide and
 •	 Options to enable self-representing       promoting e-filing
    litigants to use e-filing              •	 Understand the cost implications
                                              when setting filing fees




Key elements

A number of key elements have to be in place to ensure             be reviewed for each of the different documents the
that e-filing is effective, that is, that it saves time and        court requires for the various filing steps. Older laws
resources and eases access to the courts for all. Courts           and court rules in many countries require signatures—
with more advanced e-filing applications, in countries             indeed, often multiple signatures—unnecessarily.
such as Estonia, the United States, the United Kingdom,            Revising when signatures and verifications, including
Malaysia, Singapore, Korea, and others, have identified            notarization requirements, are needed should be part
the following factors as the most critical.                        of the process review and reengineering and reflected
                                                                   in changes to the legal framework if needed.
Electronic signature and identity verification. In all
countries, court rules and statutes require that the               E-file size limitations and appropriate e-storage
original pleading be filed with the actual signature of            capacities. An important element for e-filing that has
the party and/or attorney. When e-filing is introduced,            to be delineated in the rules is the maximum file size of
the law must allow electronically submitted documents              the electronic documents that can be accepted by the
to be accepted by the court and a mechanism must                   court. The size of the electronic files and the volume
be in place to substitute the original signature. In               of e-filings a court can handle will need to be reflected
addition, the filer must be able to provide verifiable             in its electronic storage capacities. Even when courts
proof of identity electronically (Zorza 2013). A range             are using cloud storage and could potentially allow the
of verification approaches is used by courts, including            submission of larger e-files, reasonable limits will need
the preregistration of e-mail accounts combined with               to be set to ensure that most regular users can send
individual passcodes, the use of smart ID cards, or,               files and that submissions include only what is needed
when e-verification is not yet feasible, the somewhat              instead of superfluous volumes of scanned paper that
inefficient process of in-person verification within a             are not. The courts in New Delhi, for example, limit
few days of e-submission. One interesting approach to              e-file size for submission of the initial claim to 100
notarization was introduced in the U.S. state of Virginia          megabytes (MB), and the courts in Florida stipulate
in 2012 with new legislation that allowed for video-               that documents filed through the e-portal cannot
supported notarization (USAID and UNDP 2015). The                  exceed 25 MB. Depending on the e-filing rules, courts
need for verification and electronic signature should              can allow the submission of multiple documents of the



                                                                                         Good Practice Area: Court Automation   75
     allowed size, including in PDF format and zip files. That                   these fees online significantly limits the usefulness of
     combination provides for sufficient flexibility for the                     any e-filing application. This issue is addressed further
     initial claims filing process, especially when subsequent                   in section 3.3.
     submissions are also part of the more advanced system.
     Later process submissions will then allow for the further                   Access for self-representing litigants. In many
     e-filing of required documentation throughout the case                      countries, e-filing has focused on non-small claims civil
     process, and many courts provide for submission of                          litigation and is frequently offered to law firms only.
     e-documents on CD-ROM or USB flash drives.                                  This well-educated user base is generally motivated
                                                                                 to reduce its operational costs and tends to have
     Enabling legislation and court rules for e-signature                        the needed capacities for e-filing. At the same time,
     and the filing of e-documents. Legislation allowing the                     most state-level courts in the United States and other
     court to accept electronic documents and signatures to                      countries are experiencing a significant increase in
     create electronic records, preferably also allowing for                     self-represented litigants. The state of Connecticut,
     electronic payment of court fees, has to be in place.                       for example, reported a 101 percent increase in
     As further detailed below, the court rules and related                      the number of civil cases involving self-represented
     practice guidelines should be published online to                           litigants from 2005 to 2010 (NCSC 2011). In the United
     ensure that court users understand and can follow the                       States, in response to this growing need, a group of
     instructions to avoid submission errors and failures.                       state and national stakeholders, including state court
     Like most courts with e-filing, the Delhi High Court, for                   administrators, legal aid advocates, and the National
     example, makes its e-filing rules and practice guidelines                   Center for State Courts, developed a guide entitled,
     available on its website.50                                                 Best Practices for Access-Friendly Court Electronic Filing
                                                                                 (Zorza 2013), to help courts deploy e-filing in a way that
     Document management system and link to case                                 removes barriers to access to justice. Increasingly, courts
     management systems. An important component of                               are providing online capabilities that are designed for
     electronic filing is an electronic document management                      the self-represented litigants, including guided forms
     system linked to the CMS system that not just stores                        for data capture.51 Unfortunately, many courts currently
     electronic pleadings but creates the official filing record                 allow self-represented litigants to generate only paper
     and links relevant filing information to the CMS case file.                 forms with these systems, although a few “save” the
     It does not make sense for a court to accept documents                      information so that it can be automatically transferred
     electronically if it is not prepared to use them in their                   and entered into their CMS when the litigant appears
     electronic form. If the court were to establish electronic                  at the court and submits his/her signed paper copies
     filing without a document management system, it would                       and/or fee payment. An excellent example of a fully
     just transfer the expense of printing the filing documents                  electronic online filer/response system for all court users
     from law firms to the judiciary. The importance of having                   has been built by the UK courts in their Money (Small)
     at least an electronic case tracking system—if not a full-                  Claim Online system (NCSC 2011).
     fledged CMS—in place so that the filing process can
     be traced, as well as a mechanism that creates a case
     number and filing record and enables further process                        Lessons learned
     steps (such as process service, case assignment to a
     judge or panel, and the establishment of hearing dates),                    Undertaking an e-filing needs assessment. This is one
     is further addressed below in the “lessons learned”                         important lesson learned in Canada and elsewhere. The
     section.                                                                    assessment has to cover the needs of the potential users
                                                                                 as well as the courts. It also has to review the barriers that
     Link to e-payment. Given that fees tend to be immediat-                     the laws and court rules may pose, the capacities and
     ely triggered when a case is filed, the inability to pay                    needs of different court user groups, the volume of case



     50	 See the website of the New Delhi High Court at
         http://delhihighcourt.nic.in/writereaddata/upload/Announcements/AnnouncementFile_UKNURLIT.PDF.
     51	 See, for example, “Access to Justice Author,” which, according to its website, “is a cloud based software tool that delivers greater access to
         justice for self-represented litigants” (www.a2jauthor.org); and Minnesota’s I-CAN! court forms at http://www.mncourts.gov/ican.




76   Good Practices for Courts
filings by case type, and cost implications for both the                  as 2013, a new generation of the country’s e-justice
court and its users. Understanding the computer literacy                  system was launched. The new Integrated Electronic
rate and determining the access of court users to good                    Litigation System expands system functionalities and
broadband provision are key factors in the success of                     introduces intelligent electronic court forms that reduce
e-justice. If computer literacy and broadband availability                submission errors and eliminate the use of a smart card
are not high, the use of an electronic filing system and                  to authenticate a user, making the system simpler to
other e-court systems will be impeded (USAID and                          access and extending accessibility to tablets and mobile
UNDP 2015). For example, the Australian federal courts                    phones (USAID and UNDP 2015). Case studies from
learned that the legal profession was slow to take up                     Canada (Kennedy and Jaar 2012), the Federal Court of
e-filing, litigants’ and lawyers’ awareness of e-filing and               Australia,53 and the courts in the U.S. states of Maryland
their willingness to use it were low, and concerns about                  and New York all show that efficient e-filing requires
the privacy and security of e-filing limited uptake. On                   solid planning and time (NYC Global Partners 2013).54
the side of the courts, the cost of credit card fees
presented an impediment to achieving cost benefits,                       Conducting a review of current processes and
and the federal framework and court rules required                        operations. Like other courts, the Saskatchewan Court
amendments to fully realize the benefits of e-filing.52                   of Appeals in Canada recognized the importance
All of these issues have to be understood to ensure                       of conducting a review of court operations before
that those impacted by (and who might possibly resist)                    its e-filing solution was developed. This review not
automation are engaged early on, that their needs are                     only indicated where administrative processes were
met, and that they have the capacity to use the system.                   unnecessarily complicated or even duplicative but also
                                                                          made the staff involved in the review think about why
Allowing sufficient time for proper planning and                          things were done the way they were. This enabled
implementation. Another lesson learned by all                             them to support or adjust change recommendations
jurisdictions that embarked on the introduction of                        and to communicate each actor’s processing needs to
e-filing is that it takes time to design a full-fledged                   the system developer, leading to a more effective and
e-filing system that works for all users and increases                    user friendly system (Kennedy and Jaar 2012). The
court efficiency. Although a simple system that allows                    importance of reengineering was stressed again when
users to file the initial pleading documents electronically               the Singapore courts improved on their already quite
without an adequate electronic system in place at the                     advanced e-solutions in 2014. This kind of review should
court can be a preliminary testbed for user readiness                     also include an assessment of the documents that
and is not that difficult to implement if the legal                       are actually needed at each process step. Eliminating
framework permits it, this approach does not help the                     unnecessary documents that are not compatible with an
court become more efficient and actually increases costs                  electronic system is essential and also serves to reduce
in the long run. A high-quality e-filing system, on the                   the number of e-forms that need to be developed
other hand, is part of an integrated system that allows                   (USAID and UNDP 2015).
for e-filing, e-payment, e-service, and electronic access
to the case file throughout the entire case process, and                  Ensuring adequate and appropriate sequencing of
this takes time to develop. The courts in Singapore, for                  implementation. Considering that many elements have
example, have long been regarded as leaders in the use                    to be adjusted and in place and that the courts and many
of e-solutions. Their initial plans for e-filing and other                other players need to be ready, proper sequencing of the
automation processes began in 1997, and after three                       development and implementation of the various e-filing
years of intensive testing, the first version of the e-filing             elements is essential. The Australian federal courts, for
system was launched, along with mandatory e-filing for                    example, began allowing litigants to file initial claims
writs of summons in all courts. The system continued to                   documents and pay their fees electronically in late 2000.
evolve and expand in the following years, and as recently                 The second stage of the wider e-court strategy was to



52	 See Federal Court of Australia, “Case Study. E-filing” (2012), http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/other/unpan022288.pdf.
53	Ibid.
54	 For information on electronic courts in Maryland, see http://www.mdcourts.gov/mdec/updates/20141114mdeclaunchqa.pdf.




                                                                                                   Good Practice Area: Court Automation           77
     allow for electronic returns of “stamped,” or accepted,                  related to these cases be conducted electronically
     documents in 2001, followed by an amendment of court                     (USAID and UNDP 2015). Similarly, the Money Claims
     rules to allow for the electronic service of documents and               Online system in the United Kingdom was based on
     further expansions of the system.55 Similarly, the Italian               parallel changes in legislation and IT solutions. The
     courts experienced several stages in the expansion of the                system designers understood that the procedural
     use of e-filing and case processes in civil proceedings.                 law would need to be written to support evolving IT
     From 2005 until 2009, the system was used only for                       solutions and ongoing process improvements over time
     money claims and only in five of the 165 tribunals and                   and should not aim to be too specific (USAID and UNDP
     courts of appeals. It took more progressive legislation to               2015).
     significantly extend the system and its uptake. In 2011,
     certified e-mail was introduced, and in 2013, the law                    Linking e-filing to the court’s case management
     mandating electronic communications came into effect.                    system. As already mentioned, ensuring that e-filed
     In early 2014, e-filing became mandatory for injunctions                 documents can transfer into a document management
     and pleadings in new civil cases, for all pleadings at all               system and are linked to a good court CMS is essential
     tribunals soon after, and in all courts of appeals in 2015               for effective e-filing, especially if e-submission of
     (USAID and UNDP 2015).                                                   documents is to be available for more than just the initial
                                                                              claims filing phase. Without this link, neither the court
     Depending on the country context, sequencing also                        nor its users can reap the efficiency or cost benefits of
     tends to mean that not all case types at all courts in a                 e-filing. Here too, capacities for electronic document
     country are available for e-filing by all court user types               and case management, along with e-filing by case type,
     at the same time—and possibly not for a long time. As                    are essential. The federal courts of Canada, for example,
     mentioned above, in most countries, e-filing options are                 realized that though e-filing for various case types had
     first offered to law firms, not individual litigants, since              been available since 2006, none of the documents
     the high frequency of filings by law firms, combined with                electronically filed with the Canadian Revenue Agency,
     their generally greater IT capacities, means that their                  that is, tax cases in administrative proceedings, which
     business interests in using the system tend to offset if not             represented a good 90 percent of documents filed,
     reduce any related costs. Starting with the “frequent”                   were accessible or linked to the Court and Registry
     case filers and with limited types of cases also allows the              Management System. This link was created in 2011 with
     court to fine-tune its system, gather user experiences,                  the aim of integrating all other e-filed documents in the
     and improve on the first version, the 1.0 e-filing version,              coming years (Kennedy and Jaar 2012). Similarly, when
     so to speak. The Canadian federal courts, for example,                   the e-Greffe (bailiff) system was introduced in France
     started their e-filing project in 2001 and began by                      and interfaced with the courts’ CMS, it allowed lawyers,
     allowing e-filing in intellectual property matters only,                 among others, to file emergency cases electronically,
     followed by three more phases until all federal cases                    saving the courts the time needed for entering data.
     were covered in 2006 (Kennedy and Jaar 2012).                            At the same time, however, the civil procedures code
                                                                              still requires paper documents for most process stages,
     Making parallel adjustments to the legal framework.                      and as a result, the system uptake remains at only 25
     Italy began the development of its electronic system                     percent of the estimated potential users (USAID and
     for civil cases in 2001. Some enabling legislation, such                 UNDP 2015).
     as electronic signature, was already in place. When the
     uptake remained very low, it was recognized that the                     Managing dual processes and transitioning from
     effective introduction of e-filing and other e-service                   paper-based to e-filing systems. The Canadian
     solutions required additional enabling legislation that                  Saskatchewan Court of Appeals was among many courts
     could promote a more progressive approach. As a                          to realize that the required incremental introduction of
     result, in 2011, the government of Italy introduced new                  e-filing also meant that the workload in the Registrar’s
     legislation that provided for the digitalization of paper                Office would initially increase as a result of the need to
     files for open cases before the system went into effect in               manage a dual processes as manual entries and paper
     any new court; it also required that all communications                  documents were transitioned to electronic processes.


     55	 Federal Court of Australia, “Case Study. E-filing” (2012), http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/other/unpan022288.pdf.




78   Good Practices for Courts
The court estimated that the workload rose by 30                         more than occasionally, users and the court lose time
percent at the beginning, an increase that had not been                  and effort, court users get frustrated with and lose confi-
planned for and could not be sustained over time.                        dence in the court’s ability to handle e-filing, and uptake
Similarly, the British Columbia Supreme and Provincial                   of the system will be low or even drop. In addition to
Courts in Canada are among many courts that had to                       well explained online step-by-step guidance to e-filing,
continue a dual system of handling e-filed and paper                     some courts, such as the Singapore courts and others,
documents. Until such time when e-filing becomes                         offer online e-filing training sessions. The Florida courts
more prevalent and the norm, it is not just court staff                  e-filing portal website, for example, provides many
who will have to handle dual processes but users also,                   resources for users, including WebEx video tutorials that
as they tend to be more likely to continue using and                     cover all common e-filing tasks.56 The Malaysian courts
submitting paper files. In order to keep the continued                   are among those that have paid attention to the needs
use of paper in check, the court in British Columbia                     of their users by continuing to track user satisfaction with
initially established a “print on demand” rule that                      e-filing and the overall e-court system at different court
required a special request from the judge and other court                locations via a court-user survey and by making training,
users to receive e-filed documents on paper (Kennedy                     help desks, and information readily available (Zakaria
and Jaar 2012). In Malaysia and other countries, the                     2013).
courts opted to mandate e-filing soon after an initial test
period and provided those who were not yet ready to                      Setting e-filing fees and implications for cost savings.
file online with an e-filing service (Zakaria 2013).                     When e-filing fees are higher than traditional paper
                                                                         filing in court, the likelihood that it will be used by a
Promoting e-filing. Ensuring that all potential e-filing                 sufficient number of law firms and litigants is low. The
users understand the benefits of the system and                          Australian federal courts, for example, ensured that court
consulting them throughout the development process                       users did not incur additional costs and in fact made
are essential for good uptake. The e-filing team of the                  e-filing available at no cost to litigants.57 In contrast,
Australian federal courts, for example, not only consult-                when the e-Greffe system was introduced in France,
ed with all key stakeholders during the development of                   use of the system initially required a digital certificate
the e-filing project to gain their input and buy-in, but                 that carried a subscription fee of €750 for three years.
also actively promoted the benefits of the new system                    This fee was not only too high even for most law firms,
to each stakeholder group, addressing all concerns                       it also did not exactly encourage the use of the system
and reflecting their comments in the design and later                    (USAID and UNDP 2015). Avoiding additional fees is
introductory phases. Lessons from the Singapore courts                   especially essential to allow self-representing litigants
showed that mandating electronic filing will ensure                      and pro bono attorneys to use the e-filing system.
that the system becomes the de facto tool, but this
should be done only once the system is established,                      Appropriate cost calculations and assessment of the
sufficiently mature, and accepted by court users (USAID                  feasibility of the envisioned fee structures during the
and UNDP 2015). The Korean courts offer a 10 percent                     planning stage are as important as consultations,
discount when e-filing is used instead of filing at                      potential user needs, and capacity assessments to
the court.                                                               ensuring sufficient uptake of the e-filing option and
                                                                         cost benefits. Suitably designed e-filing systems that
Providing for publication of and user training on filing                 eliminate paper and avoid data entry by filing clerks can
rules and requirements. For users to not just know                       save operational costs at the court in the long run, but
about e-filing but understand the requirements, the rules                only if the incentives for lawyers and litigants to use the
have to be easily accessible. For e-filing, publication on               system are effective (see New York State Courts 2011).
the court’s website is a must. Users should have all the                 The Ontario Supreme Court, for example, experienced
information available to complete the e-filing process                   serious cost overruns in its e-file project, while the actual
correctly so the system—or the court—does not reject                     cost savings were about 27 percent lower than expected.
the documents electronically submitted. If that happens


56	See https://www.myflcourtaccess.com/authority/trainingvideos.html.
57	 See Federal Court of Australia, “Case Study. E-filing” (2012), http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/other/unpan022288.pdf.




                                                                                                   Good Practice Area: Court Automation           79
     In this context, it is also important to mention that many                  documents and court information and procedures,
     courts have experienced difficulties in linking e-filing                    electronically. Users can file all court documents,
     processes to fee waiver requirements, which is essential                    documentary evidence, and digital evidence over the
     for many low-income court users. Fee waiver procedures                      Internet. After filing a case via ECFS, the plaintiffs/
     in many countries still require judicial review, something                  petitioners receive e-mail and text message notifications
     that will need to be reflected in the e-filing process. In                  when the other parties submit documents to the court.
     addition, e-filing systems in quite a number of courts                      If the defendants/respondents consent to e-filing,
     are outsourced to external vendors whose revenues are                       they may also receive electronic notices of the other
     based on fee collection and who therefore tend to have                      parties’ filings. Such notice, in conjunction with access
     few incentives to enable fee waivers through the system.                    to case records and procedures electronically, allows all
     If external vendors are providing the e-filing services,                    parties using ECFS to promptly check the current status
     waiver options have to be included in the initial contract                  of the proceedings. They can also check procedural
     (Zorza 2013).                                                               information and search for legal information such as
                                                                                 judgments, law-related articles, or news related to their
                                                                                 cases. The ECFS also provides services linked to financial
     Good practice examples                                                      institutions, the Patent Office, Korea Post, Registration
                                                                                 Office, and other related institutions’ computer systems.
     The Florida state courts. These courts, which are                           Anyone willing to use the system must sign in to be a
     comprised of the Supreme Court, five district courts                        member of the ECFS homepage. Before signing in, the
     of appeal, 20 circuit courts, and 67 county courts, all                     user must obtain a public key authentication from the
     have e-filing in place. Several jurisdictions, especially                   government-approved Certificate Authority (CA). The
     the Miami-Dade County courts, have even managed to                          user may register as an individual, corporate, agent, or
     become largely paperless courts. The Statewide E-Filing                     solicitor member, and the scope of functions available
     Court Records Portal (“e-Portal”) has been established                      is restricted by the type of service (see World Bank
     to manage and handle all of the court filing in the state                   2013a).61
     of Florida, and it can be accessed online by attorneys
     and self-representing litigants.58 Many resources are                       The Singapore state courts. Singapore’s courts
     available to provide assistance to attorneys using the                      continue to be internationally recognized as a leader
     e-Portal on the website, and once on the site, the user                     in the implementation of e-justice (see United Nations
     can access the clerk of any court in Florida. The portal                    2014). Building on its earlier Electronic Filing Service
     also provides very good step-by-step guidance on using                      (EFS) that already enabled subscribers to use smartcards
     the system and filing cases correctly.59                                    for authentication of identity for mandatory e-filing
                                                                                 of court documents for both civil and family court
     Courts of South Korea. In 2010, the South Korean                            jurisdictions, a new system was developed in 2014.
     judiciary launched the Electronic Case Filing System                        The new generation e-justice system, the Integrated
     (ECFS).60 It serves the Supreme Court, five high courts,                    Electronic Litigation System (iELS) or eLitigation system,
     18 district and 40 branch and/or municipal court(s), six                    was developed in collaboration with the judiciary and
     specialized family courts (with two more to open in the                     the legal profession, which ensured high stakeholder
     next two years), 16 specialized branch-level family courts,                 involvement. eLitigation improved upon the EFS by
     and the Patent Court. By 2016, the system provided for                      introducing intelligent electronic court forms instead
     e-filing of civil, commercial, administrative, and family                   of the submission of standard PDF forms (additional
     affairs cases and will soon integrate insolvency cases.                     PDF documents can still be submitted). The forms
     It is a comprehensive system that allows litigants and                      have built-in automatic checks and validations, thereby
     their attorneys to file, register, and manage cases and                     reducing submission errors and failures. Another major
     enable service notification, as well as to access court                     change was the elimination of the need for a smartcard


     58	 The website is www.myflcourtaccess.com.
     59	 See https://www.flmic.com/files/6214/0327/4617/1stq20131.pdf.
     60	 For information on ECFS, see http://ecfs.scourt.go.kr.
     61	 See also the website of the Supreme Court of Korea at http://eng.scourt.go.kr/eng/jis/jis_ecourt_intro.jsp.




80   Good Practices for Courts
to authenticate the user. The need for special software                     had been implemented in the six courts with the heaviest
components was also eliminated, making the system                           caseload in the country. The EFS enables lawyers to file
simpler to access and more widely available, including                      the claim, register, and pay fees electronically. The EFS
for use with tablets, mobile phones, and similar tools.                     is linked to the court’s CMS, which automatically
The eLitigation users must register and use a registered                    schedules cases and generates case lists; it is also part
SingPass ID, available from government agencies, to                         of a broader e-court project that can build on other
login and access the eLitigation module. Citizens can                       wide-ranging e-governance solutions offered. This
apply for the SingPass eID online or at a SingPass office.                  includes the Government Public Key Infrastructure
                                                                            (GPKI) provided by the Malaysian Administrative
As of this writing, the system is available only to law firms               Modernisation and Management Planning Unit
and selected government agencies in Singapore. Others                       (MAMPU), which also covers the cost for e-certification
can use the assistance of a vendor service bureau. The                      offered by the Certification Authority. The courts also
eLitigation system provides for e-filing and access to a                    utilize the dedicated computer network for government
Case Information Repository that allows individual law                      agencies known as 1GovNet, also provided by MAMPU,
firms to have virtual storage of all the relevant files and                 and use the Financial Process Exchange online payment
documents so that they can update and retrieve them                         gateway offered by the Malaysian Electronic Clearing
for future reference. It also includes eService, which                      Corporation Sdn Bhd (a wholly owned subsidiary of the
provides for e-service of court documents to other law                      Central Bank of Malaysia) to facilitate payment of court
firms. Other features include notifications of any updates                  filing fees by law firms via Internet banking. Since the
about current cases handled by the firm and the ability                     Kuala Lumpur courts are the busiest, e-filing there was
to view and select calendaring and hearing dates. A                         made mandatory for all law firms. To ease the transition
report generation function provides information about                       from manual to e-filing for users, court staff at service
financial transactions on a particular case, including                      bureau counters assist lawyers in becoming familiar with
case-level information on charges incurred.62                               and using e-filing. User buy-in for the EFS has gradually
                                                                            improved, and by July 2013, the ratio of online filing
Malaysia courts. The e-Filing System (EFS) was devel-                       increased to 70 percent compared to 30 percent filing
oped in 2010 and first implemented at the Kuala Lumpur                      via the service bureau (Zakaria 2013).
courts in March 2011 for civil cases. By 2016, the system




3.2 ABILITY TO SERVE PROCESS ELECTRONICALLY

Background

Closely related and frequently linked to e-filing is the                    included in the Doing Business survey (World Bank
provision of electronic service (e-service) of court orders                 2016a). This does not mean that these courts allow
and notices to parties. E-service generally means the                       e-service exclusively, nor does it mean that courts in
electronic transmission of documents from a court to                        other economies do not use select electronic means for
a party, attorney, or representative. In many countries,                    some information changes, such as SMS messages, for
however, e-service is not allowed for service of process                    hearing schedule updates or acceptance of electronic
or summons to gain jurisdiction over persons or property                    documents. But it is particularly the initial summons that
(Olson, Edwards, and Ahalt 2003), which is the focus of                     informs a party for the first time that a claim has been
the particular practice area included in the QJPI.63 In                     filed against them, for which the laws in most countries
2016, service of the initial summons through e-mail, fax,                   continue to require service in hard copy to the respective
or text message was allowed in 27 of the 189 economies                      party or representative.


62	 For more information on the full eLitigation system at the Singapore state courts, see https://www.elitigation.sg/home.aspx.
63	The Doing Business methodology reviews whether the initial complaint can be served on the defendant electronically, through a dedicated
   system or by e-mail, fax or SMS (short message service). It does not distinguish if e-service is used parallel to existing paper-based service of
   process or can be used exclusively (World Bank 2016, 155).




                                                                                                       Good Practice Area: Court Automation            81
     This is not only because laws may not have been                            to track deadlines and the timeliness of responses and
     updated to allow e-transmissions but for a range of                        saves costs on delivery services, paper documents, and
     other important reasons, such as little public acceptance                  storage. Particularly in countries where street addresses
     and trust in e-notifications as well as concerns for the                   are difficult to locate or where geographic or security
     system’s unreliability and lack of capacity to deliver fully               hurdles often delay delivery of notifications, electronic
     authenticated documents and return receipts, all of                        options allow for more timely and reliable service and
     which serve to discourage policy makers from adjusting                     exchange of information.
     related laws and regulations. Pro se (self-representing)
     litigants and other parties might not have access to                       Especially for serving the initial summons, the use of
     computers. Most importantly, there is still a fundamental                  electronic means offers an important alternative. When
     difference between receiving a physical summons and                        other required notices and document or information
     receiving an e-mail or Facebook message. The ultimate                      exchanges are incomplete or not submitted in a timely
     hurdle remains the due process requirement to establish                    manner, delays occur, but if the initial summons cannot
     that the notice will “reasonably” get to the defendant.                    be served, the case cannot begin until all service options
     As a result, to date, it has not been possible to confirm                  are exhausted. Ideally, e-service rules and capacities
     that electronic service of the initial summons is allowed                  provide for electronic options for these summons
     in any jurisdiction as the primary or exclusive option of                  as well and also extend to parties to respond to the
     service but only as an alternative option with limited                     court and to serve the other party electronically. The
     application. At the same time, as electronic means of                      latter is especially important in the large number of
     communication and new technologies, including social                       countries (mainly common law countries) where it is the
     media applications, become increasingly ubiquitous                         responsibility of the claimant to serve process.
     across the globe, this is an area where new options are
     being explored by all courts with advanced automated                       These and other issues all need to be carefully assessed
     systems.                                                                   and explored, and options need to be tested before full
                                                                                e-service for delivering the initial summons is introduced.
     The benefits of well-designed e-service options overall                    Most of the key elements, lessons learned, and select
     are not only faster delivery of court summons and almost                   good practice examples for exchange of documents
     instantaneous notification to parties of filings, deadlines,               and court notifications in general apply also to electronic
     hearings, and changes in schedules. Benefits also include                  service of process. Other factors that have proven to be
     the creation of an instant electronic record of receipt of                 essential for courts and policy makers in jurisdictions
     notices and other information exchanges if the system is                   that already allow e-service for the initial summons, at
     created accordingly. E-service allows courts and parties                   least as an alternative, are described below.




                    KEY ELEMENTS                                    LESSONS LEARNED                         GOOD PRACTICE EXAMPLE


      •	 Enabling legislation and clear rules that       •	 Ensure the same level of due process
         define e-summons options for the court             to claims served electronically and to   •	 California Courts
         and litigants                                      claims served in paper format.
                                                                                                     •	 The Courts of South Africa
      •	 Processing standards                            •	 Court-managed electronic service
      •	 IT capacities of the court, bailiffs’ office,      of process and facilitation by private
         private process servers, and parties               process servers




82   Good Practices for Courts
Key Elements

An enabling legal and regulatory environment and                            In 2006, the American Bar Association’s Science and
clear definitions and rules. Like most other e-solutions                    Technology Committee developed Best Practices for
that courts want to use effectively, e-service options                      Electronic Service of Process (eSOP). These measures
have to be supported by an enabling legal environment.                      proposed requiring voluntary waivers of service,
This begins with clarifying what is meant by “e-service”:                   document encryption for privacy and confidentiality, and
Can the initial summons to notify a party that a claim is                   the retention of principles and protections consistent
being filed against him/her be sent via e-mail, fax, or                     with due process. The draft rules also reiterated the
text message? Can this initial summons be exclusively                       importance of receipted transactions as reliable proof of
sent electronically or only as a faster secondary option?                   electronic service of process (ABA 2006). Although now
Can the initial court notices of hearings and timelines                     somewhat outdated, these suggestions reflect the rules
for submission of documents or motions also be                              developed in other countries as well and remain helpful
sent electronically? Can the initial summons be sent                        to any court exploring e-service options for the initial
electronically as a last resort when other options have                     summons.
failed? Can e-summons be used in select types of cases
(such as commercial or cross-border cases) or for select                    Processing standards. Standard hard copy delivery
types of defendants only (companies, law firms)? Is                         of summons in any country is ruled by clear legislative
it only follow-up e-notices of changes to hearing and                       requirements and court practice rules that outline how
timeline dates or clarifying information that are allowed?                  the summons is to be requested and delivered and by
                                                                            and to whom. There are general rules indicating when
Service of process is one of the first steps in a legal                     such summons can be delivered, and these rules differ if
proceeding. Documents asserting a claim are “served”                        the defendant is a private party, business, or government
on a defendant, thereby delivering legal notice and                         agency. There are also rules that outline when delivery
imposing a requirement to respond. This process is a                        comes into effect and when a response is to be issued
cornerstone of most judicial systems because it gives a                     with clear timelines. All of these rules also have to be
court jurisdiction over the defendant, and the method                       applied to an e-summons, and since electronic delivery
used for this process has to satisfy the due process                        tends to mean relatively instant delivery, practice rules
requirements contained in a country’s constitution                          issued by courts that allow this option in certain cases,
and relevant substantive laws (see Messick 2012). In                        such as the courts in California, Australia, Singapore,
the United States, the Supreme Court clarified that                         New Zealand, and South Africa, also define when
the due process requirement for service is met by any                       e-service delivery is effective and what proof has to be
method that is “reasonably calculated to provide notice                     submitted.65 Existing rules, such as the service waiver
and an opportunity to respond.”64 It also outlined                          available in the United States and other countries that
that alternative service of process was permissible                         informs the defendant that a claim has been filed by
when “due diligence” to serve a defendant had been                          another party but does not provide all the necessary
exhausted. Today in the United States, federal- and                         details included in a summons, can be particularly
state-level courts have allowed electronic service of                       helpful in limiting traditional summons processes (see
process as an alternative, including, in exceptional                        under “Lessons”).
cases, via television announcements and Facebook, but
primarily in the international context and as a last resort.                IT capacities at the court and bailiffs’ office, private
The same approach is used in Australia, New Zealand,                        process servers and parties. E-service of the initial
Canada, and the United Kingdom. In Singapore, the                           summons requires that the needed hardware and
e-service function permits only registered law firms to                     software solutions be available—and not just at the
electronically serve court documents to other registered                    court. Since these summons have to be effectively
law firms and only after the court allows this option (for                  received by the defendant and proof of receipt has to
details, see Singapore Supreme Court 2016).                                 be provided, the solution chosen should be one that is

64	 US. Supreme Court. 1950. Mullane v. Central Hanover Trust. 339 U.S. 306 (1950).
65	 For rule examples, see Judicial Council of California, California Rules of Court, “Rule 2.253. Permissive Electronic Filing, Mandatory Electronic
    Filing, and Electronic Filing by Court Order” (2016), http://www.courts.ca.gov/cms/rules/index.cfm?title=two&linkid=rule2_253.




                                                                                                       Good Practice Area: Court Automation             83
     commonly used by potential recipients and provides for                rules state that by participating in the electronic filing
     the required level of proof of service. When summonses                process, the parties consent to the electronic service of
     are to be delivered by the plaintiff, or rather, a bailiff,           all documents and will make available e-mail addresses
     sheriff, or private process server, as is the case in many            for service. When a user files a document, an e-mail
     countries, they as well as recipients too have to have the            message containing the notice of electronic filing,
     needed hardware and software solutions.                               with a hyperlink to the electronically filed document,
                                                                           will be automatically generated by the Electronic
                                                                           Case Filing system and sent via electronic mail to the
     Lessons learned                                                       e-mail addresses of all parties who have registered in
                                                                           the case.66
     Reflecting due process rules for effective e-service
     in an e-court environment. As outlined above, more                    In some jurisdictions that have made e-filing mandatory
     so than most other electronic exchanges of documents                  for commercial cases, parties have to file an exception if
     and court notices, the initial service of process has                 they do not want to accept an e-summons. Since pub-
     significant due process implications that to date limit               lication in a newspaper tends to be the option of last
     the use of electronic means for this essential court                  resort for delivering the summons in most jurisdictions,
     process. Naturally, e-service of an initial summons has               there are few reasons why utilizing e-newspapers,
     to provide the same due process protections as the                    e-mail delivery, or even social media cannot be
     traditional service of summons, including by providing                considered also as a last resort. Moreover, in jurisdictions
     for some privacy, ensuring that the e-summons can                     that already provide for a pre-summons option to in-
     reasonably be expected to be received, and adhering                   form the defendant that a claim has been filed and by
     to timelines for delivery and sufficient response time.               whom, the offer to waive the summons could be sent
     Since many electronic means, including e-mail but more                electronically, together with the request to accept
     so social media applications, are neither universally                 e-service for all further communications, thereby
     owned nor a completely reliable delivery mechanism,                   reducing effort, time, and cost to the court and both
     and since they provide only certain levels of proof of                parties without any due process concerns.
     delivery, legislators and courts have rightfully been
     careful in allowing e-delivery of the initial summons.                Court-managed electronic service of process and
                                                                           facilitation by private process servers. Even when the
     That said, the benefits of e-service, not just to the court           legislative framework does not provide for meaningful
     but to both parties, including the defendant, should                  options to allow full e-service of process, there are other
     be available if the parties agree to its use and when                 ways the electronic means can at least support the
     the type of case and its circumstances are particularly               regular service of the summons process. In California, for
     conducive to an electronic option, even if just offered               example, recognizing that such electronic transactions
     in addition to the traditional service or as a last resort            can be a necessary part of ensuring the due process
     when all other options have been exhausted. This is                   rights of the parties, the California Association of Legal
     especially the case when companies are involved that                  Support Professionals developed guidelines for an
     do have a web presence. If a company does a good part                 electronic service process facilitated by the many private
     of its business over the Internet, there are few reasons              process servers it also represents. These guidelines
     why it could not reasonably be expected to accept an                  state that such a process has to be developed in a way
     e-summons. This is exactly how courts today are using                 that is trusted and reliable and implemented to embrace
     e-service for the initial summons. Several courts in the              the following:
     United States, Australia, and elsewhere, for example,
     require parties who sign up for e-filing (and therefore               •	   Electronic Service of Process (eSOP) should be knowing
     reap the benefits of this electronic process) to also agree                and voluntary. Parties should be required to consent to
     to e-service of process. For example, U.S. federal court                   eSOP and/or waive physical service of process. Proof




     66	 See “Electronic Filing and Service of Documents,”
         http://www.vaed.uscourts.gov/ecf/documents/17i-ElectronicFilingandServiceofDocuments-ConsenttoElecSvc_000.pdf.




84   Good Practices for Courts
     that a party has consented or waived physical service                    such a request as is the case in other states. Effective in
     must be documented and proven.                                           early 2016, the Judicial Council of California approved
•	   Electronic Service of Process must require a receipted                   a new court rule related to e-service (Rule 2.251) that
     transaction—Electronic service of process must include                   not only clarifies that e-service is authorized for any civil
     reliable proof that notice was actually received by                      processes that allow for serving a document by mail,
     a person who was authorized to accept service. The                       express mail, overnight delivery, or fax transmission, but
     receipted transaction must reflect what was sent, when                   also specifies the conditions for e-service by consent of
     it was sent, what was sent was unaltered, what was                       the parties. The rule stipulates that such an agreement
     sent was received and acknowledged by the intended                       is established by a) serving a notice on all parties that
     recipient or its authorized agent.                                       they accept electronic service and filing with the court,
•	   The manner and method of electronic service should                       a notice that must include the e-mail address at which
     mimic the standards for physical service of process.                     the party agrees to accept service; or (b) electronically
     The proof of service must be in a format that the courts                 filing any document with the court. The rule assumes
     or government accept as being reliable and secure.                       that the act of electronic filing is evidence that the party
     Electronic Service of Process is complete on the date                    agrees to accept service at the electronic address the
     that it is acknowledged by the recipient.                                party has furnished to the court. This rule also clarifies
•	   The trusted/disinterested third party process                            that it does not apply to self-represented parties, who
     server must provide the parties and the courts with                      must affirmatively consent to electronic service under
     reliable proof that the documents were received                          subparagraph Rule 2.253(b)(2).67
     and acknowledged by the intended recipient or its
     authorized agent.                                                        South African courts. In 2012, an amendment to the
•	   Electronic Service of Process must be performed by a                     Uniform Rules of Courts opened the door to the service
     disinterested third party that is a Registered Process                   of court documents using electronic means, including
     Server that can attest to the facts of the transaction.                  social media platforms. This amendment was applied
     (Cals Pro 2015)                                                          for the first time when the KwaZulu-Natal High Court in
                                                                              Durban “granted an application for substituted service
                                                                              of a notice of set down and pre-trial directions on the
Good practice examples                                                        respondent (the defendant in the main action) via a
                                                                              message on social media website Facebook, in addition
California courts. The California state courts have been                      to the notice being published in a local newspaper”
ahead of many states in the United States in terms                            (Hawkey 2012, 1). Although this was not related to the
of their acceptance of alternative means of service.                          initial service of process, it was an important step toward
California was one of the first states to implement                           broader uses of electronic means of service in South
e-filing as well as limited e-service of process. Currently                   African courts and probably the first time the use of a
in California, e-service is allowed if consent is given by                    social media application was allowed for process service
both parties, thus not just when a judge signs off on                         in Sub-Saharan Africa (Hawkey 2012).




3.3 E-PAYMENT OF COURT FEES

Background

As mentioned above, an e-filing system that does not                           paying court fees (and fines) electronically, they save
offer the option of also paying the required court fees                        the time and resources needed to come to the court.
electronically largely eliminates the benefits of e-filing.                    E-payment, if well designed, also provides an instant
When litigants and other court users have the option of                        record of payment and eliminates the need for cash



67	 Judicial Council of California, California Rules of Court, “Rule 2.253(b)(2). Permissive Electronic Filing, Mandatory Electronic Filing, and Elec-
    tronic Filing by Court Order” (2016), http://www.courts.ca.gov/cms/rules/index.cfm?title=two&linkid=rule2_253.




                                                                                                          Good Practice Area: Court Automation           85
     transactions directly with court staff, thereby greatly                                                       CMS, there was no way to automate an interface for the
     increasing the transparency and reliability of the payment                                                    e-payments to be processed directly into the system.
     process. In many countries, however, especially in the                                                        From the customer’s perspective, the convenience of
     developing world, cash is still the predominate form of                                                       online payments appeared to be easy and to save time;
     payment at courts, not least because other options,                                                           however, the back-end processing inside the court was
     such as mailing paper checks, credit and debit cards,                                                         usually completely manual. The vendor typically sent a
     and even most wire transfers, require a bank account.                                                         daily report to the court that listed the fines paid from the
     For many of the self-represented litigants in particular,                                                     previous day. Court staff would then enter the individual
     including in those in middle- and high-income countries,                                                      payments manually in the CMS.
     this represents a problem since most do not have bank
     accounts or credit cards. The question therefore is how                                                       New technologies and the remarkable growth of
     to offer options that make fee payment easy, speedy,                                                          communications networks are increasingly enabling
     efficient, and financially feasible (Zorza 2013).                                                             organizations to transition from cash to e-payments
                                                                                                                   in a growing number of countries. The spread of
     Electronic payments or “e-payments” are not new to the                                                        mobile phone access and a corresponding increase in
     court system, though they have not always functioned                                                          “mobile money” products create new opportunities to
     adequately. In the early years of e-payments, many                                                            use inclusive e-payment platforms. In the developing
     courts experienced technological limitations and the                                                          world, mobile phone access today far outstrips access
     public demand for remote services was minimal. The                                                            to banks. Figure 12 compares access to formal financial
     e-payment processes in place were generally for traffic                                                       institution accounts with mobile phone accounts.68
     citations and limited to “clean” cases, which meant that                                                      In 2016, electronic payment of court fees was the
     e-payments were offered for uncontested payments                                                              most commonly available feature of court automation
     on first-time fines and traffic court payments only.                                                          measured by Doing Business (World Bank 2016). Forty-
     Furthermore, among the courts that had an electronic                                                          five economies provide for e-payment, more than all the
                                                                                                                   other court automation practices measured.69


     FIGURE 12.	 Bank account penetration

                                           100
                                                                                             94
                                            90
                                            80
        Adults with an account (%), 2014




                                                         69
                                            70
                                            60                                                                                                                                  World
                                                                             51                               51
                                            50                                                                                                   46

                                            40                                                                                                                    34
                                            30
                                            20                                                                                   14
                                            10
                                             0
                                                      East Asia &         Europe &       High income     Latin America &     Middle East      South Asia     Sub-Saharan &
                                                        Pacific          Central Asia   OECD Economies      Caribbean       & North Africa                       Africa
                                                 Financial institution account only          Financial institution and mobile money account         Mobile money account only


     Source: World Bank (2015).



     68	 See World Bank, “The Global Findex Database”(2015), http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2015/10
         /19/090224b08315413c/2_0/Rendered/PDF/The0Global0Fin0ion0around0the0world.pdf#page=3.
     69	 Doing Business only measures whether court fees can be paid electronically, either through a dedicated platform or through online banking
         (World Bank 2016, 155).




86   Good Practices for Courts
Nevertheless, this number is still only a minority among               U.S. states reported acceptance or planned acceptance
the 189 economies included, and the use of new                         of credit cards, and only two the digital wallet service
alternative payment forms in courts remains limited.                   provider PayPal, suggesting the need for continued
For example, M-Pesa, the award winning e-payment                       expansion of forms of acceptable payment in the US
option that takes advantage of the increasing use of                   (Hernandez 2013). According to an online report from the
cell phones, was initially developed in Kenya and is now               Pew Charitable Trusts, “Research predicts that mobile
available in at least seven other Sub-Saharan countries                payments in the U.S. will grow at an overall 22 percent
as well as India. The Kenyan courts currently allow its use            compound annual rate through 2019” (Pew Charitable
for payment of traffic fines but not for court fees. Even in           Trusts 2016). So far, however, courts worldwide have not
the United States, courts offer few alternatives. A survey             really taken advantage of this trend.
conducted in 2012 showed that 29 courts across several




               KEY ELEMENTS                                LESSONS LEARNED                        GOOD PRACTICE EXAMPLE

                                                 •	 Conducting a scoping survey to
                                                    determine court-users’ readiness for
 •	 Legislation to reflect the possibility of
                                                    e-payment options
    paying court fees electronically
                                                 •	 Feasibility study to ensure that       •	 The Singapore State Courts
 •	 Reliable and accessible Internet services
                                                    the chosen e-payment option is
 •	 Agreements and understandings with              sustainable for the court              •	 Arizona Courts
    relevant financial institutions, including
                                                 •	 Rollout of e-payment using a phased
    non-bank e-payment providers
                                                    approach and multiple vendors
                                                 •	 Information and training for court
                                                    users and other stakeholders




Key elements

Some of the basic prerequisites for implementing                       processing impediments; costs; capacities;
successful e-payment systems, most of which have                       and risk management options. Depending on
been addressed before, include reliable and accessible                 current payment collection and reconciliation
Internet service, cooperative financial institutions, an               responsibilities, other government agencies will
IT-oriented public, and adequate financing to set up                   need to be involved. Generally, it is a good idea
the appropriate infrastructure in the court. Equally                   to reach out to other agencies that have already
important is that the regulatory framework supports the                introduced e-payment options or are planning to
court’s use of any e-payment option chosen.                            do so to share experiences and build on already
                                                                       existing systems.

Lessons learned                                                        Reengineering payment processes. The scoping
                                                                       survey will also provide information to reconcile
Conducting a payment scoping survey. This kind                         payment transaction and reconciliation processes
of survey would help identify the court’s needs and                    in order to inform the software design and
capacities to offer and manage different e-payment                     optimize operations and system implementation.
options and also inform the system design to                           Back-end reconciliation, especially if multiple
integrate the court’s operations with its other IT                     payment options are offered, can be complex
solutions. It maps cash payment streams, volumes,                      and should be centralized (Hernandez 2013).
and values; cash management points and controls;                       Reengineering of payment also means focusing



                                                                                            Good Practice Area: Court Automation   87
     on online e-payment options. Often, the first step for        needs of all its users. Depending on market conditions
     courts is to accept credit card payment or other online       and user preferences, this could include:
     options, but either only on the premises of the court
     (sometimes via a bank terminal at the court) or if the        •	   Credit and debit cards
     litigant later files the payment receipts in person, thus     •	   Electronic transfer from checking account
     negating the benefits of e-payment. Ensuring that fully       •	   PayPal and other online payment systems
     online options can be used is the next step.                  •	   Prepaid cards, depending on use and availability
                                                                   •	   Where widely available, electronic mobile money
     Determining court-user readiness for various                       systems, such as M-Pesa or Zaad in East Africa
     e-payment options. The court needs to analyze what
     e-payment options are available, what methods users           Using multiple vendors. The offer to use multiple
     are currently using, and how the market is developing.        payment systems, including multiple credit card options,
     Helpful tools for an e-payment market assessment have         also means that courts need to be prepared to manage
     been developed for other sectors and can be easily            multiple credit card and other payment option vendors.
     applied to the court’s environment (see, for example,         For example, a 2012 study in Orange County, California,
     U.S. Global Development Lab 2013).                            showed that the Superior Court contracted with seven
                                                                   external vendors who provide e-payment services, with
     Ensuring that the e-payment option is financially             another eight vendors in the process of contracting
     feasible for the court. Any payment method has                with the court to provide additional e-payment options.
     direct financial costs, such as transactions fees, security   The court’s local finance department processes the
     or insurance costs, or outlays for travel to the bank         daily payment reconciliations for each of the vendors,
     to deposit cash. There are also other capacity and            as well as all payment reconciliation efforts currently
     operational costs (staff, operating systems) as well          in place outside of e-payments. The findings showed
     implications for the court users and their trust in the       that contracting with multiple vendors for e-payment/e-
     institutions (access, transparency, speed, reliability, and   service solutions can create a challenge for a finance
     security). Understanding the costs and potential savings      department’s back-end reconciliation process. The
     in other areas that are triggered by the different payment    findings additionally showed that there are often
     options is essential. In Europe, for example, current         inconsistencies in the convenience fees charged by
     credit and debit card fees and how they are applied           vendors for the services provided. There also appear
     vary significantly across card providers and among EU         to be inconsistencies within the web pages of the e-file
     member states. For some, the accounting and reporting         vendors, as several do not show an affiliation with the
     requirements are significantly more involved than for         Orange County Superior Court, which could potentially
     others. Some courts have found that the financial costs       create confusion among court customers.
     related to particular e-payment options may be higher         Embracing stakeholder outreach and education. Any
     than cash transactions, but that these costs would easily     e-payment option can work only if the potential users
     be offset by producing savings in staff time for payment      can access it and find it useful. The above-mentioned
     processing, reducing payment leakages through                 market research should include user behavior and
     improved transparency and tracking, and facilitating          attitudes toward various payment options, which would
     user access (U.S. Global Development Lab 2013).               help provide user feedback for optimizing the solution.
                                                                   In addition, outreach, public information, and training
     Applying a phased introduction of multiple payment            activities should be conducted.
     options. Like other automation projects, taking a
     phased approach that tests a few options with targeted,
     high-frequency user groups first and expanding the            Good practice examples
     scope of payment options and coverage to different
     case and user types is advisable. Only after sufficient       Most of the courts that offer advanced e-filing solutions
     testing and marketed adjustments are made should              also offer a range of electronic payment options, but few
     mandatory e-payment be considered. Furthermore, the           address the needs of the less affluent who do not have
     court should aim to offer a range of electronic payment       a credit card and are representing themselves. Notable
     options in addition to payment at the court to meet the       exceptions are the Singapore state courts, which began




88   Good Practices for Courts
providing the option of fee payment by credit card many                and school fees, slowly making cash obsolete. This
years ago and offer special “pay as you go” cards to                   payment option is gradually being taken up by select
those who cannot afford (or qualify for) a credit card. The            government agencies in Kenya. Even the courts already
Arizona courts’ AZTurboCourt portal allows for payment                 allow for M-Pesa payment of traffic fines, though not
via select credit and debit cards as well as PayPal, and               of court fees. M-Pesa, hosted by Vodafone’s subsidiary
similarly, since 2015, the U.S. federal courts provide the             Safaricom, will now also be available in Tanzania,
option of payment via PayPal and Dwolla.                               the Democratic Republic of Congo, Mozambique,
                                                                       Uganda, Rwanda, and Zambia.70 Similarly, the use of
Overall, this appears to be an area where courts have                  mobile money via Zaad, hosted by Telesom, has made
plenty of room to extend payment offers to a wider                     Somaliland the second-highest user of electronic money
range of court users, especially the less affluent.                    options after Sweden. Though offered in one of Africa’s
Particularly in the developing world, mobile money                     poorest regions this mobile solution has created an
solutions have significant potential, since, as shown                  informal electronic banking system with more efficiency
above, large sections of the population have a mobile                  and convenience than the systems used in many middle
phone but not a bank account. This remains an area                     and high income countries. Cash is disappearing, and
where courts are lagging far behind the private sector                 there is no need even for credit cards because even
and other government agencies. For example, in Kenya,                  street vendors accept payments by mobile phones. A
the biggest African user of mobile money, there are                    survey in 2012 found that the average customer made
currently 15 million subscribers to M-Pesa. Though                     34 transactions per month on his/her mobile phone,
originally a method to send money home from cities                     higher than almost anywhere in the world. It could not
to families in rural areas, M-Pesa is now widely used                  be confirmed, however, whether fee payment options
for many things, from receiving salaries to paying bills               via Zaad are available in the still-evolving court system.




3.4  PUBLICATION OF JUDGMENTS

Background

Accessibility to court decisions and other court and                   which mandated that all court judgments from all court
legal information is central to a well-functioning judiciary           levels in China be published online in a searchable
and key to a strong investment climate. Publishing and                 public database especially set up for that purpose.
providing wide and easy access to court decisions
in particular enhances transparency and improves                       The benefits of publishing court judgments from all
the public’s trust and confidence in the courts. The                   courts and all court levels are indisputable. Widely
availability of information on the outcome of cases                    accessible publication affects not only how courts
(commercial disputes in particular) and on the courts’                 function and provide services but how the public,
interpretation and application of laws provides litigants,             including ordinary citizens, businesses, and investors
including businesses, with invaluable insight into their               as well as the legal community, views the judiciary
rights and duties and how they are protected. Having                   and conducts commercial transactions. In addition to
this information provides predictability; can play a key               creating predictability, publication of court decisions can
role in improving investors’ confidence in the courts,                 also serve to promote accountability, improve efficiency,
especially in transitioning and evolving countries; and                and support efforts to curb corruption. Studies in the
has been recognized even in historically more restrictive              CIS, for example, have shown that publishing court
economies such as China. Indeed, in 2013, China’s                      decisions contributes to the creation of legal certainty
Supreme People’s Court issued Provisions on the Online                 (Byfield 2011). In particular, knowing that decisions will
Issuance of Judgment Documents by People’s Courts,                     be published can improve the quality of court verdicts



70	 For more information, see
    http://afkinsider.com/97718/vodafone-mtn-partnership-spreads-m-pesa-to-seven-african-countries/#sthash.Ug8l6KK8.dpuf.




                                                                                                 Good Practice Area: Court Automation   89
     and support the issuance of more uniform and well-             FIGURE 13.	 Judgments are more likely to be publicly
     reasoned judgments that also safeguard the rights of                                                                        available in economies perceived as having
     parties, especially the right to appeal. It can also support                                                                lower corruption and stronger rule of law
     impartiality in how cases are decided and ensure that
     they are issued without interference from improper
                                                                                                                                                         2.0
     pressure, influence, or threats.
                                                                                                                                                         1.5




                                                                    Average score on control of corruption index
                                                                                                                                                                 Economies where judgments
     Providing access to judicial decisions can also serve
                                                                                                                                                         1.0     are publicly available
     to indirectly promote the professional development
     and capacity building of judges, which may in turn
                                                                                                                                                               122
     contribute to improving court efficiency and the quality
                                                                                                                   -2.0      -1.5      -1.0                                 1.0     1.5      2.0
     of decisions. Anecdotally, judges in several countries                                                                                   53
                                                                                                                                                        -0.5
     indicated that they draft their decisions more carefully
     since they are published. In terms of supporting the                                                                 Economies where judgments -1.0
     development of legal jurisprudence and improving                                                                     are not publicly available
                                                                                                                                                     -1.5
     services, publishing court decisions allows legal scholars
     to study and advance legal theory; enables legal experts                                                                                           -2.0
     and the legal community to study and improve legal                                                                                       Average score on rule of law index
     services; and helps build legal precedents. The latter is
                                                                    Source: Doing Business database, World Bank, Worldwide Gover-
     especially important for common law legal systems that         nance Indicators (2009 data) http://www.doingbusiness.org/data.
     rely heavily on the use of legal precedents. Publishing        Note: Higher scores on the indices indicate perceptions of lower
     court decisions has also been shown to reinforce efforts       corruption and stronger rule of law. Relationships are significant at
                                                                    the 5% level after controlling for income per capita.
     to increase integrity and can serve as a tool for curbing
     and reducing the perception of corruption. Data from the
     Doing Business studies also suggest that countries with        number of recognized international standards provide
     stronger rule of law and greater control over corruption       specific guidance on accessibility, including those in the
     were more likely to publish court judgments (Doing             Convention on Preventing and Combating Corruption,
     Business 2012, Enforcing Contracts, p.4) (see figure13).       the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
     Moreover, making court decisions widely available can          the Council of Europe Recommendation, Rec (2001)
     further support the development of law school curriculum       3E (on the delivery of court and other legal services
     and improve legal education (which has occurred in             to the citizens through the use of new technology),
     Mongolia, for example). In 42 economies of the 189             and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
     included in the 2016 Doing Business report, courts             Europe (OSCE) Kiev recommendations on accessibility.
     publish virtually all recent judgments in commercial cases     The Council of Europe recommendation provides
     either online or through publicly available gazettes. Only     that communication with the court should be as easy
     two economies in Sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East           as possible; that access to information regarding the
     and North Africa and South Asia could be recorded to           effective administration of justice, including statutes,
     regularly publish judgements (World Bank 2016, p.95).          laws, case law, and court proceedings, should be
                                                                    provided; and that this information should be widely
     The significance and potential impact of easy                  accessible using the available technologies (see box
     accessibility to court information on the justice              15). The OSCE document equally places emphasis
     sector, the legal community, and businesses are also           on online accessibility and on the ready availability of
     recognized by many international instruments, including        court decisions, preferably on courts’ websites. Despite
     the UN Convention against Corruption, the African              focusing on European states, these standards are
     Union Convention on Preventing and Combating                   relevant to any region and provide valuable guidance
     Corruption, and the European Convention on Human               to economies worldwide. In fact, in an assessment of
     Rights. With regard to court judgments in particular, a        court decisions in the Middle East, EBRD applied both




90   Good Practices for Courts
  BOX 15.
  Select International Recommendations on Access to Court information
  Council of Europe Rec (2001) 3E:

  Considering that access of the citizens of Europe to laws, regulations and case law of their own and other European
  states and to administrative and judicial information should be facilitated through the use of modern information
  technology in the interest of democratic participation.

  OSCE Kiev Recommendation on Judicial Independence in Europe, Central Asia and the South Caucasus, Part III,
  Section 32:

  Transparency shall be the rule for trials. To provide evidence of the conduct of judges in the courtroom, as well as
  accurate trial records, hearings shall be recorded by electronic devices providing full reproduction … To enhance
  the professional and public accountability of judges, decisions shall be published in databases and on websites in
  ways that makes them truly accessible and free of charge. Decisions must be indexed according to subject matter,
  legal issues raised, and names of the judges who wrote them.
  Source: Council of Europe Rec (2001)3E 28.2001; and OSCE (2010).




standards in evaluating the extent to which courts in a                     met; the policies also aim to enhance transparency
number of countries, including Morocco, Egypt, Jordan,                      and confidence in the courts without infringing on the
and Tunisia, were providing access to court decisions                       independence of judges or the privacy rights of litigants.
(Byfield 2014).
                                                                            Despite the many benefits, accessibility to all court
In addition to international standards, country-specific                    judgments is still not generally available in many
factors, such as the existence of constitutional guarantees                 economies worldwide. As mentioned above, the Doing
and laws (such as in Chile), as well as the development of                  Business 2016 report identified that courts in only 42 out
precise access policies, have also guided the efforts in                    of 189 countries publish virtually all recent judgments
many economies to provide access to court information.                      in commercial cases either online or through publicly
Although an enabling legal framework governing                              available gazettes.71 Other studies have shown that
access can be a helpful guide, the presence or absence                      many economies still publish decisions of higher courts
of specific laws should not prevent the provision of                        only, while others publish only case summaries of key
access to court decisions. Courts in Australia, Ireland,                    decisions (Byfield 2014). A recent study conducted
the United States, and Singapore, for example, provide                      by EBRD of 27 transitioning countries in the Middle
online access to decisions despite the lack of specific                     East, Eastern Europe, and CIS regions also indicated
legal mandates. It should be noted, however, that access                    that approximately 22 countries publish decisions of
to court information in these economies is guided by                        the constitutional and appellate courts in journals and
clear and detailed government policies that address                         periodicals, while a limited number of countries (Cyprus,
wider access issues and also apply to court judgments.                      Morocco, Tunisia, and Tajikistan) do not require the
These specific court policies developed there are based                     publication of even higher court decisions (Byfield and
on this general framework and input from judges, court                      Kroytor 2015) (see figure 14 next page).
staff and stakeholders to ensure that their needs are



71	The Doing Business methodology assesses whether judgments rendered by local courts are made available to the general public through
   publication in offi  cial gazettes, in newspapers or on the internet. A score of 1 is assigned if judgments rendered in commercial cases at all
   levels are made available to the general public; 0.5 if only judgments rendered at the appeal and supreme court level are made available to
   the general public; 0 in all other instances (World Bank 2016, 155).




                                                                                                       Good Practice Area: Court Automation          91
     FIGURE 14.	 Access to court decisions in the South Eastern Middle Easter Region (SEMED)


      Country        Is there a legal     Does the country have a          Are commercial court                        Does the country have a
                     requirement for      dedicated periodical/website     decisions published                         strategy to improve the use
                     court decisions to   publishing court decisions?      regularly?                                  of technology in the court
                     be published?                                                                                     system?

      Egypt          No                   No – but decisions of the        No – some higher court        Yes – a joint project between
                                          Constitutional Court are         decisions are published, both the Court of Cassation and
                                          published in the official        in paper and on a website.    Ministry of Communications
                                          Gazette.                                                       and IT was recently initiated.


      Jordan         No                   No – but court decisions         No – but the commercial      Yes – USAID is partnering
                                          of the highest courts are        courts were only established with the Jordanian Bar
                                          supposed to be published in      in 2010.                     Association to upgrade the
                                          the journal of the Jordanian                                  ICT systems.
                                          Bar Association.

      Morocco        No                   No                               No – but information booths Yes – in 2013 the
                                                                           are available in Casablanca government announced a
                                                                           Commercial Court to check   ICT project for the courts.
                                                                           the status of cases.
      Tunisia        No                   Yes – the E-Justice portal       Yes – the E-justice portal                  No – the court system
                                          contains 12,000+ cases.          contains the text of some                   currently relies on a
                                                                           commercial cases.                           paper-based system.

     Source: EBRD.




     Limitations also exist in other economies. These include            FIGURE 15.	 Ease of access by parties and general public
     restricted dissemination, irregular publication of official                           to court decisions: regional comparaisons
     gazettes where judgments are published, delays in
     publishing decisions, incomplete registries, databases               10
     that are not regularly updated, and limited accessibility
     to all members of the public (for example, in Tunisia,
                                                                           8
     only parties can obtain copies of judgments) (Byfield
     and Kroytor 2015). These issues, along with limited
     IT capacity and access to Internet services, are more                 6
     pronounced low income economies (see figure 15).
                                                                           4


                                                                           2


                                                                           0
                                                                               South eastern Europe     Caucasus &      Eastern Europe     Southern & eastern
                                                                                     & Turkey           Central Asia                         Mediterranean

                                                                                     Ease of parties’ access to case      Ease of public to access case


                                                                         Source: EBRD Assessment of Availablitity of Court Decisions, 2015.
                                                                         Key: Rating 10= esasy; 1= difficult..




92   Good Practices for Courts
              KEY ELEMENTS                               LESSONS LEARNED                            GOOD PRACTICE EXAMPLE

 •	 Enabling legislation
 •	 Participatory approach to developing
    access policies                           •	 Adopt an incremental approach to
                                                 publishing judgments.
 •	 Balancing of the rights and needs of
    the public with other factors             •	 Routinely review and update access
                                                 policies and guidelines.
 •	 Assess court resources and capacity and                                               •	 Hong Kong Courts
    identify realistic options.               •	 Identify and allocate sufficient human
                                                 and financial resources and build        •	 Croatia Courts
 •	 Clear and detailed guidelines                technical capacity.
    identifying judgments to be published
    and how they will be published            •	 Categorize judgments to ensure
                                                 effective searches and quick and easy
 •	 Raise judicial capacity and awareness.       access.
 •	 Published access policies and
    guidelines




Key elements

Providing access to court judgments, whether online or
in paper format, is an issue that well-performing courts               BOX 16.
address as part of a broader strategy and policy to                    Access to Court Decisions in Mongolia
make court records available. Developing these policies                In Mongolia, the World Bank supported a justice
is essential to establishing a governing framework for                 sector reform project that focused on, among
accessibility and ensures uniformity in how and what                   many other issues, making court judgments more
information is provided and to whom. In the absence                    widely accessible via a public website. In particular,
of enabling laws, these policies are especially important              the online publication of Supreme Court decisions
and should be developed with careful consideration of                  increased transparency and also provided law
many factors and wide input from judges, the public,                   faculties with the opportunity to utilize these
and the legal community. They should generally address                 decisions as part of their new teaching approaches.
access to: judgments (ideally by court levels); information            There was also evidence that the publication of court
related to the internal operations and administration                  decisions helped judges pay closer attention to how
of the courts (such as budgeting, expenditures and                     they draft their opinions. To provide greater access
procurements, judicial appointments, and so on); court                 to justice, the project also provided important legal
performance data; information on the functions of the                  outreach in rural regions, poor urban communities
judiciary; annual reports; court rules and procedures                  for minority populations and to Mongolia’s blind
as well as any practice guidelines or notes; laws and                  population through a legal information campaign
regulations; and calendaring and case information.                     and legal aid schemes. Laws had not previously
                                                                       been published in braille due to the relatively high
The policies should also reflect and ensure that various
                                                                       cost. For the first time, blind Mongolians were able
options based on available resources (for example,
                                                                       to directly access these laws more easily.
online databases, paper publications and official
gazettes, and court registries) are provided; address                  Source: World Bank (2013).
how privacy rights will be protected; and set forth the
scope of dissemination and access, among many other
issues (see box 16).




                                                                                            Good Practice Area: Court Automation   93
     The following sections outline the core elements in            providing free copies of printed official gazettes, and/
     developing and upgrading court policies on access with         or providing access to user friendly computer terminals
     a focus on judgments, based on a study of courts in            that contain documents online.
     Australia, Hong Kong, South Korea, Mongolia, China,
     the United States, the United Kingdom, Croatia, Ireland,       Examining court resources and capacity. Judiciaries
     Singapore, CIS countries, and a number of countries in         in many economies lack resources and tend to be
     the Middle East and North Africa region.                       underfunded compared to other public sectors.
                                                                    Providing access to judgments, whether online or in
     Ensuring an enabling legal environment. As indicated           paper format, requires financial and human resources.
     above, legal provisions on access to court records may         When identifying the means and scope for providing
     or may not exist. When developing a policy, a review of        access to decisions, courts must carefully assess their
     existing laws is necessary to identify the legal parameters.   resources and capacities and identify realistic and viable
     Publication policies need to clearly outline when and          options for accomplishing this goal. Resources need to
     what can be publicly available, which records may be           be available to regularly publish judgements, to check
     accessible to parties only, when records need to be            for consistency and for developing mechanisms that
     closed to the public (i.e. in cases involving juveniles, for   allow for searching for and researching judgments.
     example) and if part of a judgement or other court record      Simply posting PDF versions of decisions online in
     may need to be protected (i.e. identities of victims and       chronological order is a start but a searchable database
     information that could infringe on intellectual property       that allows judges and others to search by case or
     rights). In addition, current practices or directives          court type is what is ultimately needed to provide for
     that courts have developed over time should also be            comparison and lead so some consistency in judicial
     reviewed to identity if they are prohibitive and if there is   decision making.
     a need to develop new ones that will support enhanced
     access to court judgements and records. In the United          Developing guidelines that balance public access
     Kingdom, for instance, the President of the Court of           with other factors. When upgrading their access
     Protection issued new guidance in 2014 on publishing           policies, courts should balance the public’s interest in
     the court’s judgments that allowed for increased access        and right to information with security concerns and the
     (Munby 2014). In Ireland, there are no constitutional          need to safeguard privacy rights and prevent abuses.
     provisions that govern access to court records though          Doing so will ensure that any access policy does not
     the Supreme Court, Court of Criminal Appeals, and High         infringe upon the rights of individuals (such as victims of
     Court all provide access and publish their judgments.          crimes, minors, or the mentally ill) or other entities (such
                                                                    as proprietary company information), or prejudice one
     Adopting a participatory approach to developing                group over another, and that it promotes consistency
     access policies. A participatory approach based on             and transparency. Guidance on redacting litigants’
     broad input and feedback from the court’s stakeholders,        names may also be considered, but the overall editing
     including lawyers, members of the business community,          of court decisions should be prohibited. To ensure
     litigants, self-represented litigants, and other members       that access is provided in a consistent and transparent
     of the public, should be undertaken to ensure that their       manner, guidelines should be developed to supplement
     needs and concerns are specifically addressed by the           the policy. Guidelines should address the following:
     access policy. In some countries such as the United
     States, for example, committees are established to             ►	 Define the types of cases by court types and levels
     seek input and identify changes that may be required              that will be published and whether unqualified
     to improve access to court information, including                 access to certain cases will be provided. Some
     judgments. Seeking user input can also save the court             courts, primarily supreme or high courts, provide
     resources by preventing the establishment of ineffective          unqualified access to court judgments, while others
     mechanisms, such as requiring online publication in an            may limit access and provide court registrars and
     area where Internet access is generally unreliable and/           judges with the authority to exercise discretion in
     or not available to the public. In that event, more viable        providing access to some information.
     and effective options would include developing a court         ►	 Define access to judgments by parties and third
     registry of judgments that users can access at the court,         parties.




94   Good Practices for Courts
►	 Define the format in which judgments and other           format for those courts with less online capacity and
   information will be provided (paper and online).         fewer resources.
►	 If online access is provided, define the frequency
   with which judgments and other information will be
   updated.                                                 Lessons learned
►	 Articulate exceptions where judgments and court
   records will not be accessible (such as cases            Undertaking an incremental approach to publication.
   involving minors, family matters, and certain            In the absence of a culture of openness, which is still
   crimes related to national security concerns and so      evident in many courts worldwide, developing and
   forth). For example, the New South Wales courts          implementing a transitional plan that provides for the
   in Australia have identified a number of items that      initial publication of possibly limited types of judgments
   were deemed classified and restricted, including         (by court type and court level) to a particular set of users
   pre-sentence reports, victim impact reports,             (such as judges and parties) allows the court to test the
   medical health records, and documents subject to         effectiveness of its policy and change it accordingly.
   a nonpublication or restricted access order.             Especially in courts with limited IT capacity and
►	 Establish the process for applying for an exception,     functional websites, this transitional approach may be
   including the criteria and procedures for doing so.      required to iron out any technical issues that could affect
►	 Identify who will have the power (court administrator,   publication. Developing pilot schemes to test the new
   registrar, committee, and so on) to review and grant     policy in one court can also be beneficial in identifying
   requests for exceptions.                                 specific issues that a court may face.
►	 Identify the information that may be redacted from
   judgments and considered private (such as social         Conducting regular reviews and updating the
   security numbers, birth dates, and so forth).            policies and guidelines accordingly. Access policies
►	 Identify how far back in time the court will go when     are not static but should evolve over time to reflect the
   publishing old judgments.                                changing needs of court users, the legal environment,
                                                            and technological developments. As such, courts should
In some countries such as the United States, model          regularly review their policies and guidelines. With the
strategies for state courts have been developed to          increasing use of online services, for example, many
assist them in their effort to develop access policies.     state courts in the United States conducted reviews of
Since publication, the model policy developed by the        their access policies to assess if and how online access
Conference of Chief Justices and the Conference of          to court records would be provided. A similar review was
State Court Administration has provided uniformity          also conducted in New South Wales, Australia.
in the way in which courts have approached access to
records and guided the development and upgrading of         Finding the dedicated staff and resources. Publishing
court policies (Steketee and Carlson 2002).                 judgments, whether through official gazettes, court
                                                            registries, and/or online searchable databases,
Raising judicial capacity and awareness. Making             requires human and financial resources. To ensure that
judgments public can place a burden on those judges         judgments and other information is regularly provided
who may not yet be well versed to issue well-reasoned       and updated, courts must dedicate sufficient staff and
judgments. In jurisdictions judicial where capacity is an   resources. In addition, medium- to long-term plans
issue, the courts should focus on providing ongoing         should be developed to build the courts’ internal
training opportunities to raise the technical capacity of   capacity to provide enhanced access to judgments (such
judges. Developing and providing access to resources,       as setting up websites and online databases).
such as guidelines on writing judgments and judicial
Bench Books with practice examples of well-written          Categorizing judgments. Developing appropriate
judgments by case type, can also support these efforts.     categorizations of judgments to allow for effective
                                                            database searches is essential for providing easy and
Publishing policies and guidelines. Once developed,         quick access.
the policy and related guidelines should also be
accessible on the court’s website as well as in paper




                                                                                  Good Practice Area: Court Automation     95
     Good practice examples

     Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR)                              Information Institute (HKLII) website, which provides
     courts. These courts represent a good example of                           access to information from the BLIS and Law Reference
     how online access to judgments can be provided                             System (LRS) in an easy, user friendly, and searchable
     even in a challenging environment where the judicial                       format.72
     system is bilingual—both Chinese and English are
     official languages of the courts. Despite this challenge,                  Croatian courts. These courts represent another
     the courts’ website, through its Judgments and Legal                       approach that was guided by a broader e-government
     Reference System (JLRC), currently provides online                         and EU accession strategy to combat corruption and
     access to judgments of significant legal precedent from                    increase transparency. A Freedom of Information Law
     1946 to 1948 and from 1966 onward from: 1) the Court                       was enacted in 2013 requiring all public authorities to
     of Final Appeals (since its establishment in 1997); 2) the                 develop information databases and provide online access
     Court of Appeal of the High Court; 3) the Court of First                   unless otherwise specifically exempted (for example,
     Instance of the High Court; 4) the Competition Tribunal                    information related to state, military, professional, or
     (since its establishment in 2015); 5) the district courts; 6)              business secrets). The law went further by establishing
     the family courts; and 7) the Lands Tribunal.                              the position of information commissioner, who is elected
                                                                                by Parliament and provided with the broad authority
     Judgments are published online within three working                        to inspect and issue administrative sanctions for
     days from issuance, and cases of importance or public                      noncompliance with the law. The law also authorizes the
     interest are available online on the same day. If a judgment               imposition of penalties on entities that illegally withhold
     is not available online for some reason, an individual                     information. At the same time, courts can deny access
     can submit an application to the court registry where                      to information if, among other reasons, it interferes with
     the judgment was issued and obtain a copy, at times                        the prevention or prosecution of criminal offenses or the
     for a fee. In addition, since 2008, Chinese judgments                      protection of the life, health, or safety of individuals or
     of significant jurisprudence have been made available                      the environment.
     online, along with the respective English translation.
     Since 2009, online access to a database of Reasons for                     Since enactment, the law has made the information
     Sentences issued in both the high and district court has                   held and created by government entities, including the
     been provided. The high court’s decisions are searchable                   courts, more accessible. Currently, access to judgments
     by case number or party names and available for cases                      of the municipal and county courts, the first instance
     dating back to 1973, while cases from the district court                   and high commercial courts, and the European Court
     are available from 1976 onward. A database of Reasons                      of Justice is provided online on the Judges Web.73
     for Verdicts handed down in district court has also been                   Although the website was initially launched by a private
     operational since 2012, and it is similarly searchable                     nonprofit entity, it is currently managed by the Ministry of
     by case number or party name and includes decisions                        Justice. It is publicly accessible and provides additional
     dating back to 1987.                                                       information that is helpful to court users, including: 1)
                                                                                a list of court experts by location and specialization; 2)
     In addition, the judiciary’s efforts are supported by a                    information about the courts, including their territorial
     government-wide drive to increase online accessibility                     jurisdiction; 3) a list of court interpreters; 4) an index
     to all legal information. Established and maintained                       of court fees; and 5) bankruptcy-related information.
     by the Department of Justice, the Bilingual Laws                           In addition to this website, the Ministry of Justice also
     Information System (BLIS) is a database that provides                      maintains an e-Portal that has served as a depository of
     consolidated versions of all Hong Kong laws. Further                       some judgments since 2003, including Supreme Court
     access to judgments from all courts dating as far back                     decisions dating back to 1993.
     as 1946 is also available online on the Hong Kong Legal



     72	 For more information on the types of judgments available through the LRS, see http://legalref.judiciary.gov.hk/lrs/common/ju/judgment.jsp. For
         information on the BLIS, see http://www.legislation.gov.hk/eng/home.htm, and on the HKLII, see http://www.hklii.hk/eng.
     73	 The Judges Web can be found at http://www.sudacka-mreza.hr/pristojbe.aspx (in Croatian).




96   Good Practices for Courts
           4                          Good Practice Area:
                                      Alternative Dispute Resolution

    Alternative dispute        The fourth component assessed by the Doing Business QJPI is alternative dispute
         resolution            resolution (ADR). ADR compliments adjudication by providing litigants with different
                               options for effectively resolving disputes. When implemented well and based on a
        Availability and       clear legal and regulatory framework, studies in the United States and Latin America
         regulation of
                               indicate that ADR can contribute to increasing court efficiency; reducing caseload and
          arbitration
                               backlog by reducing the number of cases that would otherwise have to go through
                               the courts; streamlining trials; and reducing costs (Jorquiera and Alvarez 2005; Amsler
        Availability and       et al. 2009). Even partial settlements that work to narrow down the disputed issues
         regulation of
                               help to streamline trials by reducing trial time and associated costs. Because of their
     voluntary mediation
        or conciliation        non-adversarial nature (with the exception of arbitration), ADR services may also
                               preserve personal and business relationships and can prevent future litigation, which is
                               a valuable factor for small and medium-sized businesses. Placing control in the hands
                               of the litigants also provides them with a level of predictability that is otherwise lacking
in the judicial process and can contribute to enhancing the enforceability of settlement agreements. Data have also
shown that the willingness of the parties to participate and reach an agreement is another key factor that contributes
to the effectiveness of ADR services.74

Having access to effective ADR services matters to investors since they help mitigate the risks associated with
adjudicating commercial disputes in the often less-than-efficient courts. ADR can also enhance a country’s reputation
internationally, is an essential factor in attracting foreign direct investment, and is often the more preferred option of
multinational corporations (Pouget 2013). For countries where the courts are viewed as inaccessible or do not have
the confidence of litigants and the business community, ADR services can contribute to improving user perception
and enhancing their trust in the overall judicial system and business environment, which may in turn contribute to
increasing investment and improving economic development. The same is also true for countries that are undergoing
economic reforms and moving toward an open market economy. In China, for example, a host of ADR services,
including mediation, “arbitration-mediation,” and arbitration, have been implemented that have been effective
in commercial disputes and are favorably viewed by domestic and international businesses (Yanming 2010).75
Arbitration in particular has increasingly become one of the most important methods of resolving commercial cases.




74	 In a survey of lawyers and litigants in New Zealand, the lawyers viewed the disputants’ willingness as overwhelmingly the most important deter-
    minant in ADR efficacy.
75	 Arbitration-mediation is a unique form of mediation held in arbitration cases where the parties mediate the case; and only when it fails will the
    case then be arbitrated.




                                                                                        Good Practice Area: Alternative Dispute Resolution              97
                     KEY ELEMENTS                                 LESSONS LEARNED                           GOOD PRACTICE EXAMPLE

                                                       Arbitration
                                                       •	 Enabling and governing legal
                                                          framework that also does not provide
                                                          courts with opportunities to inter-
                                                          vene or interfere with arbitral process
                                                       •	 Law based on the UNCITRAL Model Law
                                                       •	 Membership in the 1958 New York
                                                          Covention

       Arbitration                                     Other ADR Services
       •	 Governed by law                              •	 Institute an enabling and governing
                                                          legal framework and integrate ADR
       •	 Consensual and flexible                         into court processes by developing
       •	 Confidential and private proceedings            court rules when the law is not
                                                          sufficiently detailed.
       •	 Adversarial, lengthy, and costly
                                                       •	 Identify and provide the most
       •	 Binding and enforceable awards                  appropriate ADR services, and ensure      •	 Hong Kong
                                                          that services address cultural and
       Mediation                                          local factors and are tailored to the     •	 The United States
       •	 Cost effective                                  specific needs of court users and the     •	 Singapore
                                                          court.
       •	 Participatory, flexible, informal, and not                                                •	 Australia
          requiring legal representation               •	 Take a participatory approach and
                                                          ensure that services are developed
       •	 Confidential                                    and evaluated with input from the
       •	 Settlements based on mutual                     user community.
          agreement of parties and contractual         •	 Provide ADR on a voluntary basis.
          in nature
                                                       •	 Ensure that services are provided
       •	 Enforceability via courts                       when they are most benefiical and
                                                          conducive to settlement.
                                                       •	 Provide litigants with ADR options.
                                                       •	 Pilot, test, evaluate, and refine ADR
                                                          services.
                                                       •	 Implement good data collection
                                                          practices and regularly evaluate
                                                          performance.
                                                       •	 Raise user awareness of ADR services
                                                          through targeted actvities.




     Background

     ADR has existed for centuries and is rooted in the                       legally required to develop services and adopt ADR as
     traditions and cultural norms of many regions and                        one of the principle case management tools to reduce
     countries (for example, Southeast Asia, Africa, China,                   cost and delay (Stienstra 2011). In the Singapore state
     and the Middle East). More recently however, ADR                         courts the presumption for all civil cases is that “(t)he
     has emerged and become recognized by many well-                          Court encourages parties to consider ADR options as
     performing courts worldwide as an effective case                         a first stop,” at the earliest possible stage (Singapore
     management tool. In the United States, one of the                        State Court n.d.).
     leading countries in utilizing ADR, the federal courts are



98   Good Practices for Courts
ADR encompasses a variety of services that are                       more widely used, including arbitration, mediation,
implemented differently across the globe. These                      conciliation, and, to a lesser extent, neutral evaluations.
include mediation, conciliation, arbitration, negotiated             The vast majority of European economies utilize at
settlements, judicial settlement conferences, summary                least three forms of ADR—conciliation, mediation, and
jury trials, mini trials, neutral evaluation, online dispute         arbitration—with the latter two the most commonly
resolution (ODR), and others (see box 17). Since its                 used (CEPEJ 2014). This is also true in almost all other
modern introduction in the courts in the 1970s, however,             regions, including North America, the Middle East,
a limited number of these services have become                       and Asia.




  BOX 17.
  Core Elements of the Most Commonly Used ADR Services
  Mediation: is a process in which an impartial third person, a “mediator,” facilitates the discussions and assists
  the parties in trying to reach a mutually acceptable agreement. The mediators do not decide the outcome. It is a
  process that leaves control in the hands of the parties and can be used in different types of disputes (e.g., family,
  probate, tax, landlord-tenant, civil, and commercial); may be used at any stage in a judicial proceeding, although
  it is often more effective after case filing; and operates to preserve the relationship between the parties (e.g., in
  the United States, Singapore, and Hong Kong).

  Conciliation: is similar to mediation and is a process in which a conciliator (much like a mediator) meets with the
  parties to establish a mutual understanding of the underlying cause of the dispute and the settlement (e.g., as in
  Mali and Abu Dhabi and many countries in South America).

  Neutral Evaluation: is a process in which each party is provided with the opportunity to present a summary
  of the case to a neutral person, an “evaluator,” who is most often an attorney or expert in the subject matter.
  The evaluator then presents the parties with a nonbinding assessment of the merits of the case, including the
  strengths and weaknesses of each party’s evidence and arguments and how the dispute could be resolved (e.g.,
  in U.S. federal and state courts).

  Arbitration: is a process in which the parties select one or more impartial third parties, or “arbitrators,” to resolve
  a dispute. It is used primarily in cross-border disputes and complex commercial and intellectual property disputes
  and can be used in resolving differences between investors and governments pursuant to bilateral investment
  treaties, national investment laws, or contracts. Much like a trial, parties present evidence and testimony before
  the arbitrators. The process is flexible in that the parties agree on the procedures to be used. Arbitration may be
  either binding or nonbinding. In binding arbitration, the parties waive their right to a trial and agree to accept the
  arbitrator’s decision as final. Generally, there is no right to appeal an arbitrator’s decision. Nonbinding arbitration
  means that the parties are free to request a trial if they do not accept the arbitrator’s decision and the arbitration
  award is binding. In some cases, it may be provided by the courts (i.e., court-annexed arbitration, which is used in
  the United States for small disputes). Unlike mediation, arbitration can be lengthy and costly. Since attorneys’ fees
  represent a large portion of the cost, lengthy arbitrations can drive up the expenditure for all parties.
  Source: Adapted from USAID (1998), Decker (2013), Pouget (2013), and Stienstra (2011).




                                                                                Good Practice Area: Alternative Dispute Resolution   99
      According to the Doing Business 2016 report,                                   tions adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the
      arbitration is recognized in 183 economies. 76 It is, how-                     Council of Europe (such as Recommendation (98)1 on
      ever, a unique service because it operates mainly                              family mediation, Recommendation (99)19 on mediation
      outside of the courts, with the limited exception of                           in criminal matters, and Recommendation (2002)10
      court-annexed arbitration, which is not widely used.                           on mediation in civil cases), as well as guidelines
      Arbitration services are not provided by courts but                            adopted by CEPEJ to facilitate their implementation,
      often by national, international, and regional centers.77                      have contributed to the increased use of mediation in
      The extent of the court’s involvement in the process is                        Europe (CEPEJ 2014). Additional legislative reforms and
      generally limited to enforcing arbitral awards, which                          developments have also have taken place supporting
      are also generally not appealable on the merits. The                           the use of mediation, including the creation of a register
      process itself is adversarial and guided by formal rules,                      for mediators in the Netherlands and the establishment
      making it akin to a trial and also making it significantly                     of mediation information and assessment meetings
      different from mediation, which is not constrained by                          in the United Kingdom pursuant to the new family
      rules and is an informal process driven by the desire to                       mediation scheme under the Civil Procedures Rules
      reach mutually beneficial agreements.                                          (Neuberger 2015).

      With regard to mediation and conciliation on the other                         Another ADR service widely used in the United States
      hand, the Doing Business report 2016 indicated that 171                        is the early neutral evaluation (ENE). Unlike both
      economies recognize voluntary mediation or conciliation                        arbitration and mediation, neutral evaluation is a process
      (World Bank 2016). Doing Business research also                                in which each party is provided with the opportunity to
      shows that only slightly more than half the economies                          present a summary of the case to a neutral person, an
      recognizing voluntary mediation or conciliation (102)                          “evaluator” (See box 17). ENE can position the case for
      have a stand-alone consolidated law regulating these                           early resolution by settlement. Although it is not an area
      practices, though reforms in this area are increasing.                         that is covered by the Doing Business reports, ENE is
      Across Europe, mediation is provided in approximately                          often provided along with other ADR services (Stienstra
      42 economies in different types of disputes (for example,                      2011) and can be effective in narrowing down disputed
      in family courts in Finland and in labor disputes in                           issues and reducing trial time.
      Hungary and Romania), while conciliation is available
      in 35 countries (CEPEJ 2014, analyzing 2012 data).                             The variations between ADR services are many.
      The importance of mediation has also been regionally                           Each serves a particular local need and goal, but the
      recognized, as evidenced by the EU European Mediation                          overall benefits remain the same, which are to: provide
      Directive adopted in 2008, which requires member                               effective and efficient alternatives to litigants, drive
      states to introduce legislative frameworks to employ                           settlements, assist courts in reducing caseload, and
      and promote mediation.78 This effort has led to the                            increase access to justice. ADR continues to evolve,
      enactment of legislation regulating mediation services                         as evidenced by the use of arbitration-mediation in
      across Europe. Moreover, a number of recommenda-                               China as well as the development of new delivery



      76	The Doing Business methodology measures the availability of ADR based on the following critiria. The alternative dispute resolution index has
         six components: Whether domestic commercial arbitration is governed by a consolidated law or consolidated chapter or section of the appli-
         cable code of civil procedure encompassing substantially all its aspects. A score of 0.5 is assigned if yes; 0 if no. Whether commercial disputes of
         all kinds—aside from those dealing with public order, public policy, bankruptcy, consumer rights, employment issues or intellectual property—
         can be submitted to arbitration. A score of 0.5 is assigned if yes; 0 if no. Whether valid arbitration clauses or agreements are enforced by local
         courts in more than 50% of cases. A score of 0.5 is assigned if yes; 0 if no. Whether voluntary mediation, conciliation or both are a recognized
         way of resolving commercial disputes. A score of 0.5 is assigned if yes; 0 if no. Whether voluntary mediation, conciliation or both are governed
         by a consolidated law or consolidated chapter or section of the applicable code of civil procedure encompassing substantially all their aspects.
         A score of 0.5 is assigned if yes; 0 if no. Whether there are any ﬁnancial incentives for parties to attempt mediation or conciliation (for example,
         if mediation or conciliation is successful, a refund of court ﬁling fees, an income tax credit or the like). A score of 0.5 is assigned if yes; 0 if no.
         (World Bank 2016, 155).
      77	 Arbitration can be provided by the International Chamber of Commerce’s (ICC) International Court of Arbitration, the London Court of In-
          ternational Arbitration, the Hong Kong International Arbitration Center, the American Arbitration Association, the Cairo Regional Center for
          International Commercial Arbitration, or the Singapore International Center, to name a few, and in some countries, it is can also be carried out
          by chambers of commerce.
      78	 EU European Mediation Directive 2008/52/EC, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2008:136:0003:0008:En:PDF.




100   Good Practices for Courts
mechanisms such as ODR. With the increasing use of               have knowledge of civil and common law legal systems,
technology and access to Internet services worldwide,            if need be.
courts are developing new services to maximize the
use of IT to deliver more affordable, accessible, and            Private and confidential. The proceedings/hearings
faster court services. Her Majesty’s Courts in the United        are confidential and maintain the privacy of the parties.
Kingdom, for example, have more recently studied                 They are held in a private setting and attended only by
the implementation and piloting of ODR for low-value             the parties and their attorneys, unless agreed otherwise.
civil claims. ODR will leverage technology to provide            This confidentiality is especially important in complex
litigants with an alternative process to settle disputes         cases, that is, those involving trade secrets, intellectual
largely online. Similar efforts have also been under way         property rights, or other international disputes where
in the Netherlands and British Columbia, Canada (Civil           publicity could have a negative effect on the reputation
Justice Council 2015).                                           or position of the parties, the marketplace, or the
                                                                 political arena.
The following sections will primarily focus on arbitration
and mediation as the most commonly utilized ADR                  Adversarial, often lengthy, and costly. Arbitration
services. Because both services are interlinked, the             proceedings are adversarial in nature and akin to
core elements of arbitration and mediation will also be          judicial proceedings. They are oftentimes lengthy, which
addressed together. Furthermore, for the purposes of             can make them just as costly and time consuming as
this publication and because of the similarities between         trials. Based on World Bank and International Finance
mediation and conciliation, the two services are                 Corporation (IFC) data from 2012, it takes an average
combined into one category termed “mediation.”                   of 326 days to conduct arbitration in most regions of
                                                                 the world, including Eastern Europe and Central Asia,
                                                                 East Asia and Pacific, Latin America and the Caribbean,
Key elements                                                     OECD high-income countries, the Middle East and
                                                                 North Africa, South Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa
Arbitration                                                      (Pouget 2013). This time can be even longer in some
                                                                 countries. For instance, arbitration proceedings take
Provided for by law. Arbitration is widely recognized            560 days in Brazil, 569 days in India, 679 days in Croatia,
and governed and regulated by specific national laws, as         and 910 days in Iraq (Pouget 2013). This, in addition
well as codes of civil procedures in some countries (such        to the time it may take to enforce arbitral awards if a
as Romania and the United Arab Emirates). These laws             dispute arises between the parties, can result in even
generally provide for the use of arbitration, recognition        more delays and higher costs. Because costs are driven
of arbitral awards as an enforceable instrument and              in major part by attorneys’ fees, arbitration is regarded
typically limit the right to appeal and/or vacate awards.        in some economies, including New Zealand, as a costly
As a mechanism that is carried out outside of the                mechanism. Results from a survey of lawyers there
court system, however, its proceedings and scope are             indicated that increased cost was by far regarded as the
a contractual matter that is determined by the parties.          biggest limitation to arbitration (80 percent of lawyers
                                                                 named this as a limitation) (Saville-Smith and Fraser
Consensual and flexible. Arbitration is consensual and           2004).
contractual in nature. Parties agree to use it to resolve
disputes that may arise under a contract generally at the        Binding and enforceable. Arbitration provides finality.
time of entering into it. Arbitration is flexible in the sense   The outcome of arbitration is a binding and final
that it provides parties with the right to select arbitrators    determination of the rights and obligations of the
as well as the rules under which the arbitration will            parties. These awards are enforceable by the courts;
be conducted; moreover, it is carried out by a private           moreover, there is generally very limited basis for appeals
neutral individual or a panel of individuals who are             and an even more limited ability to vacate the awards
selected based on their expertise and knowledge in the           (for example, the U.S. Federal Arbitration Act does
subject matter of the dispute. This ability is a key factor      not provide for the appeal of an arbitration award). In
in cross-border disputes in particular, since it enables the     addition, foreign arbitral awards are enforceable in local
parties to select arbitrators of neutral nationality who         courts provided the country is a party to the 1958 New
are detached from any particular loyalties and who may           York Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of



                                                                          Good Practice Area: Alternative Dispute Resolution   101
      Foreign Arbitral Awards (UNCITRAL 1958). To date, 156
      states have become parties to the Convention.                               BOX 18.
                                                                                  Court-Annexed Arbitration at the Washington,
      Court-annexed arbitration, which is primarily used                          DC Courts
      in U.S. federal and state courts, is another type of                       During the initial scheduling conference in civil
      arbitration that is available in some economies. Unlike                    cases, the judge, parties and attorneys may
      traditional arbitration, which deals mostly with large                     select arbitration as the best forum for reaching a
      complex commercial disputes, its scope is limited to                       settlement. Before arbitration takes place, all sides
      smaller disputes.79 Some state courts in the US (such                      must agree to use either binding or nonbinding
      as in Washington, DC, see box 18) provide this type of                     arbitration. The arbitrator, who may be selected
      arbitration to litigants along with other forms of ADR.                    from a list available in the court, has full authority
                                                                                 to manage the case for approximately 120 days;
      A third form of arbitration is nonbinding arbitration,                     oversee discovery; decide all motions after a case is
      which is by definition different from binding arbitration.                 assigned to him/her; conduct evidentiary hearings;
      Nonbinding arbitration is used by disputants to obtain                     and render decisions. In binding arbitration, the
      an assessment of their positions, the result of which is a                 arbitrator’s decision is final and becomes a judgment
                                                                                 of the court. This decision carries the same weight as
      nonbinding award that can serve to help the parties with
                                                                                 a decision from a judge. In nonbinding arbitration,
      settling the case. It is similar to ENE in that it provides
                                                                                 either side of the case can file a request for a “trial
      the parties with a “reality check” about the merits of their
                                                                                 de novo” or new trial, which is a statement that a
      case and can be beneficial in narrowing down disputed
                                                                                 person does not want the arbitrator’s decision to
      issues and fully or partially settling disputes.
                                                                                 become a court judgment, and that the case should
                                                                                 go to a regular trial process with a judge. If this
      Mediation                                                                  request (trial de novo) is not made, the arbitrator’s
                                                                                 decision will be final and carry the same weight as
      Reduced cost. Mediation is generally a cost-effective                      a decision from a judge. Since 2011 and according
      mechanism for resolving disputes. Whether it is provided                   to court data, the settlement has been 100 percent.
      by the court, which is often free of charge, or carried
      out by private mediators, the cost of mediating cases                      Source: Washington DC courts at http://www.dccourts.gov.

      is far less than processing a case through the court and
      going to trial. Studies in the United States, for example,
      have shown that mediation is an economical option
      compared to the cost of adjudicating disputes and is                    litigants and lawyers agree that ADR reduces costs (with
      also cost efficient for the courts, though only if the cases            the exception of arbitration), provided that a settlement
      are settled (Decker 2013). Mediation reduces costs by                   is reached.
      eliminating attorney, expert, and court fees, as well as
      enforcement costs. In addition, because mediation                       Participatory, flexible, and less formal than court
      tends to result in mutually agreeable solutions, it can also            proceedings and trials. Mediation is premised on the
      serve to prevent future litigation and associated costs.                willingness of the parties to participate and openly
      Even when mediation fails to reach a settlement, it often               discuss their disputes in an informal, flexible setting
      succeeds in narrowing down the scope of the dispute,                    without legal and procedural constraints. The mediation
      which can reduce the length of the trial and the cost of                process itself is therefore not as intimidating as judicial
      litigation. The informality and flexibility of the process              proceedings and does not require adherence to rules
      does not require parties to hire legal counsel, which                   of evidence or any other rules, which contributes to
      can also reduce costs. Studies in Latin America indicate                its effectiveness in many countries. For example, it is a
      that conciliation in Columbia, for example, reduces the                 productive alternative in countries with sizable segments
      parties’ litigation cost by about 50% (Jorquiera and                    of disadvantaged and economically marginalized groups
      Alvarez 2005). This is true also in New Zealand, where                  that may not have the resources or capacity to access



      79	 See 28 CFR 50.20, “Participation by the United States in Court-Annexed Arbitration,”
          https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2010-title28-vol2/pdf/CFR-2010-title28-vol2-sec50-20.pdf.




102   Good Practices for Courts
justice services. It is also useful in countries where greater             of a writ of execution, and in Indonesia, parties have the
traditional and cultural emphasis is placed on sustaining                  option of either submitting the agreement to a judge,
personal and commercial relationships. In addition,                        who will affirm it as a consent judgment, or having it
mediation can often result in atypical settlement terms,                   enforced as a court award.
including an acknowledgment of a party’s role or an
apology, which can play a significant part in preserving
both personal and business relationships.                                  Lessons learned

Confidentiality. Testimony and evidence presented                          Instituting a comprehensive legal framework. As
during mediations, as well as the discussions that take                    evidenced by the experiences of the U.S. federal courts,
place, are confidential and not admissible into evidence                   the courts in Singapore and Hong Kong, and many
in the event that mediation fails and a trial is necessary.                others worldwide that are successfully implementing
                                                                           ADR mechanisms, a clear and detailed legal and
Enforceability. Mediation settlements are based on the                     regulatory framework is essential for supporting the
mutual agreement of the parties, which means that they                     effective introduction and implementation of different
are more likely to abide by the terms of the agreement.                    ADR services. According to World Bank and IFC data,
Settlement agreements are contractual in nature and                        between 2011 and 2012 alone, 59 percent of OECD
as such can be enforced as a contract in the event of                      economies and 43 percent of East Asia and Pacific
noncompliance (which is the case in Australia, Germany,                    and Eastern Europe and Central Asia economies had
the Netherlands, and Hong Kong). In countries where                        amended or adopted, or were in the process of adopting,
the agreement has to be ratified by the court (such                        new laws or provisions on international commercial
as Belgium), ratification gives it the weight of a court                   arbitration, mediation, or conciliation.80 Indeed, the
judgment that can then be enforced. In Italy, once a                       expansion of the legal framework for ADR was the most
judge validates the written agreement, it has the force                    common feature of reform in the Doing Business 2016.



FIGURE 16.	 Perception of the legal ADR framework as an obstacle to FDI, per region


                            3.0
                                                                                                              2.8
                                                                                                  2.7
                            2.5                                                       2.4
                                                                          2.3
                                                  1.9         2.0
                            2.0

                            1.5
                                      1.3

                            1.0

                            0.5

                             0.0
                                      OECD        LAC         EAP         ECA         SAR          SSA        MENA


Source: Pouget (2013).
Note: The Arbitrating and Mediating Disputes study (AMD) Perception score measures the average perception of contributors based on a
scale from 1 to 5, of the extent to which their legal framework on ADR is an obstacle to FDI. The highest scores indicate the regions where
the obstacle is perceived as bigger.


80	 This information comes from the Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) Regulations Database, which is “a World Bank Group initiative comparing
    the regulation of foreign direct investment in 105 economies. The dataset presents quantitative indicators on economies’ laws, regulations
    and practices that affect how foreign companies invest across sectors, start businesses, arbitrate commercial disputes, hire expatriate staff,
    and convert and transfer currency. The indicators are based on a survey of private-sector practitioners and government regulators. They evalu-
    ate the quality of laws and policies, as well as their implementation and enforcement in practice.” For information about the FDI Regulations
    Database, see http://iab.worldbank.org/data.




                                                                                       Good Practice Area: Alternative Dispute Resolution            103
      The laws must in particular address what forms of ADR              exist in national law and provides guidance on the
      services are provided and when, how, and by whom.                  selection and appointment of arbitrators and on arbitral
      Legislation must also identify the court’s discretion              proceedings, among other matters. Unless a country
      in referring cases to ADR; specify associated costs;               has already developed enabling national laws that have
      outline any legal aid schemes (such as the availability of         similar guiding principles, (such as France), adopting the
      waivers and/or exemptions from ADR fees), qualification            Model Law is key to the effectiveness of arbitration. To
      requirements, and application mechanisms; the effects              date, national legislation based on the Model Law has
      of reaching settlement agreements prior to trial; the              been adopted in 72 states in a total of 102 jurisdictions
      enforceability of settlement agreements; and the                   (UNCITRAL 2008). In addition, in order to ensure that
      existence of any incentives for litigants, to name a few           foreign arbitral awards are recognized and enforced by
      requisites (see figure 16).                                        local courts, economies should also become parties to
                                                                         the 1958 New York Convention, which requires national
      Integrating ADR into court processes by developing                 courts to recognize and enforce foreign arbitral awards.
      court rules is essential, especially when the law is not           Failing to join the Convention can thwart local efforts to
      sufficiently detailed. For courts that implement court-            provide more effective arbitrations, which was the case
      annexed programs (such as services provided by the                 in the United Arab Emirates, for example. There, the
      courts), internal regulations are necessary, as they play          process of amending the arbitration law was significantly
      a key role in supporting day-to-day implementation and             delayed due to the fact that the country had not become
      help educate court users on their rights and obligations           a party to the New York Convention.
      (Pouget 2013).
                                                                         Identifying and providing the most appropriate
      A recent study of arbitration in Africa indicated that             ADR mechanism. When considering the range of ADR
      the national arbitration laws in some countries such               mechanisms, courts must balance their needs with those
      as Tanzania provide courts with many opportunities                 of court users while ensuring that cultural norms and
      for procedural intervention, which interferes with the             traditions are respected. Adopting a thoughtful and
      arbitral process and undermines its use and effectiveness          holistic approach to implementing ADR services ensures
      (Namachanja 2015). Sound national arbitration laws                 that the services are tailored to the needs of court users
      should demonstrate a commitment to effective                       and to effective dispute resolution (see box 19).
      arbitration practices. These laws should follow the
      United Nations Commission on International Trade Law               Cultural norms in particular can impact the effectiveness
      (UNCITRAL) Model Law on International Commercial                   of services. Some cultures may be more predisposed and
      Arbitrations, which harmonizes discrepancies that may              open to using informal mechanisms to resolve disputes,




        BOX 19.
        Court-Annexed Mediation Pilot in Thailand
        Mediation in Thailand is specifically governed by the Code of Civil Procedure and corresponding guidelines and
        is a part of the judiciary’s strategic plan. To support and promote its use, the judiciary established the ADR Office,
        which has set up a center where the mediation of civil, commercial, land, probate and family, debt recovery, and
        loan disputes are mediated as part of court-annexed mediation efforts. The judiciary’s approach was based on a
        pilot scheme that included four pilot courts. Based on a detailed evaluation, court-annexed mediation was rolled
        out into other courts. To support the use of mediation, the ADR Office also developed a guidebook that was
        made available to users and stakeholders. The Office is also responsible for recruiting and training mediators and
        cooperates with financial institutions to build its capacity to provide mediation in financial disputes.
        Source: Sorawit Limparrangsri and Montri Sillapamahabundit, “Mediation Practice: Thailand’s Experience” (Paper delivered at the
        11th General Assembly of the ASEAN Law Association, Bali, February 15–18, 2012), http://www.aseanlawassociation.org/11GAdocs/
        workshop5-thai.pdf; and Thammanoon Phitayaporn, “Strengthening the Independence and Efficiency of the Judiciary in Thailand,”
        Thailand Law Forum,
        http://www.thailawforum.com/articles/strengthening3.html.




104   Good Practices for Courts
while others may value and require the formality of a                         volume by case type and court. If a court’s caseload
court judgment. In Southeast Asia, for instance, case                         indicates that the majority of cases filed are complex
studies have shown that there is a cultural preference                        commercial or labor disputes, mediation may not
for informal dispute resolution because of its ability to                     be the best option and more focus should be placed
preserve personal and commercial relationships (USAID                         on providing an effective arbitration framework. In
1998).                                                                        countries with IT capacity but dwindling funding for
                                                                              the justice sector (such as the United Kingdom), ODR
In Sri Lanka, commercial mediation centers established                        may be implemented to free up some of the court’s
by law have been providing mediation services in                              resources while providing an easier and cheaper
commercial disputes since 2000.81 Community media-                            alternative to adjudication for court users. In line with
tion boards established by the Ministry of Justice have                       this, adjusting and implementing new ADR services to
also been highly successful and are viewed as having                          better respond to economic developments is also key to
contributed to peace and encouraging coexistence                              meeting the needs of courts users. In Thailand following
(Gunawardana 2011). Traditional norms in Sri Lanka                            the economic crisis in 1997 and the rise in enforcement
and its history of using informal dispute resolution have                     proceedings, there was a need to reduce enforcement
made mediation widely accepted. In countries (such as                         costs. The country responded by implementing post-
Sri Lanka) where the courts are viewed as historically                        judicial mediation, which is provided at the enforcement
inaccessible, ADR has been introduced and promoted                            of judgment stage—both before enforcement
to increase access to justice services.82                                     proceedings begin and thereafter. To date, mediation
                                                                              centers exist across the country to specifically resolve
There are additional factors that should guide the type                       enforcement issues83 (see figure 17).
of service offered and how it is provided. These include
the level of literacy among a country’s population; the                       Taking a participatory approach. Ensuring that ADR
needs of both the urban and rural population; court                           services are developed and evaluated with input and
resources and capacity; IT capacity and Internet access;                      feedback from the legal community, court users, and
and case filing trends and case data, including case                          other stakeholders is essential. In Hong Kong, for


FIGURE 17.	 Perceived larger impact of mediation



            40
                                                                                                              Mediators           Users
            35
            30
            25
  Percent




            20
            15
            10
             5
             0                                                                                                                            Type of impact
                    Reducing        Reducing         Improving      Providing access     Building       N/A               Not stated
                  court bacllogs   interethnic     social harmony     to justice for   social capital
                                     tensions                        disadvantaged
                                                                         groups



Source: Gunawardana 2011.
Note: Data from the Evaluation of the Mediation Boards programme in Sri Lanka conducted in 2010.


81	 Sri Lanka, Commercial Mediation Centre of Sri Lanka, Act, No. 44 of 2000.
82	 For additional information about the mediation boards, see
    http://www.justiceministry.gov.lk/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=49&Itemid=64&lang=en.
83	 Presentation by Thailand’s Legal Execution Department, delivered at the World Bank, Washington, DC, February 17, 2016.




                                                                                         Good Practice Area: Alternative Dispute Resolution                105
      example, a working group on mediation was established                      Providing options. Offering a range of ADR options
      representing the judiciary, the legal profession, and                      is the best way to meet the varying demands of court
      major mediation service providers to evaluate existing                     users. The needs of the business community often
      services and make recommendations. Consultations                           differ from those of ordinary court users, and the
      were also carried out in which members of the public                       needs within the business community may also vary;
      were invited to comment on all aspects of mediation as                     small business owners may effectively utilize mediation
      well as the working group’s recommendations. Following                     as a means of resolving disputes, saving costs, and
      the consultation, a number of additional groups were                       preserving commercial relationships, while multi-
      established to implement the final recommendations.                        national corporations may not regard mediation as
                                                                                 effective in resolving complex commercial issues.
      Providing voluntary services. As previously stated, ADR                    Appreciating the variation in needs allows courts to
      services are premised on the willingness to participate                    develop and implement targeted ADR services that
      and as such, are generally more effective when not forced                  are useful for everyone. Studies in the United States
      upon the parties. Although making ADR mandatory                            have shown that that over one-third of all federal courts
      may be useful when first introducing services and can                      effectively provide three or more different ADR services
      increase its use, doing so may not necessarily result in                   (Stienstra 2011), as do the vast majority of European
      an increased rate of settlements. Experiences from many                    countries. Some U.S. state courts have approached the
      economies with mandatory ADR schemes at the pre-                           issue by implementing a multi-door approach, which
      filing and post-filing stages (for example, in Abu Dhabi                   essentially offers court users various “doors” or avenues
      and Mali, respectively) indicate that forcing parties into                 for resolving disputes (such as mediation, conciliation,
      ADR can result in it becoming a mere formality and a                       arbitration, neutral evaluations, and so on). Assistance
      hurdle that parties feel they have to get past in order                    from the courts is initially provided to screen cases to
      to get to the next stage, which is trial. Mandating                        determine which option would be most effective. This
      conciliation can also result in a lack of reasonable effort                approach is effectively implemented by the Washington,
      on the part of the parties to reach a settlement (Ebeid                    DC Superior Courts, which provide a host of services
      2015). In addition, mandatory ADR can impose an                            through its Multi-Door Dispute Resolution Division,
      added cost on parties who are not likely to settle as well                 including arbitration and community information and
      as increased costs to the court. A distinction, however,                   referral, as well as child protection, family, medical
      should be made between mandating that parties go                           malpractice, landlord-tenant, probate, tax assessment,
      through mediation or conciliation before filing a case (as                 small claims, and civil mediation. These programs
      in Abu Dhabi) and requiring courts to refer a case to                      have been effective in increasing access to justice
      mediation at any stage in the proceedings. According                       services, and based on court data from 2011–15, have
      to studies in the United States, requiring courts to refer                 been highly effective is resolving disputes, especially
      amenable parties to mediation post-filing does not                         landlord-tenant, small claims, probate, and tax cases.
      reduce the satisfaction with the mediation process or its                  The settlement rate for landlord-tenant cases has ranged
      outcome (USAID 1998).                                                      from 65 to 68 percent; for probate cases from 43 to 55
                                                                                 percent; for small claims from 58 to 73 percent; and for
      Ensuring that services are provided at the right time.                     tax cases from 41 to 51 percent.84
      Being well informed about the merits of the case can
      be a major factor in whether a settlement is reached.                      Piloting and testing. Piloting and testing allow for a
      Despite cost savings if conducted early on, mediation                      robust analysis and evaluation of the services provided.
      tends to be more successful when carried out after the                     These actions also allow for refinement and help courts
      case has reached a stage when the parties and lawyers                      to create buy-in and educate the public and the legal
      have a better and more realistic understanding of the                      and business communities. Many courts worldwide have
      merits of their case and the potential for losing if it goes               adopted this kind of phased implementation approach,
      to trial – one of the reasons why providing for ENE can                    including the Netherlands (court-annexed family
      be helpful in increasing settlement willingness.                           mediation and bankruptcy mediation), Hong Kong,



      84	 For more information, see the annual reports of the District of Columbia Courts,
          http://www.dccourts.gov/internet/about/orgperf/annualreports.jsf.




106   Good Practices for Courts
the United Kingdom, Thailand, the United States, and                              their opinions, and including them in other participatory
numerous other economies.                                                         activities when developing and evaluating ADR services.

Implementing good data collection practices and
evaluating performance. Once implemented, courts                                  Good practice examples
must regularly collect and analyze detailed data by case
and court type and type of ADR service provided, as                               ADR in the Hong Kong judiciary. Hong Kong provides
well as data on cases settled and partially settled. This                         a good example of how courts can holistically approach
will allow courts to evaluate the effectiveness of the                            and promote the use of ADR (in particular mediation)
services, identify any trends and potential demands for                           by providing a solid legal framework, implementing
additional or different programs, or pinpoint any need                            various services, and ensuring public awareness of
for altering the way in which the services are provided.                          their use and benefits. Hong Kong’s legal framework
This data, along with user surveys (lawyers and litigants),                       for mediation was developed in 2009 as a part of the
will enable a detailed evaluation of the effectiveness of                         civil justice reform effort and is an integral part of the
the services provided and are collected by many well-                             courts’ active case management approach to facilitating
performing courts worldwide.                                                      settlements. In fact, the courts are required and have
                                                                                  a duty to encourage the use of ADR. Mediation is
Raising user awareness. When implementing mediation                               specifically guided by two Practice Directions (PDs): PD
and related services, it is necessary to promote and                              31 on Mediation and PD 3.3 on Voluntary Mediation
educate the public and the legal community, particularly                          in Petitions under Companies Ordinances.85 To sup-
on the use and benefits of ADR. Awareness activities,                             plement PD 31, a Mediation Ordinance (Cap 620) was
whether through the provision of information and                                  enacted in 2012 essentially establishing mediation
support mechanisms—such as court-operated mediation                               as the preferred ADR and providing in more detail
assistance offices (as in the Hong Kong judiciary and                             the statutory framework for conducting this service.86
Washington, DC Small Claims Courts) or comprehensive                              Recognizing that different subject matters may require
websites that provide easy access to educational                                  different frameworks, mediation is further regulated
information—are necessary to educate, assist, and                                 by subject matter through a number of other PDs and
promote ADR use among all court users. In California,                             ordinances. Separate PDs govern: 1) family disputes; 2)
court rules mandate that litigants be provided with                               personal injury cases; 3) employee compensation cases;
information about all ADR services at the time of filing.                         4) probate and administration of estate proceedings;
This information package is available online and must be                          5) compulsory land sale cases; 6) construction cases;
included along with the original petition when serving                            and 7) building management cases.87 In addition to the
defendants (Decker 2013). Educating and creating                                  supporting and detailed legal framework, mediation
buy-in from the legal community, on the other hand,                               was also developed with broad feedback and input
may require different efforts. Lawyers are in large part                          from court stakeholders. This participatory approach,
driven by financial gain from the time spent on cases,                            adopted to develop, implement, and evaluate
but they also play a key role in driving settlements. As                          services, was based on establishing the working group
such, careful and targeted efforts should be undertaken                           described above made up of a variety of stakeholders.
to change their mindset and highlight the benefits of                             After a three-month long consultation period in which
expeditious settlements as a way to free up their time                            members of the public were also invited to comment,
to take on more cases. Creating buy-in can also be                                a Mediation Task Force was established to determine
achieved by involving them in pilot schemes, seeking                              how to implement the recommendations with the help




85	 PD 3.3 applies to cases involving disputes between company shareholders (and not disputes involving the interest of creditors or the public inter-
    est), and PD 31 provides for voluntary and confidential mediation (by a third party agreed upon by the parties) in all other civil disputes. To promote
    the use of mediation, PD 31 provides the courts with the authority to impose adverse costs on parties for failure to reasonably engage and partici-
    pate in the mediation; provides for detailed procedures for parties who are legally represented by counsel and another set of procedures when one
    or more of the parties is not legally represented; and provides for a procedure for applying to stay the proceeding pending the mediation.
86	 Cap 620 addresses a number of issues, including confidentiality and the admissibility of communications during mediation into evidence.
87	 For details on the various practice directions, see the website of the Hong Kong judiciary at http://mediation.judiciary.gov.hk/en/practice_directions.html.




                                                                                               Good Practice Area: Alternative Dispute Resolution                  107
      of three groups working specifically on: the regulatory                     was presented. This resulted in the current framework
      framework; accreditation and training; and public                           that unifies domestic and international legislation into
      education and awareness raising.                                            one law based on the Model Law and eliminates any
                                                                                  past restrictions on foreign law firms engaging in and
      Another factor that contributed to the effectiveness                        advising on arbitration in Hong Kong. An Arbitration
      of mediation services is the judiciary’s focus on raising                   Ordinance was also enacted defining the Hong Kong
      public awareness and providing adequate support                             International Arbitration Center (an independent entity)
      services for court users, including access to services and                  as the designating body of arbitrators in the event that
      facilities, information on mediation, and other resources                   parties are not in agreement. In addition, foreign awards
      to help navigate the mediation process. Services are                        can be enforced pursuant to the country’s membership in
      delivered by: 1) the Mediation Information Office, which                    the New York Convention of 1958. Providing this type of
      provides information to litigants and assistance in how                     enabling environment for arbitration has benefited Hong
      to seek mediation from professional bodies and/or to                        Kong. In 2008, the International Court of Arbitration of
      utilize computer terminals to access the court’s website                    the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) opened
      and obtain additional material if necessary; and 2) the                     a branch of its Secretariat in Hong Kong to serve ICC
      Building Management Mediation Coordinator’s Office,                         arbitration in the Asia-Pacific Region, and in 2012, the
      established as a pilot to streamline the processing of                      China International Economic and Trade Arbitration
      building management cases.88 Additional detailed                            Commission (CIETAC), which handles a large number of
      information is also available on the website and                            international arbitration cases, established its first office
      includes: laws, publications, and judgments related to                      outside of mainland China in Hong Kong.90
      mediation as well as videos explaining the process and
      comprehensive information and historic and detailed                         ADR in the U.S. federal courts. For decades, courts in
      court statistics on mediation since the enactment of PD                     the United States have been a leading force in introducing
      31. This holistic approach has proven to be effective                       and using ADR services. The federal courts in particular
      in steadily increasing the use of mediation in both first                   led the introduction and expansion of ADR in the US.
      instance and district courts. Since being introduced in                     They were guided by an enabling legal framework that
      2011, the mediation settlement rate in district courts                      included the enactment of the Civil Justice Reform
      ranged from 46 percent in 2011 to 62 percent in 2015                        Act of 1990 and the Administrative Dispute Resolution
      (these figures apply to civil cases that do not include                     Act of 1990 (later amended, see box 20). This detailed
      family, construction, and other specialized cases listed                    framework drove the establishment of ADR services
      above).89                                                                   by requiring all federal courts to develop cost and
                                                                                  delay reduction plans as well directing that all courts
      A similar approach was undertaken with regard to                            adopt six case management principles, one of which
      arbitration. Until 2011, the arbitration law was not                        is the development of ADR services (Stienstra 2011).
      consolidated, and there were two regulations governing                      To support this mandate, courts were provided with
      the conduct of domestic and international arbitrations.                     support mechanisms such as training and expert on-site
      The regime for domestic arbitration was based largely on                    ADR consultations. These services were provided by
      the United Kingdom’s arbitration law, while international                   the Federal Judicial Center (the education and research
      arbitration was based on the UNCITRAL Model Law.                            agency of the federal courts in the United States) and
      Stemming from a committee recommendation with broad                         its Program for Consultations in Dispute Resolution.
      input from and participation by the Solicitor General,                      The program specifically provided advice to courts
      the legal community, arbitration experts, and relevant                      that were developing ADR services and also supported
      government officials, a proposal for unified legislation                    courts with established ADR options in examining and


      88	 The Building Management Mediation Coordinator’s Office is set up in Land Tribunals to facilitate mediation, answer inquiries, and provide in-
          formation on mediation. Mediation coordinators also hold information sessions and consultations with the parties to provide assistance free of
          charge. Legal advice, however, is not provided by either this office or the Mediation Information Office, and detailed information about both is
          easily accessible on the courts’ website.
      89	 For more information, see the website of the Hong Kong judiciary at http://mediation.judiciary.gov.hk/en/figures_and_statistics.html.
      90	 For more information, see “CIETAC HK Arbitration Centre Enhances HK’s Status as Legal Services Hub,” website of the Hong Kong Department
          of Justice, http://www.doj.gov.hk/eng/public/pr/20120924_pr1.html; and the website of CIETAC at http://www.cietachk.org.




108   Good Practices for Courts
assessing their services using experts who were judges,                  cases and settled, or partially settled, 353 of them,
court clerks, and ADR administrators. In addition, and                   which amounts to a settlement rate of 52.6 percent (U.S.
to further guide courts when developing ADR services,                    District Court 2015a) (See figure 18).
a list of the attributes of a well-functioning court ADR
program were developed. Some of these attributes
include:
                                                                             BOX 20.
►	 defining program goals and characteristics and                            Requirements of the Federal US ADR Act of
   promulgating them in written rules                                        1998 for the U.S. Federal Courts
►	 requiring training                                                        •	 Each district court must by local rule authorize
►	 adopting written ethical rules for mediators                                 use of ADR
►	 defining the scope of confidentiality                                     •	 Each court must by local rule create its own
►	 evaluating and measuring the success of the services                         program
                                                                             •	 Each court must provide at least one type of ADR
As a result of this comprehensive approach and support,                      •	 Each court must by local rule require litigants to
ADR has been institutionalized in the US federal courts                         consider using ADR
as a primary part of judicial case management practices.                     •	 Courts may require litigants to use mediation
A detailed assessment of ADR services in 2011                                   and ENE
determined that all U.S. federal courts were providing                       •	 Arbitration referrals require party consent
ADR services in one form or another (Stienstra 2011).                        •	 Districts may exempt cases or categories of cases
In many courts, multiple forms of ADR are provided,                          •	 Courts must adopt processes for making neutrals
with mediation the most commonly used, followed by                              available
settlement conferences. None of the courts authorize                         •	 Neutrals must be trained
arbitration alone since it is no longer considered a key                     •	 Courts must adopt a local rule on confidentiality
                                                                             •	 Courts must adopt a local rule on conflicts of
ADR service. These conclusions were supported by
                                                                                interest
recent data from a number of federal courts. According
                                                                             •	 Courts with programs must examine their
to the 2015 annual report of the Central District Court
                                                                                effectiveness
in California, 2,630 cases were referred to one of the
                                                                             •	 A program administrator must be designated
three ADR options: 372 cases to a magistrate judge for
                                                                             •	 Funding must be authorized
a settlement conference; 1,290 to the Court Mediation
Panel; and 968 to private mediation (U.S. District Court                     Source: Stienstra (2011).
2015a). Panel mediators conducted mediations in 671


FIGURE 18.	 Cases referred to ADR options in US federal courts


      3000
                                                                                                 2630
      2500                                                                      2426
                                              2320           2243

      2000                                                                                                            Total #

      1500                    1358                                                                                    Panel
                                                                                                    1290
                                                                1130                1186
                                                 1025
              928                                                                                         968         Private
      1000                           863            859                                 874
                    663                                                737
                                        439            436               377                                          Magistrate Judge
       500                                                                                 366                 372
                        265

         0
                 2010            2011           2012            2013                2014                2015



Source: U.S. District Court 2015a.




                                                                                       Good Practice Area: Alternative Dispute Resolution   109
      With regard to user satisfaction, surveys conducted in      appropriate ADR service (that is, mediation, neutral
      2015 in another federal court in California that uses a     evaluation, or arbitration) at the case management
      multi-door program indicated that more than 90 percent      conference unless the parties opt out of the ADR
      of participants using mediation and ENE were satisfied      process. In addition, the court has adopted an active
      with the ADR process and that 84 percent reported that      role in promoting mediation and can consider a party’s
      the benefits outweighed the costs (U.S. District Court      conduct in relation to mediation when determining cost.
      2015b). This court data correlate with generally consis-
      tent trends in other courts showing that mediation has      ADR in the Western Australia district courts. The
      consistently been the most commonly used ADR service.       district courts have performed well in using ADR to
                                                                  resolve cases. All cases filed are subject to some form
      ADR in the Singapore judiciary. The state courts in         of ADR conference prior to securing a trial date. ADR
      Singapore adopted a holistic approach to providing          conferences include an initial pretrial conference that
      ADR services, supported by an enabling legal                the parties and lawyers are required to attend. If the
      framework and an overarching government-wide effort         case does not settle, a special appointment pretrial
      to develop and utilize mediation services in particular.    conference is set up, at which a court registrar mediates
      Today, mediation is entrenched in Singaporean society       the case. The court also has the power to order the
      and institutionalized across the country in the public      parties to mediate the case using a private mediator.
      and private sector. For example, mediation is utilized
      in a structured manner by: 1) public entities (such as      A part of the court’s success in using ADR is the guidance
      the Ministry of Manpower, which resolves employment         provided by clear and detailed court rules. These rules
      disputes; the Government Procurement Adjudication           govern the ADR/mediation process and clarify the
      Tribunal, which hears and mediates disputes related to      role of the parties (for example, parties are required
      procurement by government and other public agencies;        to attend mediation without delay; to participate in
      and the Strata Titles Boards, where mediation is legally    mediation in good faith; and to be responsible for the
      mandated before filing a court case as a way to resolve     costs incurred in the process of referring the case to
      disputes related to real estate development issues); 2)     mediation). To encourage settlements, all evidence and
      the Singapore Mediation Center (SMC) for resolving          testimony provided during mediation is confidential
      private commercial disputes; and 3) the Community           and inadmissible at trial. Failing a settlement, mediation
      Mediation Centers for resolving disputes between            serves to narrow down the issues that will go to trial.
      neighbors, families, and friends. The latter also receive   Mediations are conducted by the courts’ registrars
      referrals from the courts to mediate cases pursuant to      or private mediators. To verify that registrars are
      its enabling law, the Community Mediation Center Act        qualified, the courts focus on building their professional
      (Menon 2015).                                               capacities by ensuring that they are provided regular
                                                                  and continuous mediation and negotiation training. The
      With regard to court-annexed ADR services, mediation        registrars are also accredited mediators for the purpose
      and neutral evaluations are provided for cases that have    of the Australian National Mediation Standards. Pursuant
      been filed. Mediation is carried out by the State Courts    to the data published in the court’s annual reports, its
      Centre for Dispute Resolution (located at the court) and    success in resolving cases by using both mediation and
      may be conducted by judges who work at the center or        pretrial conferences has been consistent in limiting the
      by trained mediators based on agreement of the parties      number of case that are resolved by trial:
      or a referral from the courts. These services have been
      effective as a case management tool and have reduced        ►	 2015: 1.2 percent of all civil cases filed were resolved
      the court’s caseload and served to narrow down issues          by trial
      in cases that failed to settle, which has in turn reduced   ►	 2014: 1.7 percent of all civil cases filed were resolved
      the duration of trials. According to court data, in 2013,      by trial
      7,292 civil and criminal cases were mediated, resulting     ►	 2013: 1.4 percent of all civil cases filed were resolved
      in a 92 percent settlement rate; and in 2014, 6,420 cases      by trial
      were mediated, producing an 89 percent settlement rate      ►	 2012: less than 1 percent of all civil cases filed were
      (Menon 2015). To support these efforts further, the court      resolved by trial
      introduced the presumption of ADR in all civil cases,
      which means that all such cases are referred to the most



110   Good Practices for Courts
References


ABA (American Bar Association). 2006. “Best Practices for Electronic Service of Process (eSOP).” American Bar
       Association, Chicago.

African Union. 2003. “Convention on Preventing and Combating Corruption.” African Union, Addis Ababa,
         available at http://www.business-anti-corruption.com/about/about-corruption/african-union-convention-
         on-preventing-and-combating-corruption.aspx.

Alekand, Anneli. 2008. “The Estonian Universal Enforcement Procedure and the Bailiff as the Taker of Procedural
        Decisions.” Juridica International 15: 115–24.

Amsler, Lisa Blomgren, Tina Nabatchi, Jeffrey M. Senger, and Michael Scott Jackman. 2009. “Dispute Resolution
        and the Vanishing Trial: Comparing Federal Government Litigation and ADR Outcomes.” Ohio State
        Journal on Dispute Resolution 24 (2): 225¬–62.

Bae, Kee-Hong, and Vidhan K. Goyal. 2009. “Creditor Rights, Enforcement, and Bank Loans.” The Journal of
        Finance 64 (2): 823–60.

Batty, K. Kent, Robert J. Colombo Jr, Richard C. Kaufman, Terry R. Kuykendall, Sally A. Mamo, and Helene White.
         1991. “Toward Excellence in Caseflow Management: the Experience of the Circuit Court in Wayne County,
         Michigan: a Guide by and for Practitioners.” National Center for State Courts, Williamsburg, VA.

Bénassy-Quéré, Agnès, Maylis Coupet, and Thierry Mayer. 2007. “Institutional Determinants of Foreign Direct
        Investment.” World Economy 30 (5): 764–82.

BJA (Bureau of Justice Assistance). 1997. “Trial Court Performance Standards with Commentary.” U.S. Department
        of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Washington, DC.

Brown, J. Robert J. 2010. “Non-Random Assignment of Federal Cases and Bank of America.” The Race to the
        Bottom.org, May 20. http://www.theracetothebottom.org/miscellaneous/non-random-assignment-of-
        federal-cases-and-bank-of-america.html.

Byfield, Paul. 2011. “The Publication of Commercial Court Decisions in the Western Commonwealth of
         Independent States.” In Law in Transition 2011: Towards Better Courts. London: EBRD.

———. 2014. “Publishing Decisions of the Higher Commercial Courts in the SEMED Region: Current Status and
     Potential Developments.” Law in Transition 3. EBRD, London.

Byfield, Paul, and Olya Kroytor. 2015. “Accessibility of Judicial Decisions in the EBRD’s Countries of Operations: a
         Comparative Review.” Law in Transition (Online), Article 1. EBRD, London.

Cals Pro (California Association of Legal Support Professionals). 2015. “Best Practices for the Service of Process.”
         Calspro.org, December 5. http://calspro.org/about-us/best-practices.




                                                                                                            References   111
      CEPEJ (European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice). 2006. “Compendium of ‘Best Practices’ on Time
              Management of Judicial Proceedings.” CEPEJ, Strasbourg.

      ———. 2009. “Guidelines for a Better Implementation of the Existing Council of Europe’s Recommendations on
           Enforcement.” CEPEJ, Strasbourg. https://wcd.coe.int/ViewDoc.jsp?p=&id=1565277&Site=&BackColorInt
           ernet=B9BDEE&BackColorIntranet=FFCD4F&BackColorLogged=FFC679&direct=true.

      ———. 2011. “Reports on the Implementation of the CEPEJ Guidelines for Judicial Time Management in 7 Pilot
           Courts/Institutions (from Czech Republic, Georgia, Italy, Norway, Switzerland, United Kingdom.” CEPEJ,
           Strasbourg.

      ———. 2014. “Report on the ‘European Judicial Systems – Edition 2014 (2012 data): Efficiency and Quality.’”
           CEPEJ, Strasbourg.

      ———. 2015. “Good Practice Guide on Enforcement of Judicial Decisions.” CEPEJ, Strasbourg.

      Chung, Jin Yeong, and Sungjean Seo, 2016. “Litigation and Enforcement in South Korea: Overview.” Practical Law,
              Dispute Resolution Global Guide 2015/16, Thomson Reuters, New York.

      Civil Justice Council. 2009. “Civil Court Mediation Service Manual.” Her Majesty’s Court Services, Ministry of
               Justice, London.

      ———. 2015. “Online Dispute Resolution for Low Value Civil Claims.” Online Dispute Resolution Advisory Group,
           Her Majesty’s Court Services, Ministry of Justice, London.

      Clarke, Thomas M., Richard Schauffler, Brian J. Ostrom, Charles Ostrom, and Roger Hanson. 2008. “A Unifying
               Framework for Court Performance Measurement.” National Center for State Courts, Williamsburg, VA.

      Colman, Alan, and Veronica Bradautanu. 2014. “Enforcing Court Decisions in the Commonwealth of Independent
             States, Georgia and Mongolia: a Comparative Review.” Law in Transition 4. EBRD, London.

      Commission of the European Communities. 2006. “Green Paper on Improving the Efficiency of the Enforcement of
            Judgments in the European Union: The Attachment of Bank Accounts.” European Commission, Brussels.

      ———. 2008. “Effective Enforcement of Judgments in the European Union: The Transparency of Debtors Assets.
           Green Paper.” European Commission, Brussels.

      Corsmeier, Joseph A. 2015. “Illinois Lawyer Who Lied about Mother’s Death and Health Problems to Justify
             Discovery Delays and the Continuance of a Hearing Consents To Disbarment.” Lawyers Ethics Alert (blog),
             May 29. https://jcorsmeier.wordpress.com/2015/05.

      Council of Europe. Committee of Ministers. 1984. “Recommendation No. R (84) 5 of the Committee of Ministers
              to Member States on the Principles of Civil Procedures Designed to Improve the Functioning of Justice.”
              Council of Europe, Strasbourg.

      ———. 2001. “Rec(2001)3E, on the Delivery of Court and Other Legal Services to the Citizen through the Use of
           New Technologies.” Council of Europe, Strasbourg.

      Decker, Theresa R. 2013. “Civil Litigation Resolved Through Mediation.” Superior Court of California, Orange
              County. National Center for State Courts, Williamsburg, VA.




112   Good Practices for Courts
District Court of Western Australia. 2009. “Background Paper on the WA District Court’s ARD Program. Submission
          in Response to the Nadrac Issues Paper on Alternate Dispute Resolution in the Civil Justice System.”
          District Court of Western Australia, Perth.

———. 2012. “Annual Review.” District Court of Western Australia, Perth.

———. 2013. “Annual Review.” District Court of Western Australia, Perth.

———. 2014. “Annual Review.” District Court of Western Australia, Perth.

———. 2015. “Annual Review.” District Court of Western Australia, Perth.

ECHR (European Court of Human Rights). 2010. “European Convention on Human Rights.” As amended by Protocol
       Nos. 11 and 14 and supplemented by Protocol Nos. 1, 4, 6, 7, 12 and 13. Council of Europe, Strasbourg.
       http://www.echr.coe.int/Documents/Convention_ENG.pdf.

Ebeid, Omniah. 2015. Assessment of Commercial Case Processes in Mali. Unpublished internal report.
        The World Bank, 2015.

Eisenberg, Theodore, Talia Fisher, and Issi Rosen-Zvi. 2012. “Does the Judge Matter? Exploiting Random
        Assignment on a Court of Last Resort to Assess Judge and Case Selection Effects.” Journal of Empirical
        Legal Studies 9 (2): 246–90.

E-Justice Austria. 2014. ” Use of IT within Austrian Justice.” Federal Ministry of Justice, Vienna.
         https://www.justiz.gv.at/web2013/file/8ab4ac8322985dd501229ce3fb1900b4.de.0/itbroschüre-en.pdf.

Escudero, Carlos, and Altangerel Taivankhuu. 2014. “Strengthening Enforcement of Court Decisions in Mongolia.”
       Law in Transition 8. EBRD, London.

Estonia, Government of. 2006. “Code of Enforcement Procedure.” Riigi Teataja (State Gazette), Tallinn.
         https://www.riigiteataja.ee/en/eli/ee/516092014002/consolide.

European Union. 2008 “Directive 2008/52/EC on Certain Aspects of Mediation in Civil and Commercial Matters.”
       Official Journal of the European Union, May 21.
       http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32008L0052&from=en.

Fabri, Marco, and Phillip Langbroek. 2007. “Is There a Right Judge for Each Case? A Comparative Study of Case
        Assignment in Six European Countries.” European Journal of Legal Studies 1 (2): 292–315.

Fabri, Marco, and Nadia Carboni. 2015. “Saturn Guidelines for Judicial Time Management. Comments and
        Implementation Examples.” CEPEJ, Strasbourg.

Flanders. Steven. 1977. “Case Management and Court Management in United States District Courts.” District
        Court Study Series, Federal Judicial Center, Washington, DC.

Friesen, Ernest C., Edward C. Gallas, and Nesta M. Gallas. 1971. Managing the Courts. Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-
         Merrill.

Goerdt, John, Chris Lomvardias, and Geoff Gallas. 1991 “Reexamining the Pace of Litigation in 39 Urban Trial
        Courts.” National Center for State Courts, Williamsburg, VA.




                                                                                                         References   113
      Goerdt, John, Chris Lomvardias, Geoff Gallas, and Barry Mahoney. 1989. “Examining Court Delay: the Pace of
              Litigation in 26 Urban Trial Courts.” National Center for State Courts, Williamsburg, VA.

      Gramckow, Heike. 2012. “Estimating Staffing Needs in the Justice Sector.” Justice and Development Working
             Paper Series 19/2012, World Bank, Washington, DC.

      ———. 2016. “Beyond International Arbitration. Addressing International Commercial Disputes Locally.”
           Presentation at the World Bank, April 15, 2016, Washington, DC.

      Gramckow, Heike, and Frances Allen. 2011. “Justice Reform in Mongolia: Looking Back, Looking Forward.” Justice
             and Development Working Paper Series 16/2011, World Bank, Washington, DC.

      Gramckow, Heike, and Omniah Ebeid. 2016. “Leveraging Technology to Improve Service Delivery in the Justice
             Sector in South Korea.” Just Development 10, World Bank, Washington, DC.

      Gramckow, Heike, and Omniah Ebeid. 2016a. “Commercial Court and Enforcement Assessment Tool.” World
             Bank, Washington, DC.

      Gramckow, Heike, and Valerie Nussenblatt. 2013. “Caseflow Management: Key Principles and the Systems to
             Support Them.” Justice and Development Working Paper Series 23/2013, World Bank, Washington, DC.

      Gramckow, Heike, and Barry Walsh. 2013. “Developing Specialized Court Services: International Experiences and
             Lessons Learned.” Justice and Development Working Paper Series 24/2013, World Bank, Washington, DC.

      Gramckow, Heike, Omniah Ebeid, Eva Melis and John Sherman. 2014. Doing Business at the Abu Dhabi Judicial
             Department. Assessment of Commercial Case Processes. Unpublished internal report. The World Bank,
             2014.

      Greacen Associates. 2005. “Developing Effective Practices in Criminal Caseflow Management. A Manual Prepared
             for the California Administrative Office of the Courts.” California Administrative Office of the Courts, San
             Francisco.

      Griller, Grodon, Cynthia Savage, Kent Kelly, Erika Friess, David Sayles, and Daniel J. Hall. 2011. “Advancing
                Alternative Dispute Resolution in the New Mexico Judiciary: Key Strategies to Save Time and Money.”
                National Center for State Courts. Williamsburg, VA.

      Gunawardana, Michelle. 2011. “A Justice Alternative: Providing Access to Justice though Two Decades of
            Community Mediation Boards in Sri Lanka.” The Asia Foundation, San Francisco.

      Hannaford, Paula, David Rottman, and Roxana Gonzalez. 2000. “Focus on Business and Complex Litigation
             Courts.” Civil Action 1, no. 1, National Center for State Courts, Williamsburg, VA.

      Hawkey, Kim. 2012. “Service of Court Process by Social Media.” De Rebus 40. http://www.saflii.org/za/journals/
             DEREBUS/2012/40.html.

      Henderson, Keith, Angana Shah, Sandra Elena, and Violiane Autherman. 2004. “Regional Best Practices:
             Enforcement of Court Judgments. Lessons Learned from Latin America.” IFES Rule of Law White Paper
             Series, International Foundation for Electoral Systems, Washington, DC.




114   Good Practices for Courts
Hernandez, Pete. 2013. “Court E-Payments: External Service Providers, In-House Solutions and Beyond.” Institute
       for Court Management, National Center for State Courts, Williamsburg, VA.

Hess, Burkhard. 2004. “Transparency of Debtor’s Assets, Attachment of Bank Accounts, Provisions Enforcement
        and Protective Measures.” Study no. JAI/A3/202/02 on Making More Efficient the Enforcement of Judicial
        Decisions within the European Union. European Commission, Brussels.

HM Courts and Tribunals Service. 2014. “The Admiralty and Commercial Courts Guide.” HM Courts and Tribunals
      Service, London.

IAALS (Institute for the Advancement of the American Legal System). 2009. “Civil Case Processing in the Federal
         District Courts: A 21st Century Analysis.” IAALS, Denver.

ICCE (International Consortium for Court Excellence.) 2014. “International Framework for Court Excellence.” ICCE,
         Melbourne.

ILO (International Labour Organization). 2012. “Statistical Update on Employment in the Informal Economy.” ILO,
         Geneva.

———. 2014. “Thematic Labour Overview: Transition to Formality in Latin America and the Caribbean.” ILO
     Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean, Peru.

———. 2015. “Regional Conference on the Formalization of the Informal Economy. Summary Report.” ILO,
     Geneva.

Intrum Justitia. 2013. “Intrum Justitia Annual Report.” Intrum Justitia, Stockholm.

Investment Climate Advisory Services of the World Bank Group. 2011. “Alternative Dispute Resolution
        Guidelines.” World Bank Group, Washington, DC.

Jappelli, Tullio, Marco Pagano, and Magda Bianco. 2002. “Courts and Banks: Effects of Judicial Enforcement on
         Credit Markets.” Working Paper 58, Centre for Studies in Economics and Finance, Naples.

Jorquiera, Carlos Eugenio, and Gabriel Dabdoub Alvarez. 2005. “The Cost of Disputes in Companies and the Use
        of ADR Methods: Lessons from Nine Latin American Countries.” Alternative Dispute Resolution Network,
        Multilateral Investment Fund, Washington, DC.

Judicial Commission New South Wales. 2014. “Civil Trials Bench Book.” Judicial Commission of New South Wales,
         Sydney.

Judicial Conference of the United States. 2010. “Civil Litigation Management Manual, 2nd ed.” Committee on
         Court Administration and Case Management, Judicial Conference of the United States, Washington, DC.

Kennedy, Kevin, and Olivier Jaar. 2012. “E-filing Case Studies.” Canadian Centre for Court Technology, Toronto.

Kontrec, Damir. 2012. “Organized Real Property Records as a Precondition for Economic Development of the
        Republic of Croatia: Experiences in Organizing Land Registry and Cadastre Records.” Paper presented at
        the Annual World Bank Conference on Land and Poverty, Washington, DC, April 23–26.




                                                                                                        References   115
      Kuijer, Martin. 2013. “The Right to a Fair Trial and the Council of Europe’s Efforts to Ensure Effective Remedies on
               a Domestic Level for Excessively Lengthy Proceedings.” Human Rights Law Review 13 (4): 777–94.

      Kujanen, Kari, and Sami Sarvilinna. 2001. “Approaching Integration: ICT in the Finnish Judicial System.” In Justice
              and Technology in Europe: How ICT is Changing the Judicial Business, ed. Marco Fabri and Francesco
              Contini, 29–43. The Hague: Kluwer Law International.

      Langbroek, Philip M. 2010. “Quality Management in Courts and in the Judicial Organisations in 8 Council of
             Europe Member States.” CEPEJ, Strasbourg.

      Langdon-Down, Grania. 2015. “Mercantile Courts: in the Vanguard of Civil Justice.” The Law Society Gazette,
             December 7.

      Lord Chancellor’s Department. 2001. “Emerging Findings: An Early Evaluation of the Civil Justice Reforms.” Lord
             Chancellor’s Department, London.

      Mackenzie, Ian. 2013. “Requests to Postpone and Adjourn: Balancing Fairness and Efficiency.” Slaw (Canada’s
             Online Legal Magazine), July 3. http://www.slaw.ca/2013/07/03/requests-to-postpone-and-adjourn-
             balancing-fairness-and-efficiency.

      Madir, Jelena. 2011. “Recent Developments in Judicial Reform in Croatia.” Law in Transition 06. EBRD, London.

      Mahoney, Barry, Larry L. Sipes, and Jeanne A. Ito. 1985. “Implementing Delay Reduction and Delay Prevention
            Programs in Urban Trial Courts: Preliminary Findings from Current Research.” National Center for State
            Courts, Williamsburg, VA.

      Massachusetts Court System. 2016. “District Court Joint Standing Order 2-04: Time Standards for Civil Cases.”
             Mass.gov. http://www.mass.gov/courts/case-legal-res/rules-of-court/district-muni/standing-orders/dist2-
             04.html.

      Matthias, John. 2010. “User Requirements for a New Generation of Case Management Systems.” In Future Trends
              in State Courts, 174–79. Williamsburg, VA: National Center for State Courts.

      McMillan, James. 2016. “How Courts Should Respond to a Cyber Attack.” Court Technology Bulletin. March 1,
              http://courttechbulletin.blogspot.com/2016/03/how-courts-should-respond-to-cyber.html.

      Meirlo, Antonius I. M., and Bo Ra D. Hoebeke. 2011. “The Netherlands: Attachment of Assets.” NautaDutilh.
               https://www.nautadutilh.com/PageFiles/7517/2012-05-04-Attachment-of-Assets-tvm.pdf.

      Menon, Sundaresh. 2015. “Building Sustainable Mediation Programs: A Singapore Perspective.” Paper presented
             at the AsiaPacific International Mediation Summit, New Delhi, February 14.

      Messick, Tabitha. 2012. “Service of Process, 2.0.” Digital Media Law Project (blog), July 26. http://www.dmlp.org/
              blog/2012/service-process-20.

      Mole, Nuala, and Catharina Harby. “The Right to a Fair Trial: A Guide to the Implementation of Article 6 of the
             European Convention on Human Rights.” Human Rights Handbooks, no. 3. Council of Europe, Brussels.

      Munby, James Sir. 2014. “Transparency in the Family Courts. Publication of Judgments. Practice Guidance.” Courts
             and Tribunals Judiciary, London.
             https://www.judiciary.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/transparency-in-the-family-courts-jan-2014-1.pdf.



116   Good Practices for Courts
Namachanja, Collins. 2015. “The Challenges Facing Arbitral Institutions in Africa.” Paper presented at the CIArb
      Centenary Conference, “Meeting the Challenges: CIArbs in Africa,” Livingstone, Zambia, July 15–17.

NCSC (National Center for State Courts). 1998. “Report on Trends in the State Courts,” 1997–1998 ed.. National
       Center for State Courts, Williamsburg, VA.

———. 2005. “CourTools.” National Center for State Courts, Williamsburg, VA. http://www.courtools.org/Trial-
     Court-Performance-Measures.aspx.

———. 2011. “Eight Rules of E-Filing: Rule #6 - E-Filing Must Support the Self-Represented.” Court Technology
     Bulletin, September 8.

Neuberger, Lord David. 2015. “A View From on High.” Key note speech presented at the “Civil Mediation
       Conference,” London, May 12.
       https://www.supremecourt.uk/.../speech-150512-civil-mediation-conference-2015.pdf.

New York State Courts. 2011. “E-filing in the New York State Courts. Report of the Chief Administrative Judge
       to the Governor, the Chief Judge, and the Legislature.” New York Courts. https://www.nycourts.gov/
       whatsnew/pdf/eFiling-Report_6-2011.pdf.

Nives Miošic, Nives, and Duje Prkut. 2012. “Access to Information Croatia: Exercise of a Constitutional Right in an
        Institutional Culture of Secrecy.” Gong Research Centre, Zagreb.

NYC (New York City) Global Partners. 2013. “Best Practice: eFiling: Electronic Buildings’ Records System.” NYC
       Global Partners, New York.
       http://www1.nyc.gov/assets/globalpartners/downloads/pdf/NYC_Technology_eFiling.pdf.

OHCHR (Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights).1966. “International Covenant on
      Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR).” OHCHR, Geneva.

———. 1985. “Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary.” OHCHR, Geneva.

Olson, Travis, Marsha Edwards, and Arthur M. Monty Ahalt. 2003. “A Guide to Model Rules for Electronic Filing
        and Service.” Lexis-Nexis File & Serve. http://ncsc.contentdm.oclc.org/cdm/ref/collection/tech/id/514.

Ontario Superior Court of Justice. 2014. “The Guide Concerning Best Practices for Civil Actions, Applications and
        Motions in the Toronto Region.” Superior Court of Justice, Toronto.
        http://www.ontariocourts.ca/scj/practice/practice-directions/toronto/best-practices.

OSCE (Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe). 2010. “Kyiv Recommendations on Judicial
       Independence in Eastern Europe, South Caucasus and Central Asia. Office of Democratic Institutions and
       Human Rights, OSCE, Warsaw.

Otto, Rebecca. 2011. “Best Practices Review: Property and Evidence Room Policies and Procedures Manuals.”
        Office of the State Auditor, Saint Paul, MN.

Pew Charitable Trusts. 2016. “Mobile Payments. Regulatory Gaps, Ambiguities, and Overlap.” PewTrusts.org,
       February 10. http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/issue-briefs/2016/02/mobile-payments.




                                                                                                          References   117
      Pouget, Sophie. 2013. “Arbitrating and Mediating Disputes. Benchmarking Arbitration and Mediation Regimes
              for Commercial Disputes Related to Foreign Direct Investment.” Policy Research Working Paper 6632,
              World Bank, Washington, DC.

      Rosenberg, Maurice. 1965. “Court Congestion: Status, Causes, and Proposed Remedies.” In The Courts, The
             Public, and the Law Explosion, ed. Harry W. Jones, 29–59. New York: Prentice Hall.

      Saville-Smith, Kay, and Ruth Fraser. 2004. Alternative Dispute Resolution: General Civil Cases. Centre for Research
               Evaluation and Social Assessment. Auckland: Ministry of Justice.

      Singapore State Courts. 2015. “Delivering Justice to the Community. Annual Report 2015.” Ministry of Law,
             Singapore. https://www.statecourts.gov.sg/Resources/Pages/AnnualReport.aspx.

      ———. n.d. “e-Practice Directions.” https://www.statecourts.gov.sg/Lawyer/Pages/StateCourtsPracticeDirections.aspx.

      Singapore Supreme Court. 2016. “Supreme Court Practice Directions (Amendment No. 1 of 2016).” Ministry of
             Law, Singapore. http://www.supremecourt.gov.sg/docs/default-source/default-document-library/rules/
             pd-amd-no-1-of-2016.pdf.

      ———. n.d. “e-Practice Directions.” Ministry of Law, Singapore. http://www.supremecourt.gov.sg/rules/practice-
           directions/supreme-court-practice-directions.

      Solomon, Maureen. 1973. “Caseflow Management in the Trial Court.” American Bar Association, Chicago.

      South Africa, Republic of. Office of the Chief Justice. 2015. “Annual Performance Plan 2015/16.” Office of the
              Chief Justice, Midrand, South Africa. http://www.judiciary.org.za/doc/OCJ-APP-2015.pdf.

      Steelman, David. 2003. “Judge Shopping and Random Assignment of Cases to Judges.” National Center for State
             Courts, Williamsburg, VA.

      ———. 2009. “Model Continuance Policy.” National Center for State Courts, Williamsburg, VA.

      Steelman, David C., John A. Goerdt, and James E. McMillan. 2000. Caseflow Management. The Heart of Court
             Management in the New Millennium. Williamsburg, VA: National Center for State Courts.

      Steketee, Martha Wade, and Alan Carlson. 2002. “Developing CCJ/COSCA Guidelines for Public Access to Court
              Records: A National Project to Assist State Courts.” National Center for State Courts and the Justice
              Management Institute, Williamsburg, VA.

      Stienstra, Donna. 2011. “ADR in the Federal District Courts: An Initial Report.” Federal Judicial Center,
               Washington, DC.

      UNCITRAL (United Nations Commission on International Trade Law). 1958. “Convention on the Recognition and
            Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (New York, 1958).” UNCITRAL, Vienna.

      ———. 2008. “UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration 1985: with Amendments as
           Adopted in 2006.” UNCITRAL, Vienna.

      United Nations. 2014. “E-Government Survey 2014: E-Government for the Future We Want.” Department of
              Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations, New York.




118   Good Practices for Courts
UNODC (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime). 2004. “United Nations Convention Against Corruption.”
     UNODC, Vienna.

USAID (U.S. Agency for International Development). 1998. “Alternative Dispute Resolution Practitioners’ Guide.”
       Center for Democracy and Governance, USAID, Washington, DC.

———. 2009. “Reducing Corruption in the Judiciary.” USAID Program Brief, Office of Democracy and Governance,
     USAID, Washington, DC.

USAID and UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2015. “Review on the Advanced International
       Experience and Practices for Implementing E-Justice and Proposals for the Further Development of
       ‘E-SUD’ Information System in Uzbekistan.” USAID and UNDP, Washington, DC and New York.

U.S. District Court. District of Vermont. 2014a. “Revised Case Assignment Procedures.”
         http://www.vtd.uscourts.gov/sites/vtd/files/Notice.Website.GenOrder72.pdf.

———. Northern District of California. 2014b. “Guide to E-Filing New Civil Cases.”
     http://www.cand.uscourts.gov/ecf/caseopening.

———. Central District of California. 2015a. “2015 ADR Annual Report.”
     http://www.cacd.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/ADR_Program_Report_2015.pdf.

———. Northern District of California. 2015b. “ADR Program Report - Fiscal Year 2015.”
     http://www.cand.uscourts.gov/adr/annualreports.

U.S. Global Development Lab. 2013. “Making the Journey from Cash to Electronic Payments: A Toolkit for USAID
        Implementing Partners and Development Organizations.” USAID, Washington, DC.

Van Duizend, Richard, David C. Steelman, and Lee Suskin. 2011. “Model Time Standards for State Trial Courts.”
        National Center for State Courts and State Justice Institute, Williamsburg, VA and Reston, VA.

Warchola, Robert, and Brian Willis. n.d. “Prejudgment Attachments and Fraudulent Conveyance Claims in Fidelity
       Litigation Securing Assets Prior to Judgment – East of the Mississippi.” Shumaker, Loop & Kendrick,
       slk-law.com. http://www.slk-law.com/portalresource/lookup/wosid/cp-base-4-17904/media.name=/
       Prejudgment%20Attachments%20and%20Fraudulent%20Conveyance.pdf.

Webster, Lawrence. 1996. “Automating Court Systems.” National Center for State Courts, Williamsburg, VA.

Woolf, Harry Sir. 1995. Access to Justice: Interim Report to the Lord Chancellor on the Civil Justice System in
        England and Wales. London: Lord Chancellor’s Department.

World Bank. 2004. World Development Report 2005: A Better Investment Climate for Everyone. Washington, DC:
       World Bank.

———. 2009. Doing Business 2010: Reforming in Difficult Times. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2012. Doing Business 2012: Doing Business in a More Transparent World. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2013. “Implementation Completion and Results Report. Mongolia. Enhanced Justice Sector Services
     Project.” Justice Reform Unit, World Bank, Washington, DC.




                                                                                                           References   119
      ———. 2013a. “Improving Court Efficiency: the Republic of Korea’s E-Court Experience.” In Doing Business 2014:
           Understanding Regulations for Small and Medium-Size Enterprises, 66–70. Washington, DC: World Bank.

      ———. 2014. Doing Business 2015: Going Beyond Efficiency. Washington, DC: World Bank.

      ———. 2016. Doing Business 2016: Measuring Regulatory Quality and Efficiency. Washington, DC: World Bank.

      ———. 2016a. “Enforcing Contracts. Measuring Good Practices in the Judiciary.” In Doing Business 2016:
           Measuring Regulatory Quality and Efficiency, 91–98. Washington, DC: World Bank.

      Yanming, Wei. n.d. “New Development of ADR in China.” Presentation at the BRIC Forum, Brazil 03.09.2010,
             online at: http://www.stf.jus.br/arquivo/cms/sobreStfCooperacaoInternacional/anexo/BRIC_intercambio/
             China__New_Development_of_ADR_in_China.pdf.

      Zakaria, Arifin. 2013. “Review of ICT Implementation Mechanism in Judiciary of Malaysia.” Paper presented at the
               “International Seminar on ITC Implementation in Courts.” Bukhara, Uzbekistan, September 18.

      Zorza, Richard. 2013. “Principles and Best Practices for Access-Friendly Court Electronic Filing.” National Center
               for State Courts, Williamsburg, VA.




120   Good Practices for Courts
