                                                                                                Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                         Human Resource Management


                      Analysis of Human Resources Management
                             In the Montenegrin Judiciary
Executive Summary

1.       The Montenegrin judiciary’s strategic goals can only be accomplished through better human resource
management. The sector needs a strategic approach to human resources management that links it to the
judicial branch’s organizational strategy, focuses it on providing services to court users in an efficient manner,
and recognizes that employees are a key asset of the courts.

2.      Overall, approximately 78% of the justice sector’s budget is devoted to personnel; only six EU
countries allocate a higher proportion of their justice sector budget to people. Given a fixed resource
envelope, there is insufficient funding to support expenditures such as ICT that would support improved
performance. Unnecessary rigidities in resource allocation in the sector prevent managers from making positive
trade-offs between personnel and other expenditures (e.g., applying staff vacancy savings to operating costs).

3.     Nonetheless, some budget users and the justice sector in total spend more than their annual
appropriation for human resources. The justice sector lacks adequate controls over personnel spending;
Parliamentary appropriations are at a very high level and subsidiary level controls are missing.

4.      Montenegro has the highest ratio of judges-to-population and an above average ratio of staff-to-
judges compared with the 26 EU Countries for which CEPEJ reported data. A lack of planning and constraints in
resource deployment explain in part the suboptimal system performance. Key problems with human resources
management are as follows:
    a. Judges, prosecutors and staff are added to prior staffing levels in an ad hoc manner, rather than based
        on objective demand or caseloads;1
    b. Greater per capita resources do not correspond to improved performance, with some highly resourced
        institutions resolving fewer cases per judge or prosecutor than their less well-resourced counterparts;
    c. In effect, there is no national judiciary or prosecution service. Appointments and hiring are highly
        localized, and judges, prosecutors, and civil service staff cannot be moved without their consent from
        low to high demand locations within this small country. Few mechanisms exist to incentivize that
        consent, although the Judicial Council recently created new incentives for judges to relocate;
    d. Staffing complements are set without reference to an overall resource rationalization plan. The number
        of support staff per judge or prosecutor varies by as much as 100% between institutions;
    e. Some institutions suffer from a high number of vacancies in authorized staff positions; this does not
        appear to relate to regional recruitment difficulties;
    f. In addition to a large permanently authorized staff, large numbers of temporary staff, contractors and
        volunteers create a ‘shadow workforce’. In particular, in the courts they represent nearly 30% over and
        above the permanent workforce. The extent or purposes of this temporary employment are not easily
        understood or transparently available. Standards and processes for the appointment of these
        employees are unclear and their performance goes largely unmonitored;
    g. The judiciary has not analyzed the proper level of enforcement judge and staff resources given court

1
   Judicial appointments should generally be considered very cautiously. Judges and prosecutors are permanent
investments; once appointed, they are difficult to remove or transfer and generate high unit costs to the system in salaries,
allowances, accompanying staff etc.

                                                             1
                                                                                                     Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                              Human Resource Management

           enforcement workload now compared with 2012, when private bailiffs were introduced and in light of
           escalating enforcement appeal caseloads.

5.      Setting the appropriate number and properly allocating judges, prosecutors, and staff between courts
and PPOs in line with caseload will improve the efficiency of the judiciary and provide more equitable public
access. Vacancies at the Basic Court level should not be filled until the number of judges falls by attrition.
Furthermore, a freeze should be put in place in most areas of staffing and a plan to reduce the total complement
of staff. Meanwhile, the Montenegrin judiciary needs to develop new mechanisms for determining the
appropriate level of court staffing, taking into consideration workloads, performance, and the goals of
transformation. The ‘shadow workforce’ of temporary staff and volunteers should be reduced. Decisions about
the number and deployment of judges and prosecutors (under the auspices of the Councils) and those
concerning non-judge/prosecutor staff (under the Ministry of Justice (MOJ)) should be coordinated.

6.       The system should invest in and foster specialized and analytic roles, such as judicial and prosecutorial
assistants, court managers, ICT administrators, budget analysts, and statisticians – the so called “missing
middle?. The recent departure of several clerical employees from the judiciary makes it timely to reconfigure
the staffing mix by not filling these vacancies and adjusting systematizations to trade large numbers of low-
skilled positions for fewer numbers of higher-skilled positions. Complementary investments in ICT, infrastructure
and process re-engineering would capitalize on new employees’ skills. Adjusting the skills mix in this way
presents a significant opportunity to transform system performance.

7.      In particular, judicial and prosecutorial assistants make an important contribution to sector
performance, and they deserve special attention in HR reforms. Currently, they do not receive any designated,
formal training. Evaluation or promotional criteria are weak despite their potentially critical role in supporting
judges and court administration in processing cases. Many assistants aspire to work in their role only
temporarily as a ‘stepping stone’ to becoming judges or prosecutors. This aspiration is unrealistic in a system
that already has an excess supply of judges. The judicial system should create an attractive and viable career
path for high-performing assistants to advance to key managerial (non-judge) positions in the courts2 in a new
system that values mid-level management. It should also provide training and retraining to enable these judicial
assistants to align their aspirations with that of a modern judiciary.

8.      Systems for the evaluation and discipline of judges and prosecutors have been developed; that for
judges is being piloted. These rules provide a frame for measuring performance and will be strengthened after
the pilot. Evaluations should be linked to promotion and career progression and incentives built in to encourage
judges and prosecutors to develop their skills through continuing training. Specific criteria for evaluating Court
Presidents and Public Prosecutors that recognize their significant case flow and management responsibilities for
both judicial and non-judicial activities is needed.

9.       There is an acute need for training and capacity building across the judiciary . Looking forward, the
Judicial Training Center should focus more on continuing training and lead a large-scale capacity building
initiative for judges, prosecutors, assistants and court staff alike. Training could cover all aspects relevant to the
transformation to a modern European judiciary, based on a comprehensive training needs assessment.

10.   Overall, the judiciary needs clearer assignment of responsibility for human resources policy making,
more sophisticated management, and better-defined systems for human resources than are currently in


2
    This could include as senior advisers, analysts, court administration professionals, court managers, chiefs of cabinets, etc.

                                                                  2
                                                                                          Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                   Human Resource Management

place.
             a. Introduction

1.      Montenegro’s courts and PPOs are labor-intensive public service organizations operating in a
resource-constrained environment. The judiciary employs nearly 1,800 individuals3 across 44 institutions
including courts, PPOs, the Supreme Court, the Public Prosecutor, the MOJ and the Judicial Training Center.
These employees are divided into three groups: 1) judges and prosecutors, 2) civil servants (from executive
management to clerical staff) and public employees (for example, janitors and drivers). More effective use of
these numerous and varied human resources would allow the judiciary to perform efficiently, better use non-
labor resources such as technology and capital assets, and enhance accessibility, efficiency and quality of judicial
service delivery.

2.       Resource constraints require that funding for human resources be based on confirmed workload
considerations, that the most appropriate individual be assigned to most improve service delivery, and that
processes be examined to ensure they are as efficient as possible. Montenegro’s judicial sector needs a
strategic approach to human resources management that links it to the judicial branch’s organizational strategy,
focuses it on providing services to court users in an efficient manner, and recognizes that employees are a key
asset of the courts.

3.     Human resources management is composed of several interrelated functions, illustrated at Figure 1
and described in Box 1 below.

Figure 1: Framework for Analysis of Human Resource Management4

                          Determining
     Strategic                                    Job analysis/               Salary                Recruitment
                         organizational
     planning                                     descriptions            analysis/setting          and selection
                           structure




         Promoting          Discipline and           Performance            Training and
                                                                                                     Orientation
           ethics             discharge              management             development




3
 Excludes staff of misdemeanor courts.
4
   National Center for State Courts, Core Competencies, Human Resource Management Resource Guide:
http://www.ncsc.org/topics/human-resource-management/human-resource-management/resource-guide.aspx.

                                                         3
                                                                                                   Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                            Human Resource Management

    Box 1: Strategic HR Management in the Judiciary

    In line with this framework, efficient and effective HR management in the judiciary requires:
           a. a strategic vision and an organizational structure that reflects needs and anticipates emerging ones while
               eliminating unnecessary bureaucracy;
           b. job analyses incorporating essential duties, core competencies (knowledge, skills, and abilities), and rankings
               reflecting differences between classifications in position descriptions;
           c. salaries set to attract, retain and motivate employees, while ensuring internal equity and budgetary
               soundness;
           d. recruitment of high-quality applicants, selection using job-relevant, efficient and transparent tools;
           e. employee orientation and training programs to improve justice system performance;
           f. strong performance management, including setting individual performance expectations tied to institutional
               goals, objectives and appraising performance;
           g. fair and consistent discipline, transfer, demotion, and termination of employees with inferior performance to
               ensure optimal organizational service delivery; and
           h. promotion of ethical behavior on the part of judges, prosecutors, and staff to enhance public trust and
               confidence in the judicial sector.


4.      The judiciary’s strategic goals can only be accomplished with better human resources management.
Goals that will be advanced by improved human resources management include:
            a. increased efficiency, accountability and transparency;
            b. clear productivity and performance standards, effective use of judicial and prosecutorial
                 resources, and a strong system for education and training; and
            c. empowering the Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils to improve the effectiveness and
                 performance of the judiciary jointly with Court Presidents and MOJ.

5.       United Nations (UN) and Council of Europe (CoE) standards5 directly address human resources issues
for judges and Deputy Prosecutors, and their importance to the independence and service delivery of the
judicial system. These standards require transparent and effective appointment, promotion, evaluation,
discipline and discharge of judges and prosecutors, and stress the necessity of initial and in-service training.

6.      For civil servants, European good practices focus almost entirely on performance management,
including creating pay differentials that provide an incentive for high-quality performance. Consistency,
fairness, and transparency are the underpinnings of these standards. Although not explicitly addressed by
European standards, performance management depends on other elements of the human resources cycle
above (e.g., hiring the right individuals impacts their performance).

7.       The current highly decentralized and haphazard human resources system hinders the judiciary’s
ability to improve service delivery and transformation. As in the rest of the public sector, individual courts and

5
  See UN Standards: Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary (General Assembly resolutions 40/32 of 29
November 1985 and 40/146 of 13 December 1985); and Guidelines on the Role of Prosecutors (Adopted by the Eighth
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana, Cuba, August 27 to
September 7, 1990). See also Council of Europe standards: Recommendation of Committee of Ministers (94) 12 on
independence, efficiency, and role of judges (from 1994) and Recommendation (2000) 19 on the role of public prosecution
in criminal justice system; Consultative Council of European Judges (CCJE – established by COE) adopted European Charter
on the Statute for Judges (1998); Consultative Council of European Prosecutors (CCPE – established COE) adopted European
Guidelines on ethics and conduct for public prosecutors: ‘The Budapest Guidelines‘ (2005). However, they do not address
human resources management related to civil servants or public employees.

                                                                4
                                                                                             Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                      Human Resource Management

PPOs directly employ civil servants and public employees. However, there is no single body that drives human
resource policy making. Supervisory bodies (the Judicial Council, Prosecutorial Council, Supreme Court, Chief
State Prosecutor and MOJ) should determine the key areas where human resource management can drive
performance, and each should contribute their part to elevating Montenegro’s human resource capacity.

           b. Personnel Allocations and Expenditures

8.      Overall, approximately 78% of Montenegro’s justice sector’s budget is spent on personnel; only six
countries in the EU spend more on people.6 The large proportion of spending on personnel leaves few
resources for other performance-enhancing expenditures such as information technology.

9.      The amount allocated to personnel by justice instittuions varies widely, with prosecution
administration spending nearly 100% and the judiciary less than 80% of its allocation on people. The
differences in the percentage of budget devoted to human resources are likely related to absence of
information technology in prosecutors’ offices.

Figure 2: Percentage of Budget Devoted to Personnel by Budget User – 20147




10.    Some justice sector budget users expend more than both their total annual appropriation for human
resources appropriation because the justice sector lacks adequate controls over personnel spending. For
example, in 2014, total Judiical Council expenditures were 65% above its budget while personnel expenditures
exceeded the personnel budget by 13%. As a small institution, this overexpenditure does not represent a large
amount of funding. However, the judiciary overspent its approximately €10 million annual budget by 15%, with
personnel expenditures exceeding the budget by 2%, pointing to a much more significant financial concern. This

6
  Croatia, Greece, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Portugal and Spain, European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ),
Study on the Functioning of Judicial Systems in the EU Member States, Facts and Figures from the from the CEPEJ
2012-2014 Evaluation Exercise. See http://ec.europa.eu/justice/effective-justice/files/cepj_study_scoreboard_2014_en.pdf
7
  Law on Amendments to the Law on Budget of Montenegro for 2015, Official Gazette 047/15, 18.08.2015.

                                                           5
                                                                                                 Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                          Human Resource Management

occurs because Parliamentary appropriations are at a very high level (e.g., at each group of institution, for
example, all courts) but subsidiary level controls are currently missing. For example, a given basic court may now
fill positions without MOF approval but without a specific allocation against which to control expenditures,8
over (or even under-)expenditures by this court for salaries are not easily identified. Providing courts as well as
prosecutor offices with specific budgets against which they must control expenditures will not only improve
fiscal management but will encourage institutions to more carefully consider funding tradeoffs. The comparison
of personnel budgets to expenditres should be recalculated once 2015 expenditure information is released by
the government.

Figure 3: Percentage Execution of Total and Personnel Budgets by Budget User - 20149

    200%

    180%
             165.18%
    160%

    140%                114.83%                                                      106.76%

    120%                             102.74%
                                                 95.61%
              112.95%                                                  95.30%                           Total Budget
    100%                                                    86.48%
    80%                    102.37%     101.05%     93.51%                                               Gross Earnings
                                                                  86.37%
                                                                                       99.38%
    60%

    40%

    20%

     0%
             Judicial   Judiciary    Judiciary     Prose-     Pros.         Pros.     Total
             Council                  Admin.       cution    Admin.        Council   Sector




11.    Salary levels have not historically been responsbile for the over-average spending on personnel in
Montenegro compared to other countries. Salaries for judges and prosecutors were 2.3 times higher than the
average national salary, comparable to the average in the EU. This compares well with European benchmarks,
where the salaries of judges are on average 2.3 times higher than the national average salary. Like most
European jurisdictions, Montenegro does not apply a difference between the salaries of judges and prosecutors.

12.      However, signficant salary increases for judges, prosecutors, and some advisors implemented in
March, 2016 may bring the ratio to the average national salary higher than that in Europe10 and extend salary
differentials between these office holders and civil servants, who did not receive pay increases similar in size
(see discussion in Human Resources Equity section below).

8
   Prosecutor offices must still receive MOF approval to fill positions. The judiciary plans to provide them with individual
budgets as well.
9
   Law on Final Budget Account for 2014, Official Gazette 078/15, 31.12. 2015.
10
    As other countries may also have increased judicial and prosecutorial salaries since the 2014 CEPEJ study, it is not
possible to compare current salary ratios between Montenegro and EU member states.

                                                              6
                                                                                          Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                   Human Resource Management


13.     Controls on expenditures for “other personal income? appear weak, exceeding the budget for that
item by 70% in 2014.

Figure 4: Execution of Other Personal Income (€0.6m) - 201411

 400%


 300%


 200%


 100%


      0%




14.      Because the sectors’ budgets are appropriated at a high level (e.g., for all courts) and subsidiary
controls are not maintained, it is not possible to identify if given courts or prosecutors’ offices spend a much
higher than average amount on this category. However, the total Euros spent in this category (€0.6m) and the
percentage of budget spent on non-salary compensation is quite low, ranging from 0.3% for judiciary
administration to 3.4% for prosecutorial administration. Only the Judicial Council spends a significant portion of
its budget (21.2%), likely for payments to those serving on the Council on secondment from other institutions.
This issue should be investigated further by the justice sector.

15.     Ensuring adequate control of other personal income will be particularly important with the
introduction of incentives offered to judges to relocate from under- to over-burdened courts. The Judicial
Council should evaluate the cost effectiveness and necessary duration of these incentives.

              c. Staffing Levels and Methodology

                i.   Number of Judges and Prosecutors

16.     Montenegro has traditionally lacked a methodology for determining the number of needed judges
and prosecutors. Over time, the number of judges and prosecutors has been determined by additions to a
baseline number without considering changes in caseloads, procedural changes or new needs of the judiciary.



11
     Law on Final Budget Account for 2014, Official Gazette 078/15, 31.12. 2015.

                                                               7
                                                                                               Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                        Human Resource Management

As most judges were unwilling to move locations, staffing patterns have become rigid.12 However, the judiciary
has begun to transfer cases from busy to less-busy courts. For example, nearly 1,000 litigation cases have been
transferred to the relatively less-busy Cetinje Basic Court from the Kotor and Podgorica Basic Courts, with an
expectation of another 400 to follow. This is a good practice but should not undercut the need to evaluate long-
term staffing needs.

17.     Once positions are created, vacancies are typically filled even if there is not an objective need to fill
them. Appointments of judges and prosecutors should always be considered cautiously, recognizing that judges
and prosecutors are permanent and significant investments. Once appointed, they are difficult to remove or
transfer and generate high unit costs to the system in terms of salaries, allowances, accompanying staff, etc.

18.     At present, 99% of authorized Basic Court judgeships are filled, with 94% of all judgeships filled:

Table 1: Number of Judges by Court Type, 201513

                                                            # of Judges
                 Court type                                 Authorized*             Filled
                 Basic Courts                               149                     147
                 Higher Courts                              57                      49
                 Misdemeanor Courts                         50                      43
                 High Misdemeanor Court                     7                       7
                 Appellate Court                            13                      12
                 Administrative Court                       12                      12
                 Commercial Court                           16                      16
                 Supreme Court                              19                      19
                 TOTAL                                      323                     305


19.     At 5.3 judges per capita, Montenegro currently has approximately twice the average of filled judge
positions per capita as other jurisdictions in Europe had in 2012. Figures for Montenegro should be compared
to those from CEPEJ 2014 when that data is available. The number of judges by court type in Montenegro is
shown in Table 1 above, and comparative figures are shown in Figure 5 below.

Figure 5: Number Judges per 100,000 Inhabitants, Montenegro and EU Member States, CEPEJ 201214




12
   The Judicial Council should evaluate how many judges have voluntarily changed court seats in the last five years, survey
judges about why they are reluctant to relocate and continue evaluating voluntary relocations under its new incentive
program.
13
   Authorized judgeships: 2015 Decision on the number of judges; includes 57 recently authorized misdemeanor judges.
Filled judgeships: Website sudovi.me (lists of judges).
14
   Data from EU Member states: CEPEJ EU Justice Scoreboard 2014 based on 2012 data. Montenegro data: 2015 Decision on
the number of judges; includes 57 recently authorized misdemeanor judges.

                                                            8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Human Resource Management

 60


 50


 40


 30


 20


 10


     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lithuania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Poland
                                                                                                                                                   Romania



                                                                                                                                                                                Latvia
                                                Cyprus



                                                                         Sweden




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bulgaria
                                                                                                                              Austria



                                                                                                                                                             Greece
                                                                                                                                        Portugal




                                                                                                                                                                                         Slovakia



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Hungary



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Luxembourg
                                                                                                          Estonia
                     Denmark


                                       France


                                                         Italy




                                                                                            Netherlands


                                                                                                                    Finland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Czech Republic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Montenegro
           Ireland


                               Malta




                                                                 Spain


                                                                                  Belgium




                                                                                                                                                                      Germany




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Slovenia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Croatia
         20. CEPEJ notes that states with over 30 judges per 100,000 inhabitants can be found primarily among the
states coming from the Former Yugoslavia, including Croatia, Serbia,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Montenegro has approximately
Macedonia, Montenegro and Slovenia.15                                                                                                                                                                                      twice the filled judge positions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           per capita compared with other
21.      Montenegro’s high proportion of judges to population is not due                                                                                                                                                   jurisdictions in Europe, despite a
to a higher per capita caseload than in EU member states. Other countries                                                                                                                                                  lower than average number of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cases per population.
have more incoming cases per capita and yet have many fewer judges per
capita. For example, comparing other Eastern European countries’ civil and commercial caseload with
Montnegro entire court caseload,16 we find that:

               •           Croatia has 80% of the per capita judges of Montenegro but more than twice the number of cases
                           per capita;
                          Slovenia has slightly fewer per capita judges but three times the per capita cases;
                          Poland functions with about half the number of judges per capita but more than 2 1/2 times the
                           number of per capita cases.17


Figure 6: Number of incoming non-criminal cases per 100,000 inhabitants, CEPEJ 201218


15
    See CEPEJ Evaluation Report, 2014 (based on 2012 data).
16
   Includes criminal cases.
17
   Other EU member states such as Austria and Denmark show even greater disparity between judges per capita and
caseloads per capita.

                                                                                                                                                     9
                                                                                                 Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                          Human Resource Management

          75000



          60000



          45000



          30000



          15000



               0




22.     The Judicial Council is not required to determine the needed number of judges on a regular basis as in
other countries in the region.

23.     The judiciary has also failed to seize opportunities to adjust the number of judicial positions when the
functions of courts have been reduced. For example, when prosecution-led investigation commenced in 2010,
criminal investigations became largely a prosecutorial rather than court responsibility; the impact analysis
accompanying the authorizing statute indicated that the workload of 20 investigating judges would be
eliminated. While investigating judges were encouraged to consider transferring to the prosecution service, it is
unclear how many did so. In addition, the role of trial judges has changed as they may now return cases to
prosecutors if more needs to be done (this was previously done by the judges). Despite this significant reduction
in court jurisdiction, three judgeships have since been added to the system since that time.19 These additions
jeopardize the sector’s ability to find resources necessary for ICT, innovation and infrastructure upgrades.

24.     Recently, MOJ, with the assistance of EUROL, engaged in a rigorous examination of whether the
number of judges, advisors and court staff comport with the time needed in the court to dispose of cases
given their level of complexity.20 This type of study, known as a weighted caseload study (CWS in Montenegro),
21
   found that the judiciary has an excess of 64 judges to maintain its current workflow but would need a few
more judges (5 total) on a temporary basis than are in place at present to eliminate the backlog. The CWS found
the system employed between 72 and 101 excess advisors, even given the current backlog.

18
   Includes only countries that submitted data in civil, commercial and enforcement cases. As a significant outlier with many
fewer per capita cases than other countries, France was excluded from the comparison.
1919
     According to the 2011 Court Performance Report, there were 260 authorized judgeships in 2011, while there are 263 at
present, excluding misdemeanor judges.
20
   The analysis for support staff is being revised.
21
   Montenegro Case Weighting Study, Final Report with Recommendations, Maja Grubišin, EUROL STE, October 2015.

                                                             10
                                                                                              Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                       Human Resource Management


Table 2: Comparison of Authorized Judges and Advisors to CWS Results

 Judges
                                                                  Need                Budgeted          Budgeted
                                                  Need            Assuming            Versus Need       Versus Need
                              Budgeted            Assuming        Ongoing             with     No       with Ongoing
Court                         (Decision)          No Backlog      Backlog             Backlog           Backlog
Commercial Court              16                  8               13                  -8                -3
Subtotal High Courts          57                  49              63                  -8                6
Subtotal Basic Courts         149                 101             151                 -48               2
Total                         222                 158             227                 -64               5
Advisors
                                                             Need                     Budgeted          Budgeted
                                                  Need       Assuming                 versus Need       versus Need
                              Budgeted            Assuming   Ongoing                  with     No       with Ongoing
Court                         (Decision)          No Backlog Backlog                  Backlog           Backlog
Commercial Court              20                  4          7                        -16               -13
Subtotal High Courts          63                  17         21                       -46               -42
Subtotal Basic Courts         94                  55         77                       -39               -17
Total                         177                 76         106                      -101              -72

25.     The figures assuming maintenance of the usual rate of dispositions (rather than eliminating the entire
backlog) appear more realistic. Of the 3,671 cases unresolved as of December 31, 2015,22 68% (2,489) are less
than three years old and do not represent a backlog that requires special attention to eliminate. At the same
time, some of the oldest backlogged cases –dating back as far as 198223 -- are very unlikely to require a level of
effort equivalent to that for current cases. The EUROL study also assumes continued use of current work
methods and does not consider measures to improve efficiency through better use of support staff24, revised
procedures, and increased use of technology. Even if all of the 64 judgeship positions found to be excess were
reduced (for example, through attrition by retirement, transfer to prosecution etc.), MNE would still be at 4.2
judges per 100,000 population, the very high end of the population to judge ratio. Based on the experience of
other countries, more efficiencies can be achieved, particularly given the Montenegrin judiciary’s recent
experience of individuals being willing to transition between the role of judge and prosecutor.

26.     With an apparently larger-than-necessary pool of judges, new judicial appointments should not be
made. The Judicial Council should fulfill its obligation to systematically determine the number of needed judges.
Until those methodologies are developed and formalized, there is no reasonable or transparent basis to justify
adding more people to the already-bloated system.

27.     On the other hand, the ratio of population to prosecutor places Montenegro at the low end of

22
   See Pregled rjesavanja starih predmeta na 31.12.2015, MOJ.
23
   10% of unresolved cases filed more than three years ago – representing an actual backlog – have been unresolved for ten
or more years. It is unclear how much work effort these cases require.
24
   Including advisors, who could serve a stronger role in case processing.

                                                           11
                                                                                             Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                      Human Resource Management

countries of Central and Eastern Europe. Montenegro currently has 14 prosecutors per 100,000 inhabitants,25
compared to a regional range of 14.8 to 25.7 prosecutors per 100,000 population in Poland, Hungary, Slovakia,
Montenegro, Bulgaria and Lithuania.26 Montenegro’s ratio is high compared to that in Western Europe where,
however, prosecutors are more likely to be supported by larger numbers of mid-level specialist staff.

28.    In 2015, Montenegro counted 131 Prosecutors and Deputy Prosecutors organized across four
prosecution levels (see Table 3 below).

Table 3: Number of Prosecutors and Deputy Prosecutors in Montenegro, 201527

                                                           # of Prosecutors
                 Type of Office                            Authorized                 Filled
                 Basic Prosecutors' Office                 85                         82
                 High State Prosecutor's Office            24                         19
                 Special Prosecutor's Office               11                         11
                 Chief State Prosecutor's Office           11                         9
                 TOTAL                                     131                        121



29.     The number of prosecutors has remained relatively stable, other than a notable increase in election of
35 new state prosecutors, 30 advisors and 50 state employees with the introduction of prosecutor-led
investigations in 2010.

            ii. Distribution of Judges and Prosecutors

30.    The ratio of judges and prosecutors per 100,000 population per institution vary by as much as 85%.
The number of judges per population is not related to the overall size of the court: many small courts have a
high population to judge ratio and one large court (Kotor) has a low population to judge ratio.28




25
   2015 Decision on the Number of Prosecutors.
26
   Judicial Systems of the European Union Countries – Analysis of data by the European Commission for the Efficiency of
Justice (CEPEJ) Council of Europe, June 2013, available at http://www.canestrinilex.com/assets/Uploads/en/CEPEJ-report-
2013.pdf.
27
   Source authorized prosecutors: 2015 Decision on the number of prosecutors. Source filled prosecutor/deputy prosecutor
positions: http://tuzilastvocg.me/media/files/ODLUKA%20O%20BROJU%20DRZAVNIH%20TUZILACA.pdf
28
   Permanent area population is one but not the only indicator of needed resources; seasonal swings in population may
also impact filings in prosecutors’ offices and courts.

                                                          12
                                                                                            Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                     Human Resource Management

Figure 7: Population per Judge in Basic Courts - 201529




Figure 8: Population per prosecutor in basic prosecutors’ offices – 201530




29
   Source authorized judges: 2015 Decision on the number of judges; includes 57 recently authorized misdemeanor judges.
Source (population): Government Analysis on Need for Rationalizations of Judiciary Network.
30
   Budgeted prosecutor positions: 2015 Decision on the Number of Prosecutors by Office. Population: Government Analysis
on Need for Rationalizations of Judiciary Network.

                                                          13
                                                                                                  Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                           Human Resource Management


31.    Wide regional variations in the distribution of these resources is also evident. The Central Region has
approximately 50% more judges and prosecutors per capita than the southern region, regardless of whether
planned or filled positons are considered.

Figure 9: Per Capita Regional Differences in Filled Judge Positions - 201531

                                          5000                              4738
     Ratio oof filled judge position to




                                          4500        4136
                                          4000
           regional population




                                          3500                                                  3206
                                          3000
                                          2500
                                          2000
                                          1500
                                          1000
                                          500
                                            0
                                                 Northern region        Central region    Southern region

                                                                   National average


Figure 10: Regional Differences in Budgeted Deputy Prosecutor Positions – 201532




31
   Filled judgeships: Website sudovi.me (lists of judges). Regional populations: Government Analysis on Need for
Rationalizations of Judiciary Network. Regions defined as northern (Berane,Bijelo Polje, Zabljak, Kolasin, Plav, Pljevlja,
Rozaje), central (Danilovgrad ,Nikšić, Podgorica, Cetinje) and southern (Bar, Kotor, Ulcinj, Herceg Novi).
32
   Budgeted prosecutor positions: 2015 Decision on the Number of Prosecutors by Office. Regional populations:
Government Analysis on Need for Rationalizations of Judiciary Network. Regions defined as northern (Berane,Bijelo Polje,
Zabljak, Kolasin, Plav, Pljevlja, Rozaje), central (Danilovgrad ,Nikšić, Podgorica, Cetinje) and southern (Bar, Kotor, Ulcinj ,
Herceg Novi).

                                                                           14
                                                                                              Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                       Human Resource Management

                                       10000
                                                                           8641
     position to regional population
                                        9000
     Ratio of budgeted prosecutors



                                        8000
                                                    6840
                                        7000
                                        6000                                                5385
                                        5000
                                        4000
                                        3000
                                        2000
                                        1000
                                           0
                                               Northern region        Central Region   Southern Region

                                                                 National average


32.     Population is only one indicator of possible workload. Direct indicators such as filings and dispostions
tell a more complete story. Preliminary data indicate that institutions with more judges of prosecutors per
capita perform no better than their less well resourced counterparts. For example, increased clearance rates,33
a primary idicia of performance, do not increase with the per capita number of judges or prosecutors.

Figure 11: Court Clearance Rates Compared to Resources- 201534




33
   Clearance rate as used here is the number of disposed cases as a percentage of the number of filed and pending cases in
a given time period. A clearance rate of 100% means the court has disposed of as many cases as were filed or open at the
beginning of a given year. A clearance rate under 100% means the court has disposed of fewer cases than were filed or
open at the onset of the year, resulting in an increase in cases awaiting disposition. The more traditional definition of
clearance rates considers only newly filed cases and not those in inventory at the beginning of a given year. In impacted
justice systems, considering cases that remain at the beginning of a year is critical.
34
   2015 Annual Report on Performance of the Courts, Supreme Court; comparative analysis by World Bank.

                                                                         15
                                                                                                      Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                               Human Resource Management


                                                    Average Clearance Rate
 100%                                                                                                            95%
                                            88%
  90%                                                                                                     79%
                                  78%                                          78%
  80%                       75%                                 69% 70%
  70%
  60%        52%
                    63%                           60% 63%                            56% 59% 64%
  50%
  40%
  30%
  20%
  10%
   0%




       Below Average per Capita Resources           Average per Capita Resources         Above Average per Capita Resources

Figure 12: Basic Prosecution Clearance Rate Compared to Resources-201535


                                                        Average Clearance Rate
     100%                     92%                       90%      90%     90%                                      90%
             86%      87%                                                                                 86%
      90%                                                                                        82%
      80%                                         75%
      70%                             70%
                                                                                   59%   60%
      60%
      50%
      40%
      30%
      20%
      10%
       0%




       Below Average per Capita Resources          Average per Capita Resources          Above Average per Capita Resources




35
     2015 Annual Report on Prosecution Services, Chief Prosecutor’s Office; comparative analysis by World Bank.

                                                                  16
                                                                                         Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                  Human Resource Management

33.     Drawing conclusions from this data is difficult as data elements, are not clearly defined, particularly by
prosecutors’ offices,. For example, prosecutors’ offices may include only indictments in dispositions, ignoring
rejected criminal charges, dismissals or other prosecutor decisions. A “charge? upon which filings, pending cases
and dispostions are based for prosecution offices is also ill-defined and may represent individual counts
separated out or multiple offenses in a single crime counted collectively; similarly, either individual defendants
may be counted or collections of individuals accused of a single offense grouped together. The justice sector
needs to clearly define the manner in which filings and dispositions are to be counted both for courts and
prosecutors and perform periodic data audits to ensure compliance. Once data definitions are clear,
performance should be compared again to resource allocations.

34.     Even absent these comparisons with performance, it is clear that judges and prosecutors are not well
distributed through the country. The January, 2016 implementation report for the justice sector action plan
indicates that since adoption of the Plan for Vacant Court Seats in May, 2015, only judges from the Bijelo Polije
Commercial Court have been voluntarily relaocated to the Podgorica Commercial Court. The pace of transfers
needs to be increased, particularly given the small distances between some institutions of like kind.

35.     The justice sector should consider more proactively reallocating judge and prosecutor positions
through expanded use of incentives and as attrition occurs. The Prosecutorial Council should consider an
incentive system similar to that recently introduced by the Judicial Council. Both councils could consider
surveying judges and prosecutors about their willingness to accept relocation.

            iii. Number of Court Staff

36.      The very high ratio of judges to population in Montenegro compared to other European countries is
not explained by a low ratio of staff/judge as Montenegro is also at the high end of the staff/judge ratio. This
ratio is higher than 18 of the 25 EU Member States that submitted data on this point to the CEPEJ for 2012 (see
Figure 5).

Figure 13: Ratio of Court Staff to Judges, Montenegro and EU36




36
  Data from EU Member states is from the CEPEJ EU Justice Scoreboard 2014 based on 2012 data. ( Demark, Spain, and
Sweden not included, as data were unavailable).

                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Human Resource Management

                                            10
     Ratio of Total Non-Judge Staff/Judge

                                             9
                                             8
                                             7
                                             6
                                             5
                                             4
                                             3
                                             2
                                             1
                                             0
                                                 Romania


                                                                     Bulgaria




                                                                                                                                    Austria




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Latvia


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Italy
                                                                                                                                                                                                Lithuania




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Serbia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Malta
                                                                                Greece




                                                                                                                                                                                     Slovakia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cyprus
                                                                                                                 Hungary




                                                                                                                                                               Portugal




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Poland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Luxembourg
                                                           Finland




                                                                                                                                              Czech Republic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Montenegro



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Estonia
                                                                                         Germany
                                                                                                   Netherlands


                                                                                                                           France




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Belgium
                                                                                                                                                                          Slovenia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Croatia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ireland
37.     In 2015, Montenegro had an average of 3.7 non-judicial employees per judge, with an average of 0.8
advisors per judge.

Table 4: Number of advisors and total staff per Judge – 201537

                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ratio                           Total                                         Ratio Total                             Case
                                                                                             Judges                                             Advisors                                                    Advisors                        Employee                                      Employees                               Related
Court                                                                                        (Authorized)                                       (Authorized)                                                /Judges                         (Authorized)                                  /Judges                                 Staff
Supreme Court                                                                                19                                                 18                                                          0.9                             39                                            2.1                                     38
Appellate Court                                                                              13                                                 9                                                           0.7                             33                                            2.5                                     32
Administrative Court                                                                         12                                                 13                                                          1.1                             37                                            3.1                                     37
High Court Podgorica                                                                         40                                                 41                                                          1.0                             101                                           2.5                                     97
High Court Bijelo Polje                                                                      17                                                 22                                                          1.3                             57                                            3.4                                     53
Commercial Court                                                                             16                                                 20                                                          1.3                             80                                            5.0                                     79
Higher/Special Courts                                                                        117                                                123                                                         1.1                             347                                           3.0                                     336
Basic Courts                                                                                 149                                                94                                                          0.6                             645                                           4.3                                     586
All Courts                                                                                   266                                                217                                                         0.8                             992                                           3.7                                     922

38.     The number of support staff per judge or prosecutor varies by as much as 100% between institutions
and do not match staffing norms. 38 Staffing ranges from 3.5 and 6.0 per judge at the Basic Courts and from 0.8
to 2.0 per (deputy) prosecutor in basic prosecution offices (see Figures 14 and 15 below).

Figure 14: Number of Staff per Judge in Basic Courts30


37
   Staff systematizations dated as far back as 2009, which continue in force. Excludes 91 court guards added to Supreme
Court staffing authorization in 2016.
38
   Rulebooks on Framework Criteria for Determining the Number of Judges and Court Staff in Courts (Pravilnik o
orjentacionim mjerilima za odredjenivanje potrebnog broja sudija i ostalih zaposlenih u sudu).


                                                                                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                          Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                   Human Resource Management

   6.0

   5.0

   4.0

   3.0

   2.0                                                                                     Total Employees/Judge
   1.0                                                                                     Advisors/Judge

   0.0




Figure 15: Number of Staff per Prosecutor in Basic PPOs31

  2.5

  2.0

  1.5

  1.0
                                                                                       Total Employees/Prosecutor
  0.5                                                                                  Advisors/Prosecutor

  0.0




39.     There are significant differences in the number of judicial assistants budgeted per judge (see Figure 14
above). These positions are most closely related to case processing, and their numbers should correspond to the
number of judges which in turn should be objectively determined by caseloads, none of which is occurring. The
average ratio of advisors/judges is 0.8 (metrics call for 0.5) ranging from 0.3 to 1.0. One of the two higher courts
has nearly twice the number of advisors per judge as the other. The range for prosecutor offices (from 0.2 to 0.5
per prosecutor) is not as large.




                                                        19
                                                                                            Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                     Human Resource Management

40.      While staffing norms exist in theory to set personnel allocations, they are not enforced in practice.
Instead, staffing ratios have evolved on an ad-hoc basis, as individual Court Presidents have made and were
granted requests by the MOJ and MOF for new positions. The norms may themselves be too simplistic a way of
determining staffing levels given the complexity of justice institutions and the absence of a case weighting
methodology, and it may be reasonable for systematizations to vary from these prescribed norms. However,
variations between the norms and the systematizations and the subsequent personnel budget should in future
be justified and documented by courts based on objective need.

                       While, staffing norms exist in theory to set personnel allocations,
                       they are not implemented or enforced in practice and may not
                       reflect current needs.

41.      Staffing is also not adjusted when circumstances such as caseloads or technologies change or in light
of the devolution of certain responsibilities to other agencies or private agents. For example, since the
introduction of private enforcement agents in 2014, there remain significant court-employed bailiffs. The
judiciary indicates that this is because civil servants cannot be moved without their consent from the courts to
other bodies – and even between individual courts.39 Similarly, staff were not moved from courts to prosecutors’
offices when prosecutors adopted the responsibility for investigations; instead, new staff positions were added
to prosecutors’ offices. Meanwhile, there is a general reluctance to eliminate positions, therefore creating
inertia. Not taking action to eliminate unnecessary positions only jeopardizes the sector’s ability to fund the
necessary ICT, innovation and infrastructure upgrades.

42.     No analysis has been conducted of the staff savings in the courts of the introduction of private
notaries in 2011. The transfer of verification services should have resulted in large-scale redundancies among
registry staff, particularly in Basic Courts. Instead, these staff were    Public sector positions can be reduced
absorbed into the general staffing of the Basic Courts. With staff made through layoffs with provision of
available for case processing, the performance of courts in certain severance pay. The funds saved
areas should have improved, but this seems not to have occurred. Just      through right-sizing could then be
having more resources available without planning for their optimum         allocated to improving the capacity of
use does not guarantee improved outcomes.                                  existing people in the system.

43.      A strategy for eliminating excess staff positions through layoffs, attrition or other means such as
transfers is needed. Public sector positions can be eliminated through layoffs and severance pay provided, and
much can also be achieved through attritions and transfers, particularly in view of the availability of ICT and the
small size of the country. The funds saved through right-sizing could be invested in much-needed areas, such as
in technical and advisory positions or improvements in ICT or case management functionality or through much-
needed infrastructure improvements that justice stakeholders so strongly desire. In addition, rather than adding
employees to meet temporary workload needs, the Judicial Council is considering creating a roving support
team employed by the Council which could be deployed to courts as needed.

44.     Further, staffing patterns do not generally reflect economies of scale (see Figures 16 and 17). The Basic
Courts and prosecutors’ offices do not become more efficient as they grow, as would be expected; in fact, the
number of staff per judge or prosecutor appears to bear no relationship to court size. This confirms that staffing
patterns have not been reconsidered based on need.

39
     Staff systematizations dated to as far back as 2009, which continue in force.

                                                                20
                                                                                         Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                  Human Resource Management


Figure 16: Ratios of Budgeted Staff Positions to Basic Court Judges by Court Size, 201532

 2.5


 2.0


 1.5


 1.0


 0.5


 0.0




       Small Court (1-5 judges)      Medium Court (6-10 judges)        Large Court (11+ judges)


Figure 17: Ratios of Budgeted Staff Positions to Basic Prosecutor by Office Size, 201533




                                                         21
                                                                                                Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                         Human Resource Management

 2.5


 2.0


 1.5


 1.0


 0.5


 0.0




         Small Office (1-3 prosecutors)   Medium Office (4-7 prosecutors)        Large Office (8+ prosecutors)



45.     Many authorized positions remain unfilled. Court staff vacancies range from 2% of the authorized
workforce to over 20% in one court.40 While five prosecutors’ offices have no vacancies, one has a 68% vacancy
rate. Vacancies are not concentrated in any particular region but are somewhat lower in the central part of the
country.

Figure 18: Vacancies in Authorized Court Positions – 201541




40
  The average is 10%.
41
  Employee lists from each court (data for Ulcinj Basic Court unavailable). Since employee lists do not consistently specify
whether an individual is a temporary or permanent employee, court websites may include temporary employees; thus, the
percentage of positions that have not been permanently filled may in fact be understated.

                                                            22
                                                                                                   Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                            Human Resource Management

 30%
                                                                                                        25%
 25%                                                                                             23%

 20%
                                                                                          17%
                                                                                    15%
 15%
                                                                      11%    12%
 10%                                        7%    7%   8%        8%
                                  6%
     5%         2%      3%
          2%

     0%




                                                            Average



Figure 19: Vacancies in Authorized Prosecutor Positions – 201542
 80%
                                                                                                       68%
 70%
 60%
 50%
 40%                                                                          33%     33%       33%
 30%                                                                   25%
                                                                20%
 20%
 10%                                                   6%
          0%      0%         0%        0%        0%
     0%




                                                        Average




46.     Without an objective basis for the staffing ratios, it is not possible to assess whether all vacancies
should be filled or whether the ratios should be downgraded and money allocated to other resources. MOJ,
courts and prosecutors’ offices do not regularly examine vacancies for patterns that might reveal positions to be
unneeded or for which recruitment difficulties need to be addressed. Salary savings could be reallocaetd to
other positions that would provide more benefit to the judiciary, for example, court managers, budget and
finance staff, IT administrators, planners, and statisticians or to improvements in ICT that would better leverage

42
  Employee lists from each prosectuor’s office (data for Berane excluded as list shows more filled than budgeted positons).
Since employee lists do not consistently specify whether an individual is a temporary or permanent employee, court
websites may include temporary employees; thus, the percentage of positions not been permanently filled may in fact be
understated.

                                                                 23
                                                                                                  Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                           Human Resource Management

existing staff to perform their work. Many budget systems automatically deduct a fixed proportion of salary
budgets in recognition that there will be vacancies. Some of these savings could be captured at a central level
for use in system-wide improvements. Such improvements are much needed and much-desired by people
working in the system – they have the potential to more significantly boost morale and performance.

               iv. Extent and Impact of Temporary Staffing

47.    The judiciary employs over 309 temporary, intern and contract employees,43 of whom 279 work for
the courts, representing 29 percent over the courts’ authorized workforce.44
                                                  The ‘shadow workforce’ is reported to be extensive but their precise
                                                  numbers and roles are unknown.



Table 5: Employment of Interns, Temporary Staff and Contractors – Courts 201645



                        Judicial Interns          All Other Temps            Contractors                  Total
 Court Level
                                % of Total                % of Total               % of Total                 % of Total
                       #        Approved          #       Approved           #     Approved         #         Approved
                                Positions                 Positions                Positions                  Positions
 Basic               126       19.0%         50          7.8%           21         3.3%          197        30.1%
 Higher              27        17.0%         7           4.4%           6          3.8%          40         25.2%
 Commercial          14        17.5%         0           0.0%           22         27.5%         36         45.0%
 Administrative      1         2.7%          0           0.0%           1          2.7%          2          5.4%
 Supreme             3         7.7%          1           2.6%           0          0.0%          4          10.3%
 Total               171       17.9%         58          6.10%          50         5.2%          279        29.2%

48.    In less than 20% of these instances are positions utilized to backfill positions of individuals on leave. In
some cases, courts use temporary employees while changes in permanent systematizations are being
approved.46 The remainder of temporary employees, other than interns, are hired under provisions allowing
them to be used for special projects or work overflow. 47 However, this occurs without considering whether an


43
   Excludes MOJ and Training Center.
44
   According to a World Bank survey of each institution about the number of temporary, intern and contract employees
conducted as part of this assessment and confirmed before the conclusion of the report.
45
   Survey conducted by World Bank during the Human Resources Assessment.
46
    Notably, the Commercial Court was delayed in adopting a new rulebook to accommodate the court network
rationalization and elimination of the Bijelo Polje Commercial Court, and therefore also from recruiting any new staff.
Permanent staff will be hired by May, 2016.
47
   Three courts report extensive use of temporary and contract employees to manage special projects and workoverload.
The Podorica Higher Court reports its workload increased due to establishment of the Special Division, an increase of four
judges, and a large inflow of new cases. Cetinje Basic Court indicates that nearly 1,000 litigation cases have been delegated
to it from the Kotor and Podgorica Basic Courts, with an expectation of another 400 to follow. Podgorica Basic Court
indicates that it relies on temporary staff to manage increases in the civil litigation and enforcement department related to

                                                             24
                                                                                                  Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                           Human Resource Management

institution absorbing an additional responsibility in fact already has more than enough employees; instead, new
positions are added incrementally without an overall assessment of resources. While filling these position may
be justified, the large extent to which positions are filled outside of the regular civil service employment system
is concerning. Most of these circumstances could have been anticipated and permanent staffing approved.

49.      Interns represent 61% of the unregulated workforce. Their roles are particularly ill-defined. At present,
there are 0.65 interns per judge, in contrast to proposed, pending legislation providing for 0.35 interns per
judge. If passed, this legislation will require the courts to reduce the number of interns by 78 to 93 in total.

50.      There is no effective position control for individual institutions (e.g., a given court) or budget users
(e.g., all courts). Additional positons may and do at times result in an institution exceeding its personnel
complement and/or the total personnel budget, as shown in Figure 3 above.

51.     A list of the precise number of temporary staff, contractors, interns and volunteers is not regularly or
transparently maintained.48 This workforce has grown incrementally rather than having been planned. The roles
of these additional employees are not transparent as they are not enumerated but reportedly range from legal
assistants to staff in the registry office. Only some institutions include temporary employees on their staff lists.

52.      Temporary employees, interns and contractors are hired at the discretion of the head of each
institution and are subject to irregularity in employment. Stakeholders report that recruitment practices are
neither open nor transparent and are not merit-based. Temporary employees must also be taken off the payroll
after their limited, two-year terms. Temporary employees are likely to be lower-skilled and less productive than
their permanent equivalents.

53.     The extensive use of temporary staff creates an environment without a stable workforce. Courts are
less able to build staff knowledge and expertise, or engage in integrated resource planning. Ultimately, high
numbers of temporaries and contractors impact quality and court efficiency.

54.       By contrast, the total number of temporary employees in PPOs is more modest. The survey of
prosecutors’ offices revealed 30 temporary, intern and contract staff, mainly in Basic prosecutors’ offices, or a
little less than 15% of the authorized workforce.

            d. Recruitment, Evaluation and Promotion of Judges and Prosecutors

             i.   Recruitment and Nomination of Judges and Prosecutors

55.      The Montenegrin judiciary historically lacked an objective entry point for the judicial profession.
Criteria for judicial appointments to the Basic Courts or basic prosecutor offices were based on the generic
criteria of education and years of experience, resulting in significant discretion in appointments.

56.      The Judicial Training Center was reinvigorated in 2015 with the goal of establishing an objective basis


decisions on the objections filed by private bailiffs, which totaled to 2,829 last year and 665 for 2016 to date, and a 120,000
case backlog concerning enforcement of authentic title, and to manage other changes in statutory responsibilities.
48
   The World Bank surveyed each institution about the number of temporary, intern and contract employees as part of this
assessment.

                                                              25
                                                                                           Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                    Human Resource Management

for entry into the judicial profession line with principles established by the CoE.49 Graduation from the Center
became a mandatory precondition for initial selection to a Misdemeanor or Basic Court. The election of
candidates for initial training is made by the Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils. The Councils are also
responsible for determining the number of initial training enrollees at the Center based on the projected
number of judicial vacancies in the year in which trainees are to graduate. The first class at the Center has not
begun.

57.     The initial training program relies heavily on mentors in the courts and PPOs. Much of the training
received by initial trainees is in the form of on-the-job training in the courts or prosecutors’ offices. Trainees
receive the equivalent of 70% of a Basic Court judge’s salary.50

58.     In comparison to the previous process of selecting new judges and prosecutors, the selection of
trainees for the Judicial Training Center is relatively transparent and far superior. However, the Center will not
be used to vet and rank trainees. Since the Councils indicate that the number of entrants will match the
number of projected needed judges and prosecutors at the conclusion of the three years of the training period,
there is no room for candidates to fail the training. It is assumed that entrants to the Center will successfully
conclude training, raising questions as to the rigor of the training process and the final examination in particular.

59.       Once training is successfully concluded, trainees are to be ranked according to their rankings before
entering training, implying that training is not considered an important vehicle for evaluating candidates.
Criteria or methods for court or prosecutor mentors to evaluate trainees are not yet in place nor planned for.


60.     Using the Center as a primary entry point to the profession assumes a national career service,
whereby judges and prosecutors can be placed in any court that needs them. As in many European systems,
graduates of a Judicial Training Center are not allowed to refuse judicial appointment to a certain location. In
Montenegro, trainees who refuse appointment to the specific court offered in the employment contract will be
terminated ex officio. This is an important first step in expanding the view of judges and prosecutors as part of a
national career service.

61.     However, once appointed, judges and prosecutors will remain employees of the local
institution and cannot be moved without their consent. Few institutional incentives exist to encourage
that consent. This approach is particularly poorly-suited to a small country.

62.      The Center’s resources for example, may be better utilized in providing continuing training to existing
judges rather than training new judges. As discussed above, Montenegro already has an excessive number of
permanent judges relative to need and, given the existing balanced age structure of the judges, including a
sizeable number of younger judges the number of new judges needed to replace judges as they retire is not
expected to be significant. Thus, investing in a pipeline of future judges represents a less than optimal use of
judicial sector funds which could be used in areas of greater need. Investing heavily in initial training is also
likely to only raise expectations among trainees of future appointments, which the judicial sector cannot afford,
and should not, meet. In light of these factors, the sector could consider a freeze on initial training.51

49
    European Charter on the Statute for Judges, Independence of the Judiciary, item 7, principles       1 and 2 b,
Recommendations no R (94)12 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, 1.1.6.
50
   Article 53 of the Law on Judicial Council and Judges (Official Journal 11/2015).
51
   For further discussion on succession planning, see the Long Term Planning section below.

                                                         26
                                                                                          Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                   Human Resource Management


63.      Looking forward, the Judicial Council should limit promotional appointments to candidates from
within the judiciary. Given the excessive number of judges already in the system, it is necessary to fully utilize
existing resources, at least for the medium term until the number of judges falls by attrition. It is also important
to create viable career paths for existing judges and to enable junior judges to develop their skills through
experience, training and successive positive evaluations to advance on the professional ladder. Internal
promotions could also add value in terms of increased consistency of decision-making and uniformity in the
application of the law, as well as greater continuity and collegiality within the judiciary.

             ii. Criteria for the Evaluation and Promotion of Judges and Prosecutors

64.      Judges in Montenegro have not to date undergone any rigorous evaluation of their performance.

65.      Existing productivity norms that have existed for some time for judges do not incentivize good
performance. Existing productivity norms rely almost entirely on the number of dispositions compared with
filings. This encourages judges to ‘cherry pick’ simple cases or resolve cases too quickly while avoiding complex
cases or backlog reduction. The degree to which individual judges even meet these norms depends on whether
their individual Court President monitors those norms.

66.     Formal rules for the evaluation of judges were adopted by the Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils in
September and December, 2015, respectively. The evaluation rules for judges are being piloted. Their stated
purpose is to promote judicial competence, to motivate judges to improve performance, and to enhance public
confidence in the judiciary. The rules demonstrate a substantial improvement from the past. Judges will be
evaluated based on the quality and quantity of their decisions.

67.     There need to be clear rules about how evaluations will be used to determine promotions, identify
performance defects or discipline judges and prosecutors. Rules on promotion should build in positive
incentives for judges and prosecutors to contribute to the judiciary’s performance. Promotion criteria can be
used as a way to incentivize good behavior and signal the kinds of attributes that office holders should develop if
they seek career advancement. This is especially true for judiciaries that have a balanced age structure, because
permanent younger judges and prosecutors need clear signal for career progression to maintain motivation and
morale. In Montenegro, promotion applications could include ‘highly desirable’ criteria that encourage
applicants to have:

      a. served in more than one court of prosecutor’s office (thus encouraging judges to agree to move
         locations at least once in their career, which may also foster consistency in practice and procedure and
         stronger collegiality);
      b. undertaken management training (thus encouraging a modern management approach in courts),
         including understanding of court administration and case management techniques etc.;
      c. undertaken continuing training, particularly in European law (thus encouraging increased capacity in line
         with European standards);
      d. mentored less experienced judges;
      e. contributed to performance improvements, such as participation in a backlog reduction teams or led an
         innovative project within their court.

68.    Judicial evaluation procedures that utilize statistical data (such as number of cases resolved, decisions
overturned on appeal, etc.) depend on the data being reliable and readily available. As discussed above, the

                                                        27
                                                                                           Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                    Human Resource Management

manner in which filings, pending cases and dispositions are counted by prosecutors’ offices makes accurate
assessment of performance difficult. Rectifying those problems before utilizing data in performance evaluations
is warranted.

69.     The evaluation process will present a significant administrative burden and workload for the judiciary.
Ensuring that professional staff be assigned to assist in managing the work and paper flow entailed in the
evaluation process is key.

70.    For both the Judicial Council and Prosecutorial Council evaluation rules, implementation and
monitoring will be essential. After a reasonable period of implementation, the rules should be reviewed and
amended to apply any lessons learned from the rollout.




            e. Training

            i.   Capacity of the Judicial Training Center to Meet Training Needs

71.    State funding for the Center has been stabilized but significant shifts in donor funding can still impact
the Center’s ability to plan and offer training over the years. Funds are now dedicated by the state budget for
the operation of the Judicial Training Center. Targeting more of the state funding to continuing training would
help smooth out spending and allow the Center to better plan for continuing training.

72.     As a priority, the Center should conduct a systematic training needs assessment to elevate the
capacity of the judicial system. Trainings most likely to impact court efficiency or quality in light of changing
legal and organizational arrangements should be prioritized. The judiciary itself should identify these needs.
International support may be useful, particularly in areas such as EU law and best practice court management,
but the process should not be donor driven. Should a comprehensive needs assessment be developed; the
Center would be well placed to source significant multi-year donor contributions.

73.    Montenegro is eligible to have an observer at the European Judicial Training Network52 and has
pursued this option. Participation in the network will help the judiciary perform its own assessment.

            ii. Continuing Training

74.      The Montenegrin judiciary should expand its continuing training program in institutional and case
management as part of a strategic effort to improve performance. Continuing training in these matters could
be delivered more intensively for all categories of permanent personnel, including judges, prosecutors,
assistants, and court staff. By improving the performance of existing permanent employees, the Center could be
at the forefront of the Montenegrin judiciary’s transformation. The Action Plan identifies this type of training for
judges and prosecutors under the umbrella of the Judicial Training Center as a priority but to date that training
has been limited. According to the third report on implementation of the justice sector Action Plan, in late 2015
and early 2016, the Center developed and delivered four workshops for Court Presidents on cooperation
between the judiciary and the media in Montenegro, attended by nine Court Presidents. No other training for

52
  Participation in the network requires annual training assessments. The network also provides training standards and
curricula, judicial training exchanges and programs and training expertise.

                                                         28
                                                                                                Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                         Human Resource Management

President Judges, Prosecutors or other managers is mentioned.Participation in the training could be mandatory
in basic capacities, and could be encouraged in specialized topics. In this area, the continuing training provided
by the training center in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina provides an excellent example that the
Judicial Training Center in Montenegro could seek to emulate.

75.       Methods of enhancing training include:

         Providing dedicated training for managers, such as Court Presidents and heads of departments, whose
          capacity and skills are pivotal to the success of courts and prosecutors’ offices.
         Taking advantage of the Center’s core competency in structuring the form of curricula. This includes the
          balance of provision of legal knowledge and practical exercises, the length of training, the qualifications
          of trainers, the creation of ‘bench books’ or manuals that trainees can utilize after the course is
          complete, and conduct and analyze training evaluations. Stakeholders report that the Center has begun
          to play this role even when the training is donorfunded.
         Increasing peer-to-peer learning by creating a national network of peers for sitting judges. Institutional
          linkages with European judiciaries could be intensified to provide greater peer-to-peer exchange.
          Routine colloquia could be convened to discuss specific issues, share experiences, and adopt best fit
          practices from abroad. Such efforts may further boost capacity, morale, and performance.
         Providing information on upcoming continuing trainings to all judges and prosecutors (including listing
          all course on the Center’s website) and instituting a process for individuals to independently apply to
          attend courses.53

              iii. Training for Assistants and Court Staff

76.      While assistants are permitted to participate in subject-specific training at the Center, a rigorous, skill-
based training program has not been developed to prepare them for their current duties.54 Representing
nearly 26055 professional employees, this resource is critical to court performance. A large injection of training
for this group could help harness their potential to contribute to the transformation of the judiciary. Assistants
should be issued appropriate certifications to reflect and value their important role in the judiciary.

77.     Similarly, no training of administrative court staff has taken place at the Center. While the state’s
Human Resource Management Agency provides staff training in general topics, most administrative staff have
not undergone any training in subjects specific to the judiciary since their appointment. Like for the continuing
training of judges, prosecutors and their assistants, a large injection of training for court staff could elevate the
capacity, morale, and performance of the judiciary across the board.

              f. Support Staff Planning and Utilization

              i.   Human Resource Systems for Court Staff

78.     The responsibility for setting policy for managing human resources and labor relations of non-judge
staff has historically been unclear, other than determining the number of authorized staff. Key areas of staff

53
   Invitations for trainings are sent to the president of the court or the chief prosecutor, who decides who will attend the
training (perhaps after soliciting interest from the court’s staff).
54
   Three trainings were offered to 44 counselors in development, adoption and implementation of integrity plans.
55
   217 in courts and 42 in prosecutors’ offices.

                                                             29
                                                                                                   Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                            Human Resource Management

human resources include approving court employee classifications, developing selection techniques, and
determining how to fill positions. Court Presidents and Public Prosecutors test, select, assign, promote, and
terminate civil servants56 without guidance from the SCC, Chief Prosecutor, MOJ or the Judicial or Prosecutorial
Councils. Responsibility for performance management of civil servants is not adequately addressed.

79.      Most critically, the status of judicial assistants and judicial trainees has not been formalized. This
limits the courts in using them to their full potential to contribute to service delivery. When properly used,
these positions perform duties and play a role in case management that would otherwise have to be performed
by judges or Deputy Prosecutors.57 The gaps relating to these positions include:

       a. a lack of specific position descriptions, resulting in assistants performing widely different functions;
       b. as noted above, a lack of formal training in their capacity as judicial assistants.
       c. absence of job-specific evaluation criteria or a rigorous evaluation process for use by the assistants’
          supervisors. Assistants are formally evaluated using the general form for civil servants, which does not
          recognize their specific roles. The working criteria for their evaluation rely on self-reported statistics not
          verified by registry offices. Evaluations are not used to establish their career progression from junior to
          senior assistant, and on to advisor;

80.    Uniform civil servant and labor processes for other employees have not been established to ensure
transparency, fairness, and consistency:
    d. Court position descriptions included in systematizations are generic and do not include the
       responsibilities, skills, and abilities needed to successfully carry out the job. A more structured approach
       to classification, ranking, and selection is required;
    e. There are no position-specific methods for recruitment or promotion. Applicants are only screened for
       minimum education levels, and even less so for promotional criteria than for entry levels. They rely on
       knowledge of and preference for candidates by Judges/ Prosecutors/managers, and there is not a clear
       career ladder to tie performance to promotion, encourage superior performance, or help the
       organization retain talented staff. Few promotional applicants come from outside the system;
    f. Court Presidents determine their court employees’ assignments location without criteria (e.g. seniority)
       or a transparent process for employees to request certain assignments.

81.    Employee performance evaluations are generally perfunctory and do not follow standardized
procedures. Performance evaluations are also not periodically reviewed at a level above the Court President.
Taken seriously, performance management can help shift compliance with legislation to managing for results.

82.      Performance evaluations could be harnessed to drive performance improvements among staff.
Evaluation can be a valuable personnel management tool to help employees improve their skills or advance in
their jobs by identifying training needs and development assignments. Evaluations and promotions can also
build in ‘desirable criteria’ which create incentives for staff to develop capacities in areas of priority such as IT
skills, analytic skills, and contribution to priority efforts such as backlog reduction of innovation in case
processing. Signaling positive behaviors can thus boost individual motivation, team morale, and system
performance.

83.        The former liberal use of staff bonuses, comprising up to three months’ pay, have been replaced

56
     As well as public employees.
57
     For example, Judicial Assistants uniformly draft opinions but only in some courts do they preside over hearings.

                                                                30
                                                                                          Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                   Human Resource Management

throughout Montenegro’s state service with performance bonuses. Performance bonuses should not be used
extensively until a rigorous performance evaluation system is put in place in justice institutions. At present,
there is insufficient basis to know what represents exemplary performance to provide such bonuses. Once
rigorous evaluation systems exist, bonuses may be a useful tool to drive performance by incentivizing individuals
to excel.

            ii. Division of Labor between Judges and Support Staff

84.      There are no processes to evaluate the judiciary’s technical methodology of work, such as the
effective division of labor between judges or prosecutors and support staff. A heavy administrative burden
impacts the Court Presidents’ and Public Prosecutors’ ability to focus on case management and overall
institutional management. Court and prosecutor processes need to be re-engineered to ensure work is
effectively assigned and to relieve judges of administrative tasks where possible. Some courts and prosecutor
offices’ systematizations reveal they are assigning staff to functions in an effort to shift work from judges and
prosecutors but staffing patterns are not evaluated for effectiveness or replication.

85.       Courts and prosecutors’ offices generally need more analytical staff to contribute to improvements in
performance in exchange for the oversupply of other employees. The departure of many lower-paid staff due
to increased social welfare payments to women with large families offers an excellent opportunity to consider
reducing the staffing complement and changing the staffing mix. Analysis needs are increasing in scale and
complexity, and will continue to do so as Montenegro moves towards the accession. Very few, if any, institutions
employ analytical staff. Given the specialized skills required for these functions, these employees will likely have
to be recruited from outside the courts. This renders an effective and transparent system for selection more
critical.

            g. Planning for the Future

86.    Human resources management requires making predictions and planning for future human resource
needs both in numbers of people and their capacities to face new and growing challenges.

87.     An automated personnel tracking database is needed to allow for human resource management and
improved performance by individual judges. It should include the history of positions held by the incumbent,
training received, and complaints registered against her or him which will help the Judicial Council track career
progression and improve individual judicial performance. The database could be easily developed in EXCEL or
another database program.

88.     The HR information database should be used for planning future resource needs, not solely for
individual assessment purposes. By examining information about past employee turnover and projecting future
trends by classification, the justice sector could plan to transform the judiciary by changing the resource mix as
turnover occurs. Information about performance issues or training gaps should be consolidated and evaluated
for where changes can be made in the system.

            h. Equity in Employment in the Montenegrin Judiciary

            i.          Gender Equity

89.     Gender equity in employment in the Montenegrin judiciary is generally appropriate. Montenegro has

                                                        31
                                                                                        Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                 Human Resource Management

more female than male judges and deputy prosecutors at all levels of institutions.

90.    However, women fall far below parity in leadership positions, with fewer than 30% of Court
Presidents being women and less than half of the complement of leadership in most other insitutions.

Table 6: Percentage of Women in Leadership Positions58


                    Court Presidents                           29%

                    Public Prosecutors                         35%

                          Judicial Council                           44%

                       Prosecutorial Council                         56%

91.      According to data submitted to the CEPEJ by Montenegro for 2012,59 there are no specific provisions
for facilitating gender equality within the procedure for  ‘Diversity within the judiciary will enable the public
recruiting or promoting judges or prosecutors’ framework.  to trust and accept the judiciary as a whole… it
                                                                should be open and access should be provided to all
                                                                qualified persons in all sectors of society’’
92.    The justice sector could work with donors to             The Venice Commission
enhance equal opportunity in employment in the judiciary.
The sector should increase its capacity to assess and implement equal opportunity practices. In particular, we
encourage the Judicial and Prosecutorial Council to ensure that a transparent process for recruiting the best
candidates for judicial management positions regardless of gender be pursued.

             ii. Pay Equity

93.      Recent60 salary increases for magistrates, assistants, and typists changed the pay gradients between
positions quite signficantly. The largest percentage increases are for judges above the Basic Court level and
Supreme Cout fellows. The differntial between Supreme Court and Appellate Court judges thus grew (it had
been zero) as did that between High and Basic Court judges. The percentage increases for Basic Court judges
was not much more than that for typists. Thus, differentials betwen judges and support staff were not
significantly changed.

Table 7: Salary Differentials61

                             Pre-April, 2016       % Salary    April, 2016        Former            Current
         Position                Salary            Increase      Salary         Differential      Differential
 Basic Court Judge               1,031.3            14.6%       1,181.9
 High Court Judge                1,153.3            33.1%       1,534.6              12%              30%

58
   Annual report of the Judicial Council, 2015.
59
   Reference, Questions 110.1, 112.1, 117.1 and 119.1.
60
   April, 2016.
61
   Judicial Council financial data.

                                                          32
                                                                                      Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                               Human Resource Management

Administrative Court
Judge                        1,307.8          33.1%           1,741.2            13%              13%
Court of Appeal Judge        1,364.8          27.6%           1,741.2            4%               0%
Supreme Court Judge          1,364.8          43.8%           1,962.8            0%               13%

Associate*                   452.0            5.5%             477.0            128%             148%
Fellow**                     495.0            92.2%            951.1            192%             212%

Typist*                      320.7            11.5%            357.7            222%             230%

* Differential for Associates and Typists are those between them and Judge of Basic Court. Associates work
at Basic, Higher, Economic, and Administrative Courts; typists at all levels of courts.
** Differential between Fellow and Supreme Court Judge




                                                      33
                                                                                      Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                               Human Resource Management

Conclusions and Strategic Direction

94.   The Montenegrin justice sector could make significant strides in improving its performance
through enhanced human resource management by:

      A. Optimizing the human rights envelope:
         1. Bringing the number of per capita and per case judges, prosecutors and advisors closer to those
            in the rest of Europe and to the results of the case weighted study (CWS)
         2. Ensuring resources for functions transferred from the courts (e.g., enforcement, notary services,
            investigations) match need and transparently redeploying those that exceed it.
         3. Ensuring functions transferred from the courts are adequately provided by the private sector
            across Montenegro’s regions.

      B. Improving controls on personnel expenditures:
         1. Increasing the proportion of the budget expended on non-personnel items to enhance
            performance
         2. Establishing budget controls and eliminating overspending on personnel line items.
         3. Increasing transparency of and controls over vacant positions and temporary, intern and
            contract employees.
         4. Insuring relocation incentives are cost effective.

      C. Equalizing distribution of human resources and workload:
         1. Distributing resources in line with workload and efforts to improve performance rather than
            according to historical patterns.
         2. Building on efforts to date by increasing voluntary reallocation of judge and prosecutor positions
            through expanded use of incentives and of staff through reconsideration of standards for
            relocation.

      D. Enhancing staff capacities and skills and better managing people’s performance:
         1. Furthering the aims of a single, transparent entry point into the judiciary by introducing rigorous
            evaluation criteria for participants in the Judicial Training Center.
         2. Improving judicial office holder performance by finalizing judge and prosecutor evaluation
            criteria and linking deficits identified in performance evaluations to common training needs.
         3. Strengthening the role of president judges and public prosecutors by expanding training on
            judicial branch management, creating unique performance evaluation criteria for them and
            linking their performance evaluation to common complaints received against institutions.
         4. Enlarging the role of advisors in courts and prosecutors’ offices by developing a standard
            position description, a unique evaluation process and a mandatory training program for them.
         5. Increasing analytical and management capacity in institutions by altering the staffing mix.
         6. Better utilizing support staff by expanding on and clarifying knowledge, skills and abilities for
            each position, using position announcements as an opportunity to describe unique
            characteristics of positions and institutions, and using performance evaluations to summarize
            staff performance deficits that could be rectified through training.


                                                     34
                                                                              Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                       Human Resource Management

E. Implementing improvements in ethics, discipline and discharge identified in the Justice Strategy
   and Action Plan:

   1. Insuring sanctions imposed are consistent and appropriate based on offense.
   2. Increasing the functional separation of the disciplinary prosecutor and disciplinary commission
      in both Councils.
   3. Building on training already offered on integrity plans, anti-corruption, and ethics.




                                             35
                                                                                                 Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                          Human Resource Management



                                    ANNEX:
             HUMAN RESOURCES STRATEGY FOR MONTENEGRO JUSTICE SECTOR
                               PROPOSED OUTLINE


I.       RIGHTSIZING THE HUMAN RESOURCE ENVELOPE
A. Total Human Resources Allocations

        Reduce the total number of judges and advisors, to bring figures nearer to those of the rest of Europe62.
         To the extent possible, fill higher court positions by promoting basic court judges; hold resulting basic
         court vacancies open. Figures for Montenegro will be compared to those from CEPEJ 2014 when that
         data becomes available. Include examination of the case weighted study conducted by EUROL for
         courts.63 Apply initial case weighting categorization of simple, average and complex to allow
         consideration of workload across courts and to introduce a complexity measure for prosecutors.
        Consider alternative resource mixes that could reduce personnel costs (for example, evaluate how
         greater use of information technology for prosecution administration could reduce personnel costs).
         Further analysis of expenditures for personnel versus other costs can be conducted once 2015
         expenditure information is released by the government (MOJ with donor assistance).
        Eliminate vacancies in staff positions that have extended for long periods (e.g., for more than one year)
         or convert them to other positions that would provide more benefit to the judiciary, for example, court
         managers, budget and finance staff, IT administrators, planners, and statisticians (MOJ).
        Require institutions to identify all positions on published employee lists, including temporary employees
         and interns and for which of the three legally permitted purposes (identified special projects, specified
         workload overages or replacement of employees on leave)64. To limit extent of employment above and
         beyond authorized positions 1) place a cap on the proportion of temporary employees in any one
         institution (e.g., 10%) and 2) reduce the number of legal interns to the ratio called for in pending
         legislation. Require institutions to submit written justifications for contracted positions to insure
         contractors are providing unique services not envisioned in the organization that could not be provided
         as efficiently by employees (MOJ).
        Analyze the number of investigation judges compared with remaining court investigation workload
         (MOJ).
        Analyze the number of bailiffs currently in courts compared to remaining court enforcement workload
         by comparing court enforcement workload and judge and bailiff staffing now and in 2012 before private
         bailiffs were introduced. Project future need for staffing given dwindling open enforcement cases from
         the past but considering escalation in enforcement appeals filed in the courts (MOJ).

62
   Per capita prosecutor/deputy prosecutor positions are, unlike for judges, squarely in the middle for countries in Central
and Eastern Europe. The same is true for staff per prosecutor ratios.
63
   Criteria for evaluating workload of judges currently comprises ratio of received to completed cases and does not include a
complexity factor.
64
   Temporary employment in this latter category comprises less than 1/3 of the total temporary workforce.

                                                             36
                                                                                           Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                    Human Resource Management


B.       Human Resources Expenditures

        Finalize allocations to individual courts to insure adequate controls over personnel spending, as
         Parliamentary appropriations are at a very high level (e.g., by each group of institution, for example, all
         courts) and subsidiary level controls are missing for courts65. Consider a similar system for prosecutors’
         offices and hold these offices accountable for their expenditures. Further analysis of expenditures for
         personnel versus other costs will be conducted once 2015 expenditure information is released by the
         government (MOJ).
        Examine controls on expenditures for “other personal income? and whether over-expenditures are
         more prominent in particular institutions (MOJ).

C.       Distribution of Human Resources – Judges and Prosecutors

        Continue implementing the plan of vacant court seats adopted in May, 2015. Finalize the plan of vacant
         prosecutor seats. This item is included in the Justice Strategy and Action Plan (Councils).
        Based on the findings in the HR Assessment, increase reallocation of judge and prosecutor positions
         through expanded use of incentives (include prosecutors in the incentive system) and as attrition occurs.
         This item is included in the Justice Strategy and Action Plan (Councils).
        Evaluate cost effectiveness and preferred duration of incentives. Survey judges and prosecutors who
         have voluntarily relocated about their reasons for accepting relocation (Councils).
        Clearly define the manner in which filings and dispositions are to be counted both for courts and
         prosecutors and perform periodic data audits to insure compliance. For prosecutor data, insure data
         includes information about case activities that form part of prosecutorial workload other than
         indictments or rejected charges. Once data definitions are clear, update the analysis on the impact of
         resources on performance, expressed in terms of clearance rates (MOJ, Supreme Court, Chief Public
         Prosecutor).

D.       Distribution of Human Resources – Support Staff and Ancillary Services

        Based on results of HR Assessment, examine courts and prosecutors’ offices with greater than average
         permanent staffing per judge for elimination, reclassification or transfer of positions.
        Reset staffing norms based on the above assessment (MOJ).
        Revise statutory restrictions on involuntary movement of support staff by considering expanding the
         distance to which an employee may be reassigned (MOJ, with participation of Public Administration).
        Investigate reasons for under-recruitment of private notaries in some regions; consider the impact of
         this on access to justice (MOJ).



65
  For example, courts can now fill positions without MOF approval but do not yet have a budget against which total
expenditures are evaluated or controlled. Prosecutorial expenditures still require routine MOF approval.

                                                         37
                                                                                                Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                         Human Resource Management

        Conduct more in-depth analysis of the comparative performance of private bailiffs and of notaries,
           including examining reasons for increased enforcement appeals (MOJ).

II.        ENHANCING SKILLS TO IMPROVE PERFORMANCE
A.         Greater Transparency and Rigor of Judge and Prosecutor Selection Techniques
          To further the aims of implementing a single, transparent entry point into the judicial ranks, introduce
           rigorous evaluation criteria for participants in the Judicial Training Center. At present, it is assumed that
           all candidates entering the Center will successfully conclude training (Councils)
          Insure evaluation includes that from assigned mentors; to date, set evaluation forms or procedures have
           not been established for use by mentors. (Councils, Training Center)
          Increase representation of women in leadership roles in the courts, prosecutors’ offices and councils by
           examining the recruitment process for unintentional barrier. Begin by surveying women judges,
           prosecutors and council members. Consider whether donors can assist in this effort, as in Serbia
           (Councils).

B.         Performance Appraisal of Judges and Prosecutors

          Complete pilot of judge evaluation criteria. This item is included in the Justice Strategy and Action Plan
           (Councils).
          Link deficits identified in performance evaluations to common training needs (Councils).
          Link performance evaluations of president judges and public prosecutors to common complaints
           received against institutions (Councils).

C.         Classification Descriptions, Selection, Career Advancement and Evaluation of Support Staff

          Expand position descriptions in systematizations to clarify knowledge, skills and abilities for each
           position. For example, expand descriptions of needed technological skills.
          Expand role of advisors as stated in statute, as they are quite limited at present. Survey President Judges
           and Public Prosecutors about ways in which delegating responsibility to advisors would be of assistance
           (MOJ, Councils).
          Examine whether increasing educational requirements for some positions would improve performance
           or allow an overall reduction in workforce. Survey President Judges and Public Prosecutors about ways
           in which delegating responsibility to subsidiary staff would be of assistance and whether increased
           educational requirements would assist in doing so (MOJ, Councils).
          Use position announcements as an opportunity to describe unique characteristics of positions and
           institutions (MOJ).66
          Assess clarity of staff evaluation criteria and processes in light of legal framework (MOJ).
          Use performance evaluations to summarize performance deficits that could be rectified through training
           (MOJ with assistance of courts and prosecutors’ offices).

66
     Allowed as long as the position announcement does not contradict the terms of the systematization.

                                                              38
                                                                                            Montenegro Judiciary
                                                                                     Human Resource Management


D.         Training

          Expand training on judicial branch management for president judges and public prosecutors, building on
           success of training in finance, human resources, case management training for President Judges and
           training in cooperation between the judiciary and the media in
           Montenegro for judges and prosecutors. Evaluate training offered to president judges in Spain, France
           and California (MOJ, Councils, Training Center).
          Develop a mandatory training program for advisors. While 20% of those receiving training at the Judicial
           Training Center are advisors, there is no specific training program devoted to them. Training would be
           based on the expanded list of duties developed above (MOJ, Councils, Training Center).
          Survey judiciary employees and their managers about the areas of greatest training need. Develop a
           multi-year training plan against which donor and government funding can be sought (MOJ).


III.       DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE OF JUDGES AND PROSECUTORS
          Analyze sanctions imposed to date for clarity and consistency, based on results listed in official records
           of the councils. This item is included in the Justice Strategy and Action Plan (Councils).
          Finalize implementation of disciplinary/dismissal database to allow assessment of clarity and
           consistency of sanctions imposed. This item is included in the Justice Strategy and Action Plan (Councils).
          Increase the functional separation of the disciplinary prosecutor and disciplinary commission in both
           Councils by creating an ethical wall between their functions. This item is included in the Justice Strategy
           and Action Plan. Councils in other jurisdictions have both a disciplinary prosecutor and an attorney who
           represents the Council in disciplinary proceedings, thus creating appropriate separation of functions
           (Councils).
          Build on training offered to on integrity plans, anti-corruption, and ethics. Evaluate training offered to
           judicial employees in Spain, France and California (MOJ/Training Center).




                                                           39
