Desk Review of Analytic Work on Justice
Reform in Serbia
Background and Scope

The Desk Review of Analytic Work on Justice Reform in Serbia is conducted as a part of the Serbia
Judicial Functional Review (JFR) under the umbrella of the Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Justice Sector
Support administered by the World Bank. The Desk Review Report is a deliverable of the JFR under
Component 2: Performance and Justice Service Delivery: Baseline and Challenges in the Serbian Judicial
System.

As the integral part of the JFR the Desk Review Report (DRR) shares the same objective, focus and scope
as the JFR as identified and outlined in the JFR Concept Note. Therefore, the conducted review of
analytic work on justice in Serbia does not provide entire review of all analytical works related to justice
Serbian judiciary. The DRR rather focuses on the information such work provides on the activity of the
Serbian institutions and how the performance of such institutions supports the delivery of justice
services by the courts and impacts the reform efforts. Where a question arises as to whether a certain
analytical work would be examined under the desk review, the test to be applied will be ‘whether issues
analyzed in a specific analytical work relate to the delivery of justice services by the courts in Serbia’. The
DRR focuses on information the specific work provides regarding the three areas of performance in
terms of justice service delivery: efficiency of service delivery; quality of services delivered, and; access
to these services. Special focus is given to any recommendations on future reform activities indicated in
the reviewed analytical works.

The DRR focuses only on recent work i.e. work which provides information relevant for the current
efforts to reform the Serbian judiciary (a tentative timeframe is works produced in the last three years,
since 2010). In summarizing and outlining information provided in the relevant work the DRR follows
the analytical structure set for the JFR.

In terms of the type of documents reviewed the DRR is to primarily focus on the existing analytical work
but, to a lesser extent and only where so is relevant for the JFR: survey findings, reports of relevant
judicial institutions, strategies, articles. The DRR includes a reference list of documents which are not in
the focus of the DRR but are in content related to it. The documents listed in this reference list could be
used as reference for further research in the specific area of interest. Laws, bylaws, treaties and other
legislation is not reviewed under the DRR.

While the DRR is produced as a deliverable and an integral part of the JFR DRR is also meant to be used
as a standalone document. The DRR will be disclosed to the general public and it may be used by all
interested stakeholders. It is to serve as reference to existing and relevant analytical work that has
recently been undertaken in relation to justice sector performance and related challenges, with a focus
on the delivery of justice services by the courts. Consequently, the DRR identifies as many analytical
works as possible and available at the time of drafting, catalogues and stores them taking stock of
existing challenges, success stories and lessons learned from each. List of abbreviations and acronyms



                                                                                                             1
used throughout the DRR is attached as Annex 1; List of analytical works included in the DRR is attached
as Annex 2.

The analytical works reviewed in the DRR have been produced by different international and local
institutions and not the World Bank. The DRR purpose is only to summarize the analytical works and not
to opine or further analyze them. The fact that these documents were chosen and reviewed under the
DRR does not mean that the Word Bank or the team preparing JFR shares the opinions, views or
recommendations expressed therein nor does it imply that the World Bank certifies or confirms that the
facts expressed therein are true and accurate.




                                                                                                      2
Table of Contents
Background and Scope.................................................................................................................... 1
Table of Contents ............................................................................................................................ 3
Analytical Work ............................................................................................................................... 4
Analytical Work Produced in the EU Accession Process................................................................. 4
1. Commission Staff Working Document, Serbia, 2013 Progress Report ...................................... 4
2. Commission Staff Working Document, Serbia, 2012 Progress Report ...................................... 4
3. Commission Staff Working Document, Serbia, 2010 Progress Report ...................................... 6
Analytical Work Produced by the European Commission for Efficiency of Justice and Data
Submitted by the Ministry of Justice .............................................................................................. 7
4. European Judicial Systems, Efficiency and Quality of Justice ......................................................
              ...................................................................................................................................... 7
5. Serbia Country Report to CEPEJ on Efficiency and Quality of Justice, data 2011 ...................... 7
6. Serbia Country Report to CEPEJ on Efficiency and Quality of Justice, data 2009 ...................... 9
Analytical Work Analyzing Enforcement Processes...................................................................... 10
7. Civil Enforcement in the Western Balkans ............................................................................... 10
8. Enforcement in the Western Balkans and its Compatibility with the Human Rights Standards
   of the Council of Europe .......................................................................................................... 12
SIGMA Reports .............................................................................................................................. 13
9. SIGMA, Priorities and SIGMA, Assessment, Serbia, April 2013 ............................................... 13
Analytical Works produced by IMG .............................................................................................. 13
10.          Analysis of Diversion Orders and Alternative Sanctions Application Practices ......... 13
Core Judicial Strategy .................................................................................................................... 14
11.          National Strategy for Reform of Justice for the Period 2013 – 2018 ......................... 14
12.          Action plan for the implementation of the National Strategy for Reform of Justice 17
Annual Reports ............................................................................................................................. 19
Annual Reports of the Supreme Court of Cassation ..................................................................... 19
13.          Annual Report on Courts' Activity in 2012, Supreme Court of Cassation .................. 19
14.          Annual Report on Courts' Activity in 2011, Supreme Court of Cassation .................. 20
15.          Annual Report on Courts' Activity in 2010, Supreme Court of Cassation .................. 22
Annual Reports of the State Prosecution Office ........................................................................... 23
16.          Work of Pubic Prosecution Offices on Fighting Crime and Protection of Law and
   Constitution in 2011 ................................................................................................................. 23
Surveys .......................................................................................................................................... 24
17.          Global Corruption Barometer National Report – Serbia, Transparency International ,
   data for 2013 ............................................................................................................................ 24
Reference List................................................................................................................................ 25
Annex 1 Acronyms and Abbreviations .......................................................................................... 26
Annex 2 Reviewed Analytical Works............................................................................................. 28




                                                                                                                                                    3
Analytical Work
The DRR incudes analytical work which has been produced both by international and national
institutions and which contain information on how the performance of such institutions in Serbia
supports the delivery of justice services by the courts and impacts the Serbian judicial reform efforts. A
tentative timeframe is analytical works produced in the last three years, since 2010. The analytical
works are systemized by institution which has facilitated their development/publication and where
possible or applicable by legal area they cover.

Analytical Work Produced in the EU Accession Process

1. Commission Staff Working Document, Serbia, 2013 Progress Report, Brussels, October 2013
Report covers the period Oct 2012/Sept 2013; briefly describes the relations between Serbia and the EU,
analyses the situation in Serbia in terms of the political and economic criteria for EU membership and
reviews Serbia’s capacity to take on the acquis.
Highlights: The Report rates the overall legal predictability and enforcement of court decisions as weak.
It identifies backlog and length of proceeding as the most critical concerns and provides data on case
disposal for Constitutional and Administrative courts where these issues are most pressing. Lack of free
legal aid system and the new general adversarial system are considered important obstacles for access
to justice. Other identified deficiencies of the judicial system include: judges’ and prosecutors' lack of
capacity to deal with complex legal issues; week application of disciplinary measures and of ethic
standards to judges and prosecutors; corruption; inconsistency in case-law. Notable reported
developments in the judicial sector for the covered period include introduction of a new judicial strategy
and its action plan, reappointment of judges and prosecutors by a decision of the Constitutional Court
(approx. 1/3 of total number); development of a new court network; postponing of introduction of
notaries for 2014 and low number of bailiffs with their uneven geographical coverage.
  Guide to relevant information

  p. 9 ¶ 5 review of the Serbian judicial system (exe. summary)
  p. 11 ¶ 8 domestic processing of war crimes (exe. summary) ¶
  p. 18 ¶ 2 assessment of implementation of laws (exe. summary)
  pp. 38-48 detailed assessment on achievements regarding Ch. 23
  pp. 50 ¶ 5 judicial cooperation in civil and criminal matters with international partners
  p. 51 ¶ 1 police cooperation and fight against organized crime


2. Commission Staff Working Document, Serbia, 2012 Progress Report, Brussels, October 2012
Report covers the period Oct 2011/Sept 2012; briefly describes the relations between Serbia and the EU,
analyses the situation in Serbia in terms of the political and economic criteria for EU membership and
reviews Serbia’s capacity to take on the acquis.



                                                                                                        4
Highlights: The Report rates the overall legal predictability and enforcement of court decisions as weak.
Backlog remains a pressing concern. In 2011, the courts received 2.23 million new cases, resolved 2.65
million and were left with a backlog of 3.34 million cases. Imbalances persist in the courts’ workload.
The quality of statistics needs to be improved. On independence of the judiciary, HJC and the SPC took
over the administration of the budget of courts and prosecution services. MoJ remains in charge of IT
and capital expenditures in the court system and funding of the courts’ administrative staff. The HJC and
the SPC have not yet adopted rules on regular evaluation of the work and performance of serving judges
and prosecutors. The legal framework still leaves room for undue political influence over the judiciary, in
particular Parliament’s power to appoint judges and prosecutors. The re-appointment procedure carried
out for judges and prosecutors in 2009/2010 was overturned by the Constitutional Court as not meeting
the required standards.
The impartiality of judges continues to be broadly ensured thanks to automated allocation of court
cases introduced in all commercial courts and courts of general jurisdiction. On accountability, a first set
of Rules on Disciplinary Procedure and Liability were introduced which needs to be further aligned with
EU standards. The HJC has started to investigate and impose penalties in disciplinary proceedings. The
higher courts and the MoJ continued internal inspections on technical and administrative matters in the
courts, identifying shortcomings in registering and handling of court cases. A proper merit-based career
system for judges and prosecutors remains to be fully developed. It is still possible to enter the judicial
profession, in particular at higher levels, on the basis of unclear criteria without having passed through
the JA.
A number of laws came into force aimed at improving the efficiency of the judiciary and at applying
international standards. The JA provided a variety of in-service training which still need to be
systematized. The judicial budget for 2012 remained stable at some EUR 213 million (around 0.65% of
GDP). The first private bailiffs were sworn in while entry into force of the Law on Public Notaries was
postponed for 2013. The new Criminal Procedure Code gives the prosecution the lead role in collecting
evidence and presenting it before the court which aim is to shorten the investigative phase of criminal
proceedings. The prosecution service still has to demonstrate its ability to obtain convictions in high-
level cases against well-funded defense teams. On access to justice the fully adversarial system raises
questions on the ability of poorer defendants to finance an effective defense, while constitutional
guarantees on access to justice are in place. Legislation and funding for an effective system of free legal
aid still need to be developed.
Serbia remains moderately advanced in the areas of judicial cooperation in civil and criminal matters.
Serbia is actively involved in international police and judicial cooperation and law enforcement agencies
generally have sufficient capacity to carry out standard investigations. Additional efforts are needed to
increase capacities to carry out complex investigations and to strengthen coordination between law
enforcement agencies and the judiciary. A track record of proactive investigations and final convictions
in organized crime cases needs to be built up.




                                                                                                          5
  Guide to relevant information

  pp. 9-11 review of the Serbian judicial system and developments in the reported period (exe.
  summary)
  pp. 12 ¶ 4 judicial activity in anticorruption (exe. summary)
  p. 13 ¶ 5 prisons
  pp. 14 ¶ 1 access to justice
  pp. 49 52 - detailed assessment on achievements regarding Ch. 23
  pp. 53 ¶ 5 judicial cooperation in civil and criminal matters with international partners
  pp. 54 ¶ 1 police cooperation and fight against organized crime


3. Commission Staff Working Document, Serbia, 2010 Progress Report, Brussels, November 2010
Report covers the period mid Sept 2009 /early Oct 2010; briefly describes the relations between Serbia
and the EU, analyses the situation in Serbia in terms of the political and economic criteria for EU
membership and reviews Serbia’s capacity to take on the acquis.
Highlights: The Report states that Serbia made little progress towards further bringing its judicial system
into line with European standards. It concludes that overall Serbia’s judicial system only partially meets
its priorities and emphasizes that serious concerns exist over the way recent reforms were
implemented, in particular the reappointment of judges and prosecutors.
New Court Rules of Procedure were adopted in December 2009. They regulate the work of courts and
the internal organization of the new court network. The reappointment procedure for all judges and
prosecutors was carried out under the lead of the MoJ in the second half of 2009 and took effect as of
January 2010. The overall number of judges and prosecutors was reduced by 20–25%. A new structure
of the court network was implemented as of January 2010. The organization of the prosecution service
was changed accordingly. However, major aspects of the recent reforms are a matter of serious
concern. The reappointment procedure for judges and prosecutors was carried out in a non-transparent
way, putting at risk the principle of the independence of the judiciary. Objective criteria for
reappointment, which had been developed in close cooperation with the Council of Europe’s Venice
Commission, were not applied. Judges and prosecutors were not heard during the procedure and did
not receive adequate explanations for the decisions. First-time candidates (876 judges and 88 deputy
prosecutors) were appointed without conducting interviews or applying merit-based criteria. The overall
number of judges and prosecutors was not calculated in a reliable way on a proper needs assessment
basis and it was adjusted several times after the reappointment had already been carried out. The large
backlog of pending cases remains a matter of concern. A uniform system for organizing the work of the
court seats and the new court units has not been established. Case registration and the IT system
connecting all courts and court units and allowing access to files are not fully operational. While the JA
has been established as the body responsible for the vocational training and continued professional
development of judges the setting up of the Judicial Academy still is at an early stage and vocational
trainings have not yet started.
Access to justice is overall ensured, but there has been no further progress as legislation and funding for
a more effective system of free legal aid is still missing. Serbia made little progress in the reform of its



                                                                                                          6
prison system. Overcrowding in prisons is a concern. Decisive action is needed to develop an efficient
probation system and to introduce alternative sanctions on a broader scale.

Analytical Work Produced by the CEPEJ and Data Submitted by the Ministry of Justice

4. European Judicial Systems Edition 2012 (2010 data), Efficiency and Quality of Justice
The publication synthesizes data provided by European Commission for Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)
member states in the individual country reports and gives a comparative analysis of European judicial
systems. The publication is based on data collected in 2010. Data on Serbia used in the publication is
provided in the Serbian Country Report which report is described below (please see point 5 of the DRR).
Highlights: The publication indicates that Serbia is one of 13 (out of 36) states which has decreased its
judicial budget in the period 2008-2010 (in Serbia the decrease of the budget is for 17%). For a majority
of European states including Serbia the court taxes and fees constitute significant financial resources.
Serbia has the third highest share of court fees in the budget allocated for courts (after Malta and
Austria) standing at 43% (while average for the reported countries is 22.3%). Serbia is listed as one of
seven countries which uses only user survey's to evaluate its justice system. Serbia as well as majority of
European countries has between 1 and 2 courts per 100,000 inhabitants (1.8 courts). Among European
states Serbia (together with other former Yugoslav countries) has a very high number of professional
judges sitting in courts per 100,000 inhabitants. Serbia has a clearance rate of 85.4% for non litigious
and 91.6% for civil litigious cases. Serbia has 8.5 public prosecutors per 100,000 inhabitants which is
close to the European average. Timeframe for notification of a court decision on debt recovery to a
person living in the city where the court is sitting is for Serbia between 11 and 30 days this rates Serbia
as one of the slowest in Europe.

5. Serbia Country Report to CEPEJ on Efficiency and Quality of Justice, data 2011
The document is a country report submitted by the Serbian Ministry of Justice (MoJ) in preparation for
the publication of CEPEJ on European Judicial Systems Edition 2014. The document is prepared in the
standard scheme for evaluation of European judicial systems provided by CEPEJ submitted by all
participating CEPEJ countries. The scheme lists a number of yes/no questions and questions on
statistical data to which the Serbian MoJ has provided answers covering 2010. The information provided
does not include Kosovo.
The following areas are reviewed by the report:
Section 1: Demographic and Economic Data. General information on Serbia and budgetary data
concerning Serbian judicial system. This section covers data on budget for courts (EUR 111,016,635),
public prosecution and legal aid (budget for courts, prosecution and legal aid is EUR 183,772,1110) and
information on judicial fees (income from fees is EUR 85,137,114).
Section 2: Access to Justice and to all courts. Covers information on: (i) possibilities and use of legal aid
(indicating that legal aid exists and can exempt payment of court fees. No data is available on the
costing of legal aid); (ii) rights of the users and victims; (iii) information on confidence of citizens in their
justice system (indicating that only occasional surveys of parties have been conducted).
Section 3: Organization of a court system. Covers information on: (i) functioning of the courts, judges
and staff, prosecutors and staff, court budget and new technologies (data provided include no. of courts



                                                                                                               7
129; no. of judges 2455, no. of non judicial court staff 11040, no. of prosecutors 611 and prosecutor's
staff 1061); (ii) performance and evaluation (the report indicates that system for monitoring case
disposal is in place). It indicates that four main performance and quality indicators used in Serbia are (1)
length of proceedings, (2) closed cases, (3) productivity of judges and court staff, (4) judicial quality and
organizational quality of the courts.
Section 4: Fair Trail. Covers information on timeframes of proceedings - Caseflow management and
timeframes of judicial proceedings (providing data on no. of pending / disposed cases per area of law
litigation, misdemeanor, non criminal and criminal cases).
Section 5: Career of judges and public prosecutors. Covers information on recruitment and promotion,
training, practice of the profession, disciplinary procedures. The report explains that prosecutors and
judges are selected initially for a 3 year probation period after which they are selected on a permanent
basis. Training for judges is annual and compulsory save for in-service training for the use of computer
facilities in courts. Data on judicial salaries (net annual beginning of career salary is EUR 9600), no data is
available on disciplinary actions against judges as the disciplinary procedures have been set up only in
2010.
Section 6: Lawyers. Covers information on status of the profession and training, practicing the
profession, quality standards and disciplinary proceedings (total no. of lawyers 7883, no information is
available for disciplinary proceedings).
Section 7: ADR. Information on mediation provided however no statistical data is available.
Section 8: Enforcement of court decisions. Covers information on: (i) execution of decisions in civil
matters (no. of enforcement agents 413), (ii) efficiency in enforcement services, (iii) execution of
decisions in criminal matters.
Section 9: Notaries (no data available as notaries are not yet introduced).
Section 10: Court interpreters - no. of accredited court interpreters is 2100.
Section 11: Judicial Experts - no. of accredited judicial experts is 5351.
Section 12: Foreseen Reforms. MoJ reports nine new anticipated reform activities including new Civil
Procedure Code, Criminal Procedure Law, Administrative procedure Law, Mediation Law, introduction of
notaries and further introduction of bailiffs.




                                                                                                             8
  Guide to relevant information

  pp. 5-7 Section 1 demographic and economic data (budget of the judiciary)
  pp. 7-11 Section 2 Access to justice and to all courts
  pp. 11-20 Section 3 Organization of a court system
  pp. 20-27 Section 4 Fair Trail
  pp. 27-35 Section 5 Career of judges and public prosecutors
  pp. 35-38 Section 6 Lawyers
  pp. 39-40 Section 7 ADR
  pp. 40-44 Section 8 Enforcement of court decisions
  pp. 44-45 Section 9 Notaries
  pp. 45-46 Section 10 Court interpreter's
  pp. 46-47 Section 11 Judicial experts
  p. 47 Section 12 Foreseen reforms

6. Serbia Country Report to CEPEJ on Efficiency and Quality of Justice, data 2009
This document is a country report submitted by the Serbian MoJ in preparation for the publication of
CEPEJ on European Judicial Systems Edition 2012. The document is prepared in the standard scheme for
evaluation of European judicial systems provided by CEPEJ by all participating countries. The scheme
lists a number of yes/no questions and questions on statistical data to which the Serbian MoJ has
provided answers covering 2008. Information provided does not include Kosovo.
Highlights: The following areas are covered by the report:
Section 1: Demographic and Economic Data. General information on Serbia and budgetary data
concerning Serbian judicial system. Data include budget for courts (EUR 195,863,391), income from
judicial fees (EUR 83,533,573).
Section 2: Access to Justice and to all courts covering: (i) possibilities and use of legal aid (indicating that
legal aid exists however no data is provided on the costing); (ii) rights of the users and victims (iii)
confidence of citizens in their justice system (indicating that only occasional surveys of judges,
prosecutors and citizens are conducted).
Section 3: Organization of a court system covering information on (i) functioning of the courts, judges
and staff, prosecutors and staff, court budget and new technologies (providing data such as no. of courts
138; no. of judges 2506, no. of non judicial court staff 9602, no. of prosecutors 689 and prosecutor's
staff 950) (ii) performance and evaluation (the section indicates that monitoring of case disposal is in
place). It indicates that four main performance and quality indicators used in Serbia are (1) incoming
cases (2) closed cases (3) pending cases and backlogs).
Section 4: Fair Trail covers information on caseflow management and timeframes of judicial proceedings
(provides information on the manner of case management).
Section 5: Career of judges and public prosecutors. Covers information on recruitment, nomination and
promotion, training, practice of the profession, disciplinary procedures (among other explaining that
judges are elected by the Parliament at the proposal of the HCJ, data on judicial salaries (net annual
beginning of career salary EUR 10393).



                                                                                                              9
Section 6: Lawyers - Covers information on status of the profession and training, practicing the
profession, quality standards and disciplinary proceedings.
Section 7: ADR. Information on mediation (total number of 423 cases were resolved in the mediation
centre since 1 March 2007).
Section 8: Enforcement of court decisions. Covers information on (i) execution of decision in civil
matters (no bailiffs have been introduced); (ii) efficiency in enforcement services (among other
information the key identified issues in enforcement are: no execution at all, excessive length and
insufficient supervision); (iii) Execution of decisions in criminal matters.
Section 9: Notaries (Serbian judicial system does not include notaries).
Section 12: Foreseen Reforms. MoJ provides a detailed information and explanation on reform efforts
conducted in the reported period. It notes that it has carried out a thorough research and a number of
analyses of the current situation and problems in the judiciary. As a result of this MoJ has proposed 28
new draft laws 22 of which were endorsed by the Parliament. A part of legislative package are laws on
judiciary reorganizing the entire judicial system including the system of courts its seats and areas of
jurisdiction.
    Guide to relevant information

    pp. 3-7 Section 1 demographic and economic data (budget of the judiciary)
    pp. 7-11 Section 2 Access to Justice and to all courts
    pp. 13-21 Section 3 Organization of a court system
    pp. 21-27 Section 4 Fair Trail
    pp. 27-34 Section 5 Career of judges and public prosecutors
    pp. 34-37 Section 6 Lawyers
    pp. 38-40 Section 7 ADR
    pp. 40-45 Section 8 Enforcement of court decisions
    pp. 45-46 Section 9 Notaries
    p. 47 Section 10 Court interpreter's
    pp. 48-52 Section 11 Functioning of justice


Analytical Work Analyzing Enforcement Processes1

7. Civil Enforcement in the Western Balkans, An overview of the present situation and future
    developments in the various legal systems in the Western Balkans, Jos Uitdehaag, Eric Vincken,
    Albania Tirana 2011
The publication reviews the enforcement systems of the Western Balkan jurisdictions (Serbia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Albania, Montenegro, Croatia, FYORM, Kosovo) and shows the state of play regarding
enforcement as of December 2010.


1
 Please see also Enforcement in the Western Balkans and its Compatibility with the Human Rights Standards of the
Council of Europe, J. Uitdehaag reviewed under point 8 of the DRR



                                                                                                             10
The publication highlights that all the surveyed countries include a common historical background -
socialist based economy and the similar political context - the accession to the EU (requiring alignment
with the aquis and EU directives regulating enforcement processes). Given the commonalities all
countries encounter the same problems: (a) legal framework based on socials principles of enforcement
which protects and favors the debtor enabling the debtor to frustrate and delay the enforcement
proceedings; (b) enforcement is organized within first instance courts with staff working on
enforcement not adequately recognized in the court system, (c) existing culture of not paying bills with
creditors that have not developed any system of collection but lean on the courts to perform all
activities; (d) weak service provided by the registries and postal service hindering servicing of documents
(e) lack of cross border cooperation in enforcement (need for multilateral agreements on recognizing
court awards).
The publication reviews the cases heard by the ECtHR against the Western Balkan countries in the area
of enforcement (in Hornsby v. Greece ECtHR has confirmed that Article 6 also applies to enforcement).
Based on ECtHR rulings deficiency in enforcement could breach Article 6 in terms of the length of
proceedings but also in terms of the right to protection of property. Before the ECtHR several cases
against Serbia were heard. Part of the cases dealt with whether all remedies under Serbian law were
exhausted (see case ETV company v Serbia, Felbab v Serbia - described in 8 of the DRR). In these cases
ECtHR ruled that the claimant is obligated to exhaust only effective remedies within the Serbian legal
system and not all remedies available as suggested by the defendant (Serbia). Another bulk of cases
before ECtHR deal with delay in enforcement (Krivošev v. Serbia in which it was ruled that “Irrespective
of whether enforcement is to be carried out against private of a State actor, it is up to the State to take
all necessary steps to execute the final court judgment as well as to, in doing so, ensure the effective
participation of its entire apparatus, failing which it will fall short of the requirements of Article 6”).
Further, ECtHR dealt with the issue of excessive number of legal remedies in the Serbian legal system
(please see Bulović v Serbia described under DRR point X). Backlog not being an excuse for delay was the
court's ruling in Illić v Serbia (please see Illić v Serbia described under DRR point 8). Finally, in cases
regarding collection over state controlled debtors Kacapor and others v. Serbia, and Grišević and others
v. Serbia the court ruled that state is responsible for the debts of companies that are predominately
state owned.
The publication surveys the state of enforcement in Serbia as at December 2010 which was the time
when the currently applicable Enforcement Act was in draft form and its adoption by the Parliament was
expected in 2011. At the time of publishing the 2004 Enforcement Act was in force and the publication
gives a detailed overview of the enforcement rules and processes as set by the 2004 Enforcement Act.2
The publication rates the enforcement processes conducted by the NBS as the most efficient. The NBS
conducts enforcement over bank accounts by transferring the amounts from all the debtor’s accounts to
the creditor and by freezing the all debtor accounts for any payment if the judgment based on which the
enforcement is processed has not been exhausted. The system is highly automated and IT supported



2
 Given that this DRR was drafted at the time the 2004 Enforcement Act was no longer in force the report will
refrain from summarizing the description of the 2004 Enforcement Act.



                                                                                                               11
and allows for additional services to be provided to the parties in question (e.g. issuance of certificates).
The downside of this system is that it is used only with commercial entities.
Backlog in the courts including backlog of enforcement cases is a pressing concern. Judges have a key
role in the enforcement processes and are involved in every phase of the process (the publication
questions whether such high involvement is absolutely necessary). The publication goes further to
outline the main novelties introduced by the then draft Enforcement Act (Enforcement Act of 2011).
These are introduction of private enforcement officers and changes in the appeal process where appeals
are reviewed by the same first instance court (and not a higher instance court as per 2004 Enforcement
Act). The latter was included in the new draft law as the right to appeal was the most common right
misused by debtors for the purpose of delaying the enforcement proceedings. The publication notes
that training is further needed especially for court clerks working on enforcement and gives detail on the
issues with monitoring ethic and disciplinary standards. Finally, it summarizes the findings of the USAID
BES project which surveyed enforcement agents in eight commercial courts in Serbia. The findings of the
survey are highlighted as key concerns which should be addressed in the reform of enforcement in
Serbia. The findings include the following information: most enforcement agents have suggested that
their success rate in enforcement was normally between 10% and 20%. One respondent noted that
three enforcement attempts would be ideal but that there are at least 10 with no successful
enforcement at the end. No enforcement agents have said that enforcement could be conducted in one
attempt. Backlogs are a concern, at some courts in Belgrade agents receive up to 300 new cases that
require actual enforcement activities per month per officer. All these enforcement activities have to be
dealt with minimum infrastructure (no assistants, lack of vehicles, computers, phones and low salaries).
  Guide to relevant information

  pp. 45-49 Serbia and the ECtHR
  pp. 233-259 Serbia Chapter

8. Enforcement in the Western Balkans and its Compatibility with the Human Rights Standards of the
     Council of Europe, J. Uitdehaag
This is a chapter of the Enforcement and Enforceability Tradition and Reform, C.H. van Rhee and A.
Uzelac (eds) Antwerp: Intersentia, 2010 describes a number of ECtHR cases arising from the countries in
Western Balkans. The analyzed cases relate to the excessive length of enforcement and violate the right
to a fair trial within a reasonable time and the right to have a judgment enforced. The Chapter analysis
three ECtHR cases on Serbia: (1) In EVT Company v. Serbia applicant was informed that the enforcement
proceedings were hindered by the debtors' discontented employees and the police (the police refused
to assist the court bailiffs). The ECtHR ruled that it was up to the State to take all necessary steps to
insure enforcement of a final court award and ensure effective participation of its entire apparatus
(including police). (2) Felbab v. Serbia: ECtHR ruled in favor of the applicant which claimed that there
was no effective remedy under the domestic law for non enforcement of a final access order in a child
related matter. (3) In Bulovic v. Serbia numerous appeals in the enforcement procedure, ill scheduled
hearing and suspension of the proceedings delayed the enforcement so much that finally the applicants
withdraw its claim as the debtor has fully compensated her. The ECtHR noted that the decision



                                                                                                          12
favorable to the applicant is not in principle sufficient to deprive him or her of the status of a victim. The
ECtHR ruled that Government failed to provide with any compensation for the delay t. Further, ECtHR
ruled that a chronic backlog of cases is not a valid explanation for excessive delay. The States are
obligated to organize their judicial system so that their courts can meet their requirements including
hearing cases in a reasonable time.
The Chapter concludes that in all the analyzed countries the following inefficiencies of the judicial
system are similar and should be addressed: (i) difficulties in enforcing legislation that is outdated,
incomprehensible or inappropriate; (ii) difficulties in finding an appropriate balance between the
interests of the debtor and the creditor; (iii) excessive number of legal remedies leading to successive
remittals; (iv) lack of efficiency and effectiveness of the organization of the enforcement system; (v)
insufficient budget of the enforcement system; (vi) lack of professionalism, infrastructure and trained
staff; (vii) preferential treatment of the State or State entities which makes enforcement difficult against
such debtors.

SIGMA Reports

9. SIGMA, Priorities, Serbia, May 2013 and SIGMA, Assessment, Serbia, April 2013
The report proposes priority country reform targets which should be achieved by 2020 and relevant sub-
targets while it sequences priority activities in 1-2, 3-5 and 5+ year time perspectives.
Highlights: SIGMA report identifies five priority targets which should be achieved by 2020 among which
reform of the judiciary is looked at as a related objective of public administration reform. To insure that
sound administrative procedures are applied in most areas, offering legal certainty to citizens and
businesses the new Law on General Administrative Procedure (LGAP) in accordance with EU principles
and good practice should be adopted within 1 to 2 years. MoJPA is in this timeframe to prepare a
targeted implementation action plans that will enable the smooth implementation of the LGAP in the
administration and judiciary. Target for 3 to 5 years is to align the judicial control of administrative acts
with EU principles and practices, by amending the Law on Administrative Disputes.


Analytical Works produced by IMG
10. Analysis of Diversion Orders and Alternative Sanctions Application Practices in Serbia, Mapping
    Resources of Local Communities for Implementation of Diversion Orders and Alternative
    Sanctions, Nadezda Sataric, and Dragan Obradovic , Belgrade, May 2011
The purpose of the study was to identify human resources for development of procedures and
standards for implementation of diversion orders and alternative sanctions as well as to gather
information on, mechanisms, experiences, obstacles and examples of good practices that will serve as
foundation for proper implementation. The study was developed through desk review, research of good
practices and by interviews with representatives of institutions within judicial and social protection
systems in 10 towns/municipalities.
Highlights: Desk review was carried out to identify the courts and public prosecutor’s offices that have
so far applied diversions and alternative sanctions. Through the review a great discrepancy in data was



                                                                                                           13
identified including direct incomparability of data. In addition statistic in both sectors – judiciary and
social protection – are not in line with applicable laws.
The analysis showed that members of judiciary did not have any have specific trainings on application of
diversions and alternative sanctions while representatives of the Center for Social Welfare and Civil
society organization did not have a unified training on diversions and alternative sanctions
implementation.        Representatives of public utility service and public institutions where
diversions/alternative sanctions were implemented did not have any training on juvenile justice. Most
of the offered training did not include all representatives of key systems in juvenile justice at local level.
The report includes examples of unclear role of Centers for Social Welfare case manager and different
practices in different phases of diversions/alternative sanctions implementation. Competences of
different bodies in diversions implementation cause confusion in cooperation among professionals
from. This issue is additionally complicated since there are no agreements at local level among the
judiciary, Centers for Social Welfare and organizations implementing diversions/alternative sanctions.
Diversion implementation is limited. In practice, most frequently used measure is compensation of
damage and participation, without remuneration, in the work of humanitarian organizations or
performing the community work of social, local or environmental character. Alcohol/drug treatment
and individual or group counselling cannot be applied because there are no agreements between justice
and health system. In addition, issue of funding is a problem - costs of criminal sanctions should be
covered from the central budget. However, as diversions is not a criminal sanctions, it remains unclear
how will it be financed.


  Guide to relevant information

  pp. 7-15 desk review/analysis for 2008 – 2009
  pp. 15-31 report on meetings with representatives of judiciary
  pp. 31-40 report on meetings with representatives of Centers for Social Welfare
  pp. 40-45 report on meetings with representatives of the civil society organizations and public
  institutions (gerontology centers and one public utility service)




Core Judicial Strategy
The National Strategy for Reform of Justice and its implementing action plan have been reviewed under
the DRR. Other strategies which are related to the judicial reform efforts but are non-core have been
included in the reference list below.

11. National Strategy for Reform of Justice for the Period 2013 – 2018, 1 July 2013, Serbia
The objective of the Strategy is to increase the quality and efficiency of justice and to strengthen judicial
independence and accountability in order to strengthen the rule of law, democracy, legal certainty,
improve access to justice and restore the citizens' confidence in the judicial system. The Strategy bases
the reform agenda on the following principles: independence, impartiality and quality of justice,




                                                                                                           14
professionalism, accountability, efficiency. It in detail defines the directions in which the reforms are to
be take place to achieve the set out principles.
Below is a summarized review of strategic directions / specific goals set to achieve the principles
outlined in the Strategy. Each strategic direction / specific goal is further worked into measures and
actions defined in the Action Plan (described under point 12 of the DRR.)
Independence is to be achieved by activities aimed at strengthening the HJC and SPC. This is to be done
by precisely defining HJC, SPC competences, improvement of their internal processes and by preparing
the needed constitutional changes. Budget management should be fully transferred to the judiciary. The
HJC and the SPC capacity to take on the judicial budget management should be strengthened while a
clear separation of budgeting responsibilities between HJC, MoJ and SPC is needed. The JA is to become
the point of entry to the judicial profession, while carrier and HR management is to be improved by
setting out a clear grading system. The position of the misdemeanor courts should be improved.

Impartiality and quality of justice is to be improved by developing and monitoring the implementation of
ethical codes and integrity plans and by enabling the court users to report wrongdoings. Laws dealing
with conflict of interest should be enhanced. The reform efforts should focus on strengthening the
capacity of the institutions in charge of protection of property rights of the Republic of Serbia. In terms
of access to justice the legal framework regulating free legal aid should be adequately defined. To
enable targeted aid specific criteria to identify the poor are needed. Greater use of ADR should be
encouraged Awareness of court user's right to a court interpreter should be raised. Consistent case law,
further improvements and amendments of the legal framework are needed to align with acquis and
international standards. These changes should not, however, create a need for the framework to be
further frequently changed. Public access to databases of legislation, case law, judicial records and
proceedings is to be provided (at the same time insuring confidentiality of appropriate files). Greater
and proactive interaction with citizens with a set up of services for help to victims and witnesses is
needed.
Professionalism is to be enhanced by providing continuous training at the JA and making the training
mandatory. The JA should be an entry point for positions in the judiciary while the initial training and
evaluation mechanisms at the JA have to be improved. Judicial staff - judicial assistants and associates
administrative staff in the courts and prosecutor offices should receive adequate training. A system of
training for bailiffs, notaries and mediators should be established. Processes for appointment of expert
court witnesses and judicial interpreters have to be reexamined and revised. Reform of the law school
and of the bar exam should commence. The capacity of the JA should be strengthened.
Accountability should be strengthened by implementing clear standards for evaluation of judges in
terms of work performance and ethics. Civil liability and internal disciplinary processes should exist and
be implemented in case of wrongdoings. The rules insuring responsibility should apply to all including
members of the HJC, SCP as well as bailiffs, notaries, expert court witnesses, court interpreters,
mediators and administrative staff. To enable evaluating work performance a system of data collection
and processing should be set. A unified system for collection and review of citizens' complains should be
organized while the existing mechanisms are to be strengthened with a clear and transparent definition
of disciplinary liability.



                                                                                                         15
To improve efficiency of the judiciary a system an even number of cases per judge should be established
and reintegration of reappointed judges completed. This will make even out the workload of judges and
prosecutors. The legal framework should allow for a possibility to horizontally transfer the judges
between courts with adequate stimulation and based on the Constitution. The network of courts is to
be aligned with the Brussels Agreement. Periodic analysis of the efficiency of the new court network
should be conducted to enable gradual adjustment to the service demand. Further enhancement of
judicial administration is needed. Infrastructure investment planning based on degree of priority is
needed. An ITC body for governing E-justice should be organized while the judiciary should be provided
with a continuous IT support, IT capacity and infrastructure should be development. Judicial services
should be available online to general public with few exceptions based on strong justifications. Further
significant efforts are needed for reduction of backlog. A program for backlog reduction based on
priority of cases should be set. Use of simplified procedural forms (such as ADR) whenever legal possible
should be encouraged. Legal framework should be changed to shorten trial time. Investments into
infrastructure are needed to resolve the lack of courtrooms and lack of prosecutorial offices and enable
more trails per court. Liability in case of misuse of trail rights to intentionally prolong trial time should be
insured. Notaries should be introduced into the legal system. Enforcement should be enhanced by
greater use of bailiffs. A separate strategy is prepared in the area of enforcement of criminal sanctions.
The Strategy evaluates the achievements of the previous judicial reform strategy and provides a
comprehensive overview of the previous and current reform efforts and status of each activity.
The Strategy recognizes the following issues as the most urgent and pressing concerns of the Serbian
judiciary: (i) reintegration of the judges and prosecutors into the Serbia justice system 3 and reexamining
the judicial network; (ii) reduction of backlog; (iii) resolution of cases within a reasonable timeframe; (iv)
improvement of the status of the HJC and the SPC and legislative amendments which would insure
accountability and competences of the two bodies; (v) consistency of case law; (vi) establishing a
unified system of e-Justice.
    Guide to relevant information

    p. 2 Goal of the Strategy
    pp. 2-5 Key principles and priorities
    p. 5 Action plan
    pp. 5-8 Reform efforts
    pp. 8-25 Review of results of the judicial reform to-date in comparison to weaknesses and reform
    activities set out by the 2006 Strategy
    pp. 25-43 Organization of the Strategy
    p. 43 MoJ and the Strategy
    pp. 44-48 Standard of the activity results




3
 This refers to judges and prosecutors which were not reappointed to their position after the 2009/2010 re-
election process but which were reinstated to their positions by the Constitutional Court decision in 2012.



                                                                                                              16
12. Action plan for the implementation of the National Strategy for Reform of Justice for the Period
    2013 - 2018
The Action plan covers the period from 2013 to 2018 and was developed to facilitate implementation of
the National Strategy for Reform of Justice (described under point 11 of this DRR). The Action Plan is to
be revisited and revised every year based on the progress made. The Action Plan outlines the reform
activities in the following manner: It sets our strategic principles which are further worked out in 
strategic goals  strategic directions  measures, activities, deadlines, responsible units, source of
financing. For each strategic goal it sets out indicators and methods to verify whether such indicators
have been met. Below is a summarized outline of activities which should be conducted under each
strategic principle:
Independence of the judiciary is to be improved by: (i) revising and drafting new laws and bylaws,
including preparatory activities for the change of the Constitution. The following legislation should be
revised/drafted: Constitution, HJC Act, SPC Act, Law on Judges, Law on Public Prosecutors, Rulebooks on
HJC and SPC procedure, bylaws on criteria for evaluation and promotion of judges and prosecutors; (ii)
enabling that judicial budget is managed by the judiciary - HJC and SPC. HJC and SPC should participate
in preparation of 2014 budget, HJC and SPC capacity on budget management should be strengthened
(especially on financial planning and methodologies); (iii) insuring that all other judicial issues are
managed by the judiciary. In particular change in laws is needed to insure that HJC monitors the
implementation of a Court l Rulebook while SPC monitors the implementation of a Public Prosecutor's
Administrative Rulebook. Further, HJC and SPC should manage the courts and prosecutors property and
infrastructure issues. HJC and SPC should strengthen and/or create departments for: strategic planning
and analysis, for supervision of the work of courts/ prosecutors, for evaluation and promotion; (iv) other
activities and needed to insure independence of judiciary such as: creation of working groups to monitor
the impact of change of laws, promotion of judicial profession in laws schools, improving / clarifying of
the status of non-professional judges (jurors) as well as of associate public prosecutors and associate
judges, misdemeanor judges.
On improving impartiality and quality of justice: (i) new laws and bylaws should be introduced or
amended in the following areas: on monitoring of plans of integrity – Law on Anticorruption Agency
should be amended, action plan, a plan of integrity and a questionnaire should be drafted; new code of
professional ethics for the judiciary developed; on conflict of interest - Law on Judges, Law on Public
Prosecutors, Criminal Procedure Act, Law on Anticorruption Agency, Law on Public Servants should be
amended; on representing the property interests of the Republic of Serbia the law and bylaw on the
public attorney should be drafted; on the right to a natural judge amending the Law on Judges and the
Court Rulebook; on the legal aid - drafting the laws and bylaws on legal aid, amending the Criminal
Procedure Code and Law on Mediation reviewing other legislation regulating access to justice for
marginalized groups; on aligning the Serbian judicial laws with the acquis communautaire and the
international standards - analysis of the existing legal framework and amending the Law on Judges, Law
on Network of Courts and Prosecutor’ Offices, Law on Public Prosecutors, Civil Procedure Law, Criminal
Procedure Law, Law on Notaries, Law on Organization of Courts, Criminal Code, Law on Mediation, Law
on Probation, Law on Enforcement of Criminal Sanctions, Law on Misdemeanors, Law on Legal Aid, Law
on International Cooperation in Criminal Matters, Law on Offences in Commerce, Law on Bar Exam, Law
on Judicial Academy, Law on Non Contentious Procedure, Law on Protection of Personal Data, Law on


                                                                                                       17
Confidentiality of Data, Law on HJC, Law on SPC, Civil Code, International Private Law, Law on the Public
Attorney, Law on Property, Law on Official Use of Language, Law on Confiscation of Property Obtained
through Criminal Acts; on consistency of case law - amending the Law on Organization of Courts and
Court Rulebook and review of the procedural laws; on developing state bodies for support of victims and
witnesses - amending the Law on Organization of Courts, Court Rulebook, Law on Public Prosecutors; (ii)
capacity should be improved: by motivating the best students to work in the judiciary (through
organization of volunteer work and offering of higher salaries), by regulating status of judicial and
prosecutor's associates and trainees, by improving of the status of jurors and misdemeanor judges, by
introducing training on ethic standards; (iii) integrity should be strengthened by developing and
monitoring integrity standards, enabling the court users to report misuse, clearly defining what matters
are closed for public, providing internet public access to data which is not confidential; surveys, etc.
Activities on improving professionalism include: (i) introducing evaluation criteria for evaluating judges
and prosecutors (through amendments of the Law on Judges and Law on Public Prosecutors and
relevant bylaws); (ii) strengthening the initial and continuous training. This requires amending the Law
on Judges, Law on Public Prosecutors to make initial training a mandatory requirement for entering legal
profession and to make regular continuous training mandatory. Training curricula should be improved to
introduce courses on practical skills, courses on legal writing, ethics, uniform case law, EU law etc,
special classes should be provided for court managers, ToTs organized; (iii) capacity of judges' and
prosecutors' associates, trainees, volunteers, assistants and administrative staff should be strengthened
by initial evaluation, developing programs for their training, thigh monitoring of their work and by
setting up evaluation standards; (iv) initial and continuous training programs for bailiffs, notaries public,
mediators should be set up; (v) the appointment process for court interpreters and court expert
witnesses should be improved; (vi) the capacity of the law faculties should be strengthened by
intensifying cooperation with the bar, courts, public prosecutor office, review of their curricula,
revisiting the content of the bar exam.
Accountability should be strengthened by: (i) setting up clear standards for evaluation of judges and
public prosecutors and conducing such evaluation on regular and extraordinary basis, organizing regular
reporting on performance and establishing a centralized database of such reports; (ii) introducing
disciplinary responsibility of judges, prosecutors and deputy prosecutors. This will require changes in law
(Law on Judges, Law on Public Prosecutors introducing appropriate bylaws and ethical codes), training of
disciplinary bodies, strict implementation of disciplinary processes with regular review of results and
their analysis; (iii) introducing civil responsibility of judges and prosecutors through changes in Law on
Judges and Law on Public Prosecutors; (iv) introducing, strengthening and improving mechanisms which
insure accountability of the following professionals: members of HJC and SPC (through changes in Law
on HJC, Law on SPC, development of ethical codes), bailiffs (by rendering relevant bylaws, establishing
departments which will monitor and impose disciplinary responsibility), notary public (by developing
ethical codes, strengthening capacity of the MoJ, empowering the public notary bar with relevant
competences), expert court witnesses, court interpreters, mediators, judicial and prosecutors'
associates and trainees, administrative and other court staff; (v) developing a unified system of
collection and processing of complains which regard the work of the judiciary and other improvements
in the mechanisms insuring accountability of the judiciary



                                                                                                          18
To improve efficiency of the judiciary (i) a new court network should be established. This would require
drafting of a new Law on the Court Network, analysis of the allocation of judge in the court network and
developing a system for grading cases which would even the number of cases per judge, introducing a
two instance administrative courts (through an amendment of the Law on Administrative Disputes),
revising the processes at the MoJ, strengthening the court administration through examining the
judiciary needs, and developing an investment plan (a database on investment needs should be required
with regular reporting requirements); (ii) a system of E-justice should be developed (activities are to be
defiled in an ITC strategy); (iii) resolution of backlog and shortening trial time. This will require greater
use of simplified procedural forms by raising public awareness on their use and by training of judges,
change of laws to shorten trial time (Criminal Procedure Act, Civil Procedure Act, etc.), reallocating
workload from judges to administrative staff (analysis of existing tasks, training of administrative staff),
reviewing the needs and investing into courtrooms and prosecutor's offices to enable more trails per
court, analysis of existing the legal framework to minimize the possibility of misuse of trail rights to
intentionally prolong trial time; (iv) introducing a public notary system through amending the Law on
Notaries and rendering relevant bylaws, establishing a public notary bar, changing appropriate laws to
enable enforceability of notarized documents; (v) insuring that court awards are enforceable by
introducing a judge for enforcement of penalties, delineating the competences of the MoJ and Courts
bailiffs, improving the jail infrastructure to enhance treatment and respect of human rights, increase of
use of alternative sanctions etc; (vi) further enhancement of international cooperation.
  Guide to relevant information

  pp. 1-6 Activities on strategic principle Independence
  pp. 6-17 Activities on strategic principle Impartiality and quality of justice
  pp. 17-24 Activities on strategic principle Professionalism
  pp. 24-31 Activities on strategic principle Accountability
  pp. 31-42 Activities on strategic principle efficiency



Annual Reports
The DRR includes descriptions of available annual reports produced by institutions relevant for the JFR,
namely, the annual reports of the: Supreme Court of Cassation, State Prosecution Office, High Judicial
Counsel and Omdurman Office.

Annual Reports of the Supreme Court of Cassation

13. Annual Report on Courts' Activity in 2012, Supreme Court of Cassation
Annual Report on Court's Activity covers the period from January 1, 2012 to December 31, 2013. It
provides detailed statistical data on the activity of the courts separately for the: (i) Supreme Cassation
Court including: overall SCC data, data per each SCC department (civil, criminal, administrative),
information and data on other SCC activities (training, workshops, conferences and knowledge sharing
events organized by and for judges and court staff, reports from the general meeting, justice
administration - processing of complains regarding the functioning of the courts, international


                                                                                                          19
cooperation, processing requests for access to public information; (ii) Appellate Court overall data, data
per each area of law ; (iii) Higher Courts overall data, data per each area of law ; (iv) Basic Courts' overall
data, data per each area of law (civil litigation, labor law, enforcement, inheritance, criminal law); (iv)
Administrative Court; (v) Appellate Commercial Court; (vi) Commercial Courts overall data, data on
commercial misdemeanors, litigation, non-contentious matters, insolvency, payment requests; (vii) High
Misdemeanor Court (viii) Misdemeanor Courts.
The overall statistics shows that the courts were able to work on current cases but also clear some of
the backlog. In 2012 there were 5,315,547 cases in processing out of which 1,969,270 cases were
received, 2,156,958 resolved, leaving the backlog of 3.158.400 cases. However, given the number of
incoming cases it appears that the courts were less efficient in 2012 in comparison to 2011. This could
be accounted to the increase of a non case related workload such as intensified supervision of lower
instance courts and intensive participation in working groups for drafting new laws.
The number of old unresolved cases has increased in 2012 in comparison to the same number in 2011
for approx. 18%. The volume of these cases is the highest in the Basic Courts and while for some of the
Basic Courts programs for reduction of backlog has been developed it can be assessed that these
programs were not effective. Uneven allocation of cases per judge is still a pressing concern, average
number of incoming cases per judge ranges from 31.11 to 178.19. First and Second Basic Courts in
Belgrade have the highest number of incoming cases amounting to 30,8% of all incoming cases in the
country. Appellate Court in Belgrade is the appeals court with the highest volume of cases. Although
they are the fastest courts to dispose of cases at the same time they are the least efficient given the
work volume, number of citizens and territory they cover. It is recommended that new courts and
judges are introduced in this territory so that the citizens are adequately serviced. Overall the statistical
data indicates that the court network should be adequately revised.


  Guide to relevant information

  p. 1 Overall Data
  pp. 1-21 SCC data
  pp. 21-26 Appellate Court`
  pp. 26-31 High Courts
  pp. 31-39 First Instance Courts
  pp. 39-41 Administrative Courts
  pp. 41-42 Commercial Appellate Court
  pp. 42-46 Commercial Courts
  pp. 46-48 High Misdemeanor Court
  pp. 48-55 Misdemeanor Courts
  pp. 55-57 Conclusion of the Report

14. Annual Report on Courts' Activity in 2011, Supreme Court of Cassation
The Annual Report on Court's Activity provides detailed statistical data on the activity of the courts
separately for the: (i) Supreme Court of Cassation including: overall SCC data, data per SCC department
(civil, criminal), information and data on other SCC activities (training, workshops, conferences and


                                                                                                            20
knowledge sharing events organized by and for judges and court staff, participation in working groups
on drafting of laws, reports from the general meeting, justice administration – internal meetings,
meetings with representatives from lower instance courts, processing of complains regarding the
functioning of the courts, analysis of the minutes on supervision of the lower courts, cooperation with
other institutions, international cooperation, processing requests for access to public information,
communication with the general public); (ii) Appellate Courts overall data, data per each area of law; (iii)
Higher Courts' overall data, data per each area of law ; (iv) Basic Courts' overall data, data per each area
of law (general civil, labor law, enforcement, inheritance, land registry applications, criminal law); (v)
Administrative Court; (vi) Appellate Commercial Court; (vii) Commercial Courts overall data, data on
commercial misdemeanors, litigation, non contentious matters, insolvency, enforcement; (viii) High
Misdemeanor Court (ix) Misdemeanor Courts.
The overall statistics shows that the courts were able to work on current cases and were also able to
clear some of the backlog. In 2011 there were 5,994,945 cases in processing out of which 2,653,347
cases were received, 2,653,347 resolved while the backlog stands at 3,341,598. This indicates that the
courts have been able to clear 44.26% of all cases. The number of old unresolved cases stands at around
1,5 million making the number of old cases approx. 25% of the entire number of cases. The Basic Courts
have the largest share of the old cases (32.9%) 4% of which are more than 10 years old. Uneven
allocation of cases per judge is a pressing concern - average number of incoming cases per judge ranges
from 25.34 to 210.67. First and Second Basic Courts in Belgrade have the highest number of incoming
cases. It is recommended that new courts and judges are introduced in this territory so that this territory
is adequately serviced. At the same time some courts and court units have very low income of cases
imposing a question whether existence of these cases is justified. The recommendations for further
reform of justice an adequate revision of the court network, strengthening the efficiency of the court
through affirmation and greater use of the ADR, introduction of notaries and bailiffs. Work on
automation of processing of cases and use of IT has intensified (SAPS data management in
Administrative SCC and appeals courts) and should be strengthened going forward.
  Guide to relevant information

  p. 1 Overall Data
  pp. 1-27 SCC data
  pp. 27-32 Appellate Court data
  pp. 32-37 High Courts data
  pp. 37-43 First Instance Courts data
  pp. 43-45 Administrative Courts data
  p. 45 Commercial Appellate Court
  pp. 45-48 Commercial Courts data
  pp. 48-50 High Misdemeanor Court data
  pp. 50-55 Misdemeanor Courts data
  pp. 56-65 Conclusion of the Report providing additional comparative data




                                                                                                         21
15. Annual Report on Courts' Activity in 2010, Supreme Court of Cassation
The Annual Report on Court's Activity provides detailed statistical data on the activity of the courts
separately for the: (i) Supreme Court of Cassation including: overall SCC data, data per SCC department,
information and data on other SCC activities (training, workshops, conferences and knowledge sharing
events organized by and for judges and court staff, participation in working groups on drafting of laws,
reports from the general meeting, justice administration – internal bylaws, meetings with
representatives from lower instance courts, processing of complains regarding the functioning of the
courts, cooperation with other institutions, international cooperation, processing requests for access to
public information, communication with the general public); (ii) Appellate Court overall data, data per
each court, data per court and area of law, data per court and judge, number of overturned decisions;
(iii) Higher Courts' overall data, data per each court, data per each court and area of law, data per each
court and judges, number of overturned decisions, detailed comparative statistics ranking the Higher
Courts based on different criteria (average case per judge, number of received cases, etc.), statistic for
special Higher Court units on organized crime and war crimes; (iv) Basic Courts' data per each court, data
per each court and area of law, data per each court and per judges, number of overturned decisions,
detailed comparative statistics - ranking the courts based on different criteria (average case per judge,
number of received cases etc.), statistics for court units together with information on court unit costs
and issues; (v) Commercial Courts overall data, data per court, data per court, data per court per area of
law, data per court per judge (on commercial misdemeanors, litigation, non contentious matters,
insolvency, enforcement), ranking of commercial courts based on different criteria (number of disposed
cases per judge per area of law etc); (vi) Appellate Commercial Court; (vii) High Misdemeanor Court
overall data, data per court unit, data per area of law; (viii) Misdemeanor Courts overall data, data per
area of law, data per court, data per court and judge; (ix) Administrative Court.
Statistical data indicates that the new network of courts was unable to resolve the issue of uneven
allocation of cases per judge. In the current court network judge dealing with the highest number of
cases has 8 times more incoming cases in comparison to the judge dealing with the lowest number of
cases. First and Second Basic Courts in Belgrade are courts with the highest number of cases under any
criteria. It is critical that new courts and judges are introduced in this territory so that this territory is
adequately serviced. At the same time some court units have very low income of cases and it should be
further examined whether their existence is justified and cost effective. Recommendations for further
reform are: an adequate revision of the court network, adequate training for judges provided at the JA
with adequate revision of JA curricula, introduction of mechanism for evaluation of judges. Work on
automation of processing of cases and use of IT is needed especially in misdemeanor courts.




                                                                                                           22
    Guide to relevant information

    pp. 3-4 Overall Data
    pp. 6-15 SCC data
    pp. 15-26 Appellate Court data
    pp. 26-116 High Courts data
    pp. 116-246 First Instance Courts data
    pp. 246-258 Commercial Courts data
    pp. 258-260 Commercial Appellate Court data
    pp. 261-263 High Misdemeanor Court data
    pp. 264-277 Misdemeanor Courts data
    pp. 277-279 Administrative Court data
    pp. 280-282 Conclusion of the Report data


Annual Reports of the State Prosecution Office

16. Work of Pubic Prosecution Offices on Fighting Crime and Protection of Law and Constitution in
    2011, State Prosecution Office, Belgrade, March 2012

The publication is an annual report of the State Prosecution Office reporting on the activities of the
prosecutors for 2011. It provides information on the level of crime in Serbia as well as information
regarding prosecution of criminal acts, commercial offences and misdemeanors. The report is a
combined report of individual reports submitted by the State Prosecution Office, Appellate Prosecution
Office, Higher Prosecution Offices and specialized prosecutorial departments (please see below the
Guide on Relevant Information for details on issues covered by the report).
Highlights: The report gives detailed statistical data with important aggregate figures on the work of the
prosecution4 in Serbia. Number of all incoming cases for 2011 is 308,810 out of which cases regarding
prosecution of criminal acts [krivičnih dela] is the highest - 241,340. Number of all reports of crimes
[krivičnih prijava] for 2011 was 145,679 out of which known perpetrators were reported in 111,812
instances. The most frequent crimes are crimes against property accounting for 19,474 cases.
Overall the report highlights a number of novelties which have been or are to be introduced during the
reported period. Some of the most important are: expected introduction of prosecutorial investigation
under the new Criminal Code; establishment of the new Unit for Crimes Against Corruption,
establishment of this unit represents a requirement under GRECO; increase in the enforcement of the
Law on Confiscation of Property Acquired through Criminal Acts, the property confiscated was in value
over several hundred million euro, implementation of the new legal forms such as plea bargaining and
criminal liability of legal entities.


4
 Aggregate number for the State Prosecution Office, Appellate Prosecution office, Higher Prosecutions
Offices and the Office Prosecuting Organized Crime and Office Prosecuting of War Crimes



                                                                                                       23
Report indicates that there is a demand for stricter policies in the fight against crime. It comments that
at the moment most of the judgments rendered impose only probation instead of actual jail sentence. In
rare cases where imprisonment is sentenced duration of this sanction is usually set at the legal
minimum. In 2011 there has been an increase in the total number of verdicts in criminal matters (for
24.38%) and an increase of the number of jail sentences (for around 19% ). This data shows a trend of
stricter policies in sanctioning crime however general conclusion is that these changes are not
significant.


  Guide to relevant information

  pp. 1- 8 Overall Information on the Levels of Crime and work of the Prosecution, general issues
  pp. 8 -11 Work of the Department against High Technology Crime
  pp. 12-14 Work on the Crimes against Constitution and Homeland Security and Crimes against
  Humanity
  pp. 16-19 Work on the Crimes against Life and Body
  pp. 19-21 Crimes with elements of Violence
  pp. 22-29 Status of business crime and work of the Department for Fight against Corruption
  pp. 31-36 Juvenile Delinquency
  pp. 36-39 Work of the State Prosecutor on Crimes against the State Armed Forces
  pp. 39-42 Work of the Public Prosecution on business crime
  pp. 42-46 Analysis of the Activity regarding individual Business Crime Cases
  p. 47 Work of the State Public Prosecution on Misdemeanors
  p. 47 Liability of Legal Entities for Criminal Acts
  pp. 49-54 Sanctions as a factor in the fight against crime
  pp. 54-62 Simplified Procedural forms and their use
  pp. 62-68 Activities of the State Prosecutor on Confiscation of property obtained through criminal
  acts
  pp. 68-84 Activity of the State Public Prosecutor in International cooperation and legal aid in 2011
  pp. 84-99 Work of the Public Prosecutor for Organized Crime
  pp. 99-179 Statistical Report




Surveys
17. Global Corruption Barometer National Report – Serbia, Transparency International, data for 2013
The Global Corruption Barometer is a worldwide public opinion survey on views and experiences of
corruption. It captures how corruption is viewed at the national level. It also provides a measure of
people’s experience of corruption for a specified year
Type of Index            Score        Rank         Explanation
Corruption Perceptions                             Index ranks countries/territories based on how corrupt a
                                 42          72
Index (2013)                                       country’s public sector is perceived to be. Scores range from 0



                                                                                                                     24
                                                   (highly corrupt) to 100 (very clean).
                                                   Control of corruption reflects perceptions of the extent to which
                                          52%      public power is exercised for private gain. Point estimates range
Control of corruption   -0.213269704
(2010)                                             from about -2.5 to 2.5. Higher values correspond to better
                                                   governance outcomes.
                                                   Judicial Independence Index measures the perceived extent in
Judicial independence                              which the judiciary of the country is independent from influences
                            2.4           128
(2011-2012)                                        of members of government, citizens, or firms. Scores range from
                                                   1 (heavily influenced) to 7 (entirely independent).
                                                   This dimension captures perceptions of the extent to which
                                                   agents have confidence in and abide by the rules of society, and
                                          43%      in particular the quality of contract enforcement, property rights,
Rule of Law (2010)      -0.388995987
                                                   the police, and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime and
                                                   violence. Point estimates range from about -2.5 to 2.5. Higher
                                                   values correspond to better governance outcomes.


In addition to the information above the Barometer indicates that:

-   17% people reported paying a bribe in 2010;
-   61% of people feel their government's efforts to fight corruption are ineffective;
-   49% of people feel that from 2007-2010 the level of corruption in the country has increased;
-   Institutions perceived to be most affected by corruption are political parties;
-   Judiciary is perceived to be 3.9 points affected by corruption where 5 is extremely corrupt and 1 is
    not corrupt at all.


Reference List

The following list of documentation through the work on the JFR has been indicated as relevant for the
Serbian justice sector reform efforts but did not by its form fall fully within the scope of the DRR.

1. Relevant non – core strategies

        ICT Strategy for MoJPA, July 2013
        National Plan for Adoption of the Acquis (2013-2016), February
        National Anti-Corruption Strategy for period 2013-2018, July 1 2013

2. Reviews of Laws, rulebooks and other legislation

        OSCE, Comments to the Rules on Criteria, Indicators and Evaluation Procedure to Performance
         Evaluation of Judges and Court Presidents
        OSCE, Comments on the draft Rulebook on the Manner of Measuring Performance of the Public
         Prosecutors and Deputy Public Prosecutors
        [list will be expanded based on further findings]


                                                                                                                    25
                        Annex 1 Acronyms and Abbreviations

Acronyms and Abbreviations

¶                             Paragraph

ADB                           Asian Development Bank

ADR                           Alternative dispute resolution

approx.                       Approximately

BEEPS                         Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey

CCJE                          Consultative Council of European Judges

CCPE                          Consultative Council of European Prosecutors

CEPEJ                         The European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice

Ch                            Chapter

EBRD                          European Bank for Reconstruction and Development

ECA                           Europe and Central Asia

ECHR                          European Convention on Human Rights

ECtHR                         European Court of Human Rights

EU                            European Union

EUR                           EURO

exe                           Executive

FY                            Fiscal Year

FYROM                         Former Yugoslavian Republic of Macedonia

GDP                           Gross Domestic Product

HJC                           High Judicial Council

ICT                           Information and Communication Technology

ICTY                          International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia

IDF                           Institutional Development Fund

IFMIS                         Integrated Financial Management Information System



                                                                                          26
IMF        International Monetary Fund

IMG        International Management Group

ISM        Ipsos Strategic Marketing

IT         Information Technologies

JA         Judicial Academy

JAS        Judges Association of Serbia

JFR        Serbia Judicial Functional Review

LSA        Law and Society Association

MDTF-JSS   Multi Donor Trust Fund for Justice Sector Support

MoJPA      Ministry of Justice and Public Administration

NBS        National Bank of Serbia

NJRS       National Judicial Reform Strategy

no.        Number

Oct        October

OSCE       Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe

p.         page

PEFA       Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability

pp.        pages

RCLS       Research Committee on Sociology of Law

RSD        Serbian Dinar

SAA        Stabilization and Association Agreement

SCC        Supreme Cassation Court

Sept       September

SPC        State Prosecutorial Council

UMIC       Upper Middle Income Countries

US$        United States Dollars



                                                                  27
                              Annex 2 Reviewed Analytical Works

1.    Commission Staff Working Document, Serbia, 2013 Progress Report, Brussels, October 2013
2.    Commission Staff Working Document, Serbia 2012 Progress Report, Brussels, October 2012
3.    Commission Staff Working Document, Serbia 2010 Progress Report, Brussels, November 2010
4.    CEPEJ, European Judicial Systems Edition 2012 (2010 data), Efficiency and Quality of Justice
5.    Serbia Country Report to CEPEJ on Efficiency and Quality of Justice data 2011
6.    Serbia Country Report to CEPEJ on Efficiency and Quality of Justice data 2009
7.    Civil Enforcement in the Western Balkans, An overview of the present situation and future
      developments in the various legal systems in the Western Balkans, Jos Uitdehaag, Eric Vincken,
      Albania Tirana 2011
8.    SIGMA, Priorities, Serbia, May 2013 and SIGMA, Assessment, Serbia, April 2013
9.    Analysis of Diversion Orders and Alternative Sanctions Application Practices in Serbia, Mapping
      Resources of Local Communities for Implementation of Diversion Orders and Alternative Sanctions,
      Nadezda Sataric, and Dragan Obradovic , Belgrade, May 2011
10.   National Strategy for Reform of Justice, 1 July 2013
11.   Action plan for the implementation of the National Strategy for Reform of Justice for the Period
      2013 - 2018
12.   Annual Report on Court Activity in 2012, Supreme Court of Cassation
13.   Annual Report on Court Activity in 2011, Supreme Court of Cassation
14.   Annual Report on Court Activity in 2010, Supreme Court of Cassation
15.   Work of Pubic Prosecution Offices on Fighting Crime and Protection of Law and Constitution in 2011,
      State Prosecution Office, Belgrade, March 2012
16.   Enforcement in the Western Balkans and its Compatibility with the Human Rights Standards of the
      Council of Europe, J. Uitdehaag
17.   Global Corruption Barometer National Report – Serbia, Transparency International, data for 2013




                                                                                                      28
