Guideline for Incorporating Gender into
 ITS Planning, Design and Operation




                 2016
                                           Preface
     During the past two decades, the Intelligent Transport System (ITS) has been applied rapidly
in Chinese cities. It has been upgraded gradually from a single-function application to a top-level
designed resource-sharing platform, designed to improve public sector efficiency in the area of
satisfying people’s travel needs. The provision and quality of an urban transport service influence
all residents. However, due to social differences in gender, age and race, the seemingly equally
provided social product may have different impacts on various social groups. Therefore,
government sectors should become more sensitive to potential social inequality in the areas of
gender, age and race during the process of the planning, design and construction of urban
transportation and ITS.
    It is recognized that male and female have different travel behavior and transport needs. Both
the public and private sector can take advantage of ITS’s technology and resource-sharing
platform to make urban transport infrastructure and services more gender friendly, thus mitigating
social inequalities. This can eventually not only maximize the efficiency of the transport
infrastructure, but also provide a people-oriented transport service to make trips more comfortable
and convenient for the masses.
   Under the funding support from the Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality (UFGE) in East
Asia Pacific (EAP), the World Bank commissioned Prof. Tong Xin, a Professor from the
Department of Sociology of Peking University, as a chief expert, together with other researchers
from Peking University, Wuhan University, Xinjiang University, and China Women’s University
as a research team. In 2015, the project team used Wuhan and Urumqi as two case studies to
evaluate the gender impacts of urban transport ITS and prepared an Assessment Report of Gender
Impacts of ITS. Based on the findings and recommendations, the project team developed this
technical guideline for government authorities and ITS practitioners to better incorporate gender
considerations in ITS planning, design and operation. The guideline focused on the commonly
applied ITS in Chinese cities, which mainly includes ITS for traffic management and enforcement
and ITS for public transport operations, management and passenger services.
   The guideline features the following four chapters:
           •   Chapter One: Gender-Sensitive ITS Planning
           •   Chapter Two: Gender-Sensitive ITS Design
           •   Chapter Three: Gender-Sensitive ITS Operation
           •   Chapter Four: Gender-Sensitive ITS Monitoring and Feedback
                                                 Table of Contents


Preface................................................................................................................................ 2
1 ITS Planning ................................................................................................................... 4
   1.1 Balancing Efficiency and Equality .................................................................................. 4
   1.2 Recognizing Gender Traits and Needs ............................................................................ 5
   1.3 Gender Analysis ............................................................................................................... 5
   1.4 Data Collection................................................................................................................. 9
2 ITS Design..................................................................................................................... 11
   2.1 Intelligent Transport Information System .................................................................... 11
     2.1.1 Bus positioning, dispatching and information service system ..................................... 11
     2.1.2 Variable message signs.............................................................................................. 12
     2.1.3 Parking guidance information system ........................................................................ 13
     2.1.4 Personal service information and applications............................................................ 13
     2.1.5 User-friendly methods ............................................................................................... 15
   2.2 Smart Cards ................................................................................................................... 15
     2.2.1 Public transit card swipe option ................................................................................. 16
     2.2.2 Flexible ticket pricing system .................................................................................... 16
     2.2.3 Real-name information system .................................................................................. 17
     2.2.4 Convenient public transit card recharge ..................................................................... 17
   2.3 Intelligent Monitoring Facilities .................................................................................... 18
     2.3.1 Comprehensive monitoring services .......................................................................... 18
     2.3.2 Timely, efficient incident management ...................................................................... 19
     2.3.3 Special attention to women’s safety ........................................................................... 19
   2.4 Traffic Signal Control System ....................................................................................... 20
     2.4.1 Intersection layouts and signal-system design ............................................................ 20
     2.4.2 Reasonable traffic timings and high priority for pedestrians ....................................... 20
     2.4.3 All-red signals ........................................................................................................... 21
   2.5 Electronic Police System ................................................................................................ 21
3 ITS Operation............................................................................................................... 23
   3.1 Government Initiatives .................................................................................................. 23
   3.2 Stakeholders in Developing ITS .................................................................................... 24
   3.3 Media Publicity and Public Participation ..................................................................... 24
   3.4 Personal Privacy ............................................................................................................ 26
4 ITS Monitoring and Feedback.................................................................................... 27
   4.1 Monitoring and Assessment Methods ........................................................................... 27
   4.2 Assessment Indices......................................................................................................... 27
Annex A: General Steps for Incorporating Gender into ITS ..................................... 29
Bibliography .................................................................................................................... 30
                                                                                           P a g e |4




1 ITS Planning

1.1 Balancing Efficiency and Equality

     Urban transportation development aims to improve transport efficiency for both people
and goods. With the fast pace of urbanization and limited transport resources in China, the
transport sector therefore has spent a great deal of time focusing on improving the efficiency of
urban transport, and satisfying most people’s general travel needs. However, they have paid
less attention to the travel needs and preferences of the minority and vulnerable groups,
somehow ignoring equality in urban transportation resource allocation.
     An imbalance between efficiency and equality in gender manifests itself as a lack of
attention to the travel traits of different genders as well as a lack of humanized travel services
designed to better satisfy gender-specific needs—for example, a safer and more comfortable
travel environment for females or more efficient travel services for males.
     The development of the ITS provides good opportunities for balancing urban
transportation efficiency and equality. The government and decision-makers could clearly
define the principle of balancing efficiency and equality in the ITS planning process.
Transport infrastructure efficiency should be gradually improved, and the potential of
intelligent transport services should be further discovered. At the same time, more attention
should be paid to the different travel needs of different groups, especially those of China’s
minority and vulnerable groups. The ITS is supposed to be more accessible and practical for
such groups as females, the elderly, and children (Table 1-1).

         Table 1-1: Balancing Efficiency and Equality in Urban Transportation
 Urban Transportation Infrastructure Development    Intelligent Transport System (ITS) Development
 Efficiency                Equality                 Efficiency                  Equality
 •    To meet              •   To pay attention     •    To improve             •   To populate
      preferences of           to travel needs of        efficiency of              intelligent
      mainstream               vulnerable groups         intelligent                transport facilities
      groups (young            (the elderly/             transport facilities       among non-
      adults/office            children/females/    •    To meet                    mainstream
      workers)                 rural migrant             preferences of             groups
 •    To maximize              workers)                  mainstream             •   To pay attention
      using efficiency     •   To meet travel            groups (young              to using
      of transport             preferences and           adults/office              preferences of
      infrastructure and       needs of males            workers)                   vulnerable groups
      resources                and females          •    To provide                 (the elderly/
                           •   To use transport          standardized and           children/females/
                               infrastructure and        advanced                   rural migrant
                               resources equally         intelligent                workers)
                                                         transport services     •   To provide
                                                                                    humanized
                                                                                    intelligent
                                                                                    transport services
                                                                                    that can meet
                                                                                       P a g e |5



                                                                                different
                                                                                preferences of
                                                                                males and females



1.2 Recognizing Gender Traits and Needs

    Women and men have different traits and preference, which leads to various transport
needs and travel behaviors, such as trip purpose, travel mode, frequency, and trip distance.
However, these differences usually tend to be ignored in traditional urban transport planning.
Therefore, gender mainstreaming should be advocated in transport planning and development.
It is a strategy for making men’s and women’s concerns and experiences an integral dimension
of ITS planning, design, construction, and operation in the context of politics, economics and
society to make sure that women and men benefit equally. Gender inequality may slow down
the economic development and poverty-reduction advances of developing countries. A gender-
sensitive and successful intelligent transport system must eliminate mechanical and physical
obstacles, thus enhancing the incentive mechanism. Moreover, it should adapt to local feature
and improve level of accessibility, especially for women.
    Therefore, ITS practitioners should be nurtured according to the following
characteristics of gender-consciousness in ITS planning phase:
         Recognizing the rights that men and women share with regard to the use of transport
         services and the ITS;
         Recognizing the balance between ITS efficiency and equality to benefit men and
         women equally;
         Being aware of men’s and women’s different needs and ITS services; and keen to
         investigating the differences;
         Being aware of the potential difference of females in the aspects of the economy,
         physiology and freedom of speech, compared to males; paying attention to women’s
         difficulties and challenges in using the ITS; helping women to use ITS equally,
         efficiently, and safely through reasonable ITS design and operation.
1.3 Gender Analysis

    Residents’ travel demand remain the basis of urban transportation planning. Similarly,
urban ITS planning should also take into consideration travel demand as well as the need of
ITS usage. To get a full understanding of gender differences and traits in their trips and in ITS
application, gender analysis should be conducted during the stage of ITS planning.
    Gender analysis is a powerful tool for gender mainstreaming. It is used to evaluate and
understand the differences in men’s and women’s lives, including those lead to social and
economic inequity, and to provide an informed understanding of the potential different impacts
of proposed policies, projects, and services on men and women. Gender analysis aims to
eliminate these inequalities and to achieve positive change for women. A number of different
                                                                                           P a g e |6



gender analysis frameworks and approaches have been widely applied in many fields – for
example, the Harvard Framework, the Gender Analysis Matrix and Moser’s Framework. Each
framework was designed in a different way in terms of research method, scope, data collection
and results presentation, and is suited to a particular context. In terms of transport projects, this
study suggests choosing a proper gender analysis framework according to the features and
locations of transport projects, as well as to the executive scopes of policy (city or region).
However, no matter which framework is adopted, gender analysis in transport project planning
should consider the following three points:
                  Problems identification
                  Investigation and data collection
                  Result prediction and assessment of transport project planning after taking gender
                  into consideration
        For gender-sensitive ITS planning, the first step is to identify gender-specific travel
    needs and behaviors. ITS provides service for people. It is therefore crucial to understand
    their travel needs and travel behaviors, which is also the foundation of ITS planning.
    Household travel survey and public transport user satisfaction, etc., could be utilized to
    understand travel differences by gender. The following aspect should be referred to in gender
    analysis according to the local context:
             Trip purpose
       Studies have shown that men and women have different travel purposes. Generally, men
tend to make work trips during the morning and evening peak hours. Meanwhile, women tend
to make more trips associated with their reproductive work for their households at more varied
times. Moreover, women are more likely to take more frequent and shorter, multiple-purpose
trips within one trip, called chained trips. For example, they might be going to work/home, but
on the way, they might drop off their kids at school, or strop at a grocery store.
             Trip mode
        In terms of trip mode, women tend to choose walking and public transport. The majority
    of men usually have access to private motorized forms of transport, such as private cars, or
    take taxis.
             Travel cost
        With multi-purposes and multi-destinations in travel, women require low cost to meet their
needs. Generally, women tend to spend less money than men do for daily commute, no matter
which transport mode they choose – private car or public transport. However, when compared
to their incomes, women proportionally spend more than men do on transport on average1. With
regard to choosing travel mode, females are more price-sensitive than males are.

1
 Babinard, Julie and Kinnon Scott. (2009). What Can Existing Surveys Tell Us about Gender and
Transportation in Developing Countries?’ Proceedings of the Transport Research Board (TRB) 4th
International Conference on Women's Issues in Transportation. October 27-30, 2009. Irvine,
California. Forthcoming.
                                                                                          P a g e |7



            Travel time and time consumption
     Generally speaking, men tend to have much more linear origins/destinations centered on
 work during the morning and evening peak hours. Women tend to take more frequent and
 shorter trips at more varied times of the day. Moreover, because of their unique trip modes
 and social roles, females consume less time than males do on a single trip on average.

        ：
 Box 1 Travel behaviors of women in developing countries, using Wuhan, China and Delhi,
 India as examples
       Studies have shown that males and females have different travel needs and face various
 restraints. The fact that women’s travel purposes tend to involve going to multi-destinations causes
 women to have fewer travel options than men do in most current urban transport system designs.
 Women particularly have less access to cars (Anand & Tiwari, 2006). As shown in the following
 figures, in both Delhi and Wuhan, women tend to be highly dependent on either walking (Wuhan:
 39.8%; Delhi:52%) or public transport (Wuhan:35%; Delhi:43%). Other transport modes are not
 available to women because they are either too expensive or inconvenient.


                WUHAN, CHINA                                       DELHI, INDIA
       Others
          ,                                                 Bicycle
       24.9%                                                etc., 5%
                                      Walk,
                                      39.8%
                                                          Bus,                           Walk,
                                                          43%                            52%
    Metro,
    12.3%

                      Bus,
                     23.0%

 Source    ：India case from Anand and Tiwari (2006), Wuhan case from our Gender Impact of ITS study
 report.


            Factors of concern in travel
     Males and females have different priorities in the evaluation of transport attributes. Overall,
both of them list road safety as a significantly important factor (see Box 2). Women’s concerns
about safety are greater than men’s are, while men value efficiency more. However, when
“efficiency” and “safety” conflict, men tend to value speed, sometimes at the expense of safety.
The factors summarized in Box 2 indicate that males are concerned more with speed, traffic
safety, travel choices, etc., while females’ worries are more on personal security, traffic safety,
and ticket prices, etc.
     The second step is to identify the needs to use ITS by gender. In the process of overall
ITS planning and each sub-system planning, a gender analysis can be conducted from
administrators’ and users’ perspectives to understand their different needs regarding intelligent
transport facilities and applications. Typically, these differences will be reflected in the
                                                                                         P a g e |8



different usage of hardware, the various needs and preferences for either the software itself or
the information content, and concerns about personal security and privacy.

Box 2： Factors of concern in travel
                  Female                                                   Male
                    （）
                    +                                               （+）
          -Importance (high    ）               Order          －Importance（high）
                   （            ）
   Personal security theft, harassment          1          Speed （get to destination fast）
          Road safety（accident）                 2              Road safety（accident）
                                                        Travel choices（shuttle bus, routes and
                Ticket price                    3                      stops）
                    Comfort                     4                     Ticket price
            Courteous treatment                 5                                 （ ）
                                                              Personal security theft
                  Hygiene                       6                  Courteous treatment
                 （
   Travel Choices Shuttle bus, route and
                 pit stop）                      7                       Hygiene
                      （ ）
          -Importance low                                      －Importance (low）
                   -（）                                              （-）
Source: Gómez (2000)



     In sum, ITS planning and design need to develop a systematic, scientific and reasonable
gender-analysis framework. The first step is to collect data on users to understand what they
prefer and what they need (see Table 1-2). This study suggests including four major parts of
gender analysis: understanding gender traits in travel behaviors, understanding gender needs in
travel, understanding gender traits in the ITS, and understanding gender needs in the ITS.

                        Table 1-2: Gender Analysis Framework for ITS
 I. Understanding          II. Understanding                                  IV. Understanding
                                                    III. Understanding
 Gender Traits in          Gender Needs in                                    Gender Needs in ITS
                                                    Gender Traits in ITS
 Travel Behaviors          Travel
 Travel Preferences        Travel Survey            ITS Usage Survey          ITS Demand Survey
 Survey                    •   Travel purpose       •   How to get            •   Needs and
 •   Infrastructure        •   Travel distance          intelligent               preferences for
     Satisfaction          •   Travel time              transport                 intelligent
 •   Public transport      •   Travel frequency         information               transport
     satisfaction          •   Trip mode            •   How to use                information and
 •   Travel                •   Travel time              intelligent               its publish
     environment           •   Time distribution        transport                 methods
     comfort               •   Travel space             information in        •   Needs and
 •   Travel                    distribution             travel                    preferences for
     environment               …                    •   Public transit            function, form,
     safety                                             card recharging           swiping and
 •   Travel                                             method                    recharging
     environment                                                                  method of public
     convenience                                                                  transit card
                                                                                          P a g e |9



 •    Travel                                        •    Public transit       •    Using need of all
      information                                        card swiping              kinds of
      promptness                                         method                    intelligent
 •    Travel                                        •    Usage frequency           transport
      information                                        and preferences           facilities and
      accuracy                                           of all kinds of           willingness to
 •    Travel                                             intelligent               pay
      Information                                        transport                 …
      Richness                                           facilities
      …                                                  …




1.4 Data Collection

     Given different cultural, social and economic backgrounds and specific geographic
conditions, travel preferences and ITS needs vary between men and women. Although it is
possible to find similarities in these preferences and needs across cities, the characteristics and
differences of people’s travel behaviors and ITS demands can be more specific and accurate
only when taking local features into consideration. Therefore, ITS planners should use local
residents as an investigated sample to obtain accurate data and information for gender
analysis. Moreover, ITS planning, design and operation depend largely on the support of the
government, transport administrations, operators and communities. Therefore, ITS planners
should widely consult the views and suggestions from these stakeholders.
     A variety of ways of collecting such data exist and include, but are not limited to the ones
listed as follows.
          Questionnaire
     Questionnaires       can    be
distributed to people at bus
stations and at commercial and
community centers as well as to
residents of each community door
to door in the investigated areas.
Questionnaire collection needs to
ensure that the proportion of
males and females is balanced and
that the sample covers all ages,
major residential areas, major               Figure 1: Information collection by questionnaire
travel destinations and transport
hubs, it must also ensure that the collected information is accurate and reliable. In Chinese cities,
this type of questionnaire collection can be combined with a household travel survey as well as
a public transport passenger satisfaction survey. In the questionnaire design, besides residents’
basic information (such as age, education background, work experience, and income, etc.), it
                                                                                       P a g e | 10



should include people’s travel needs and travel choices by gender (such as daily travel patterns,
travel purposes, travel modes travel costs, and so on).
         Semi-structured interview
    Semi-structured interview can be used not only to explore various travel behaviors that are
difficult to quantify or notice, but also to understand existing travel options, the services
available to users, travel frequency and the costs and preferences of travel choices. Additionally,
it can be used to find out the social, economic and psychological reasons behind these travel
behaviors, including why females feel unsafe and uncomfortable in travel, how the division of
household labor affects travel, which details in ITS services affect females’ feelings and so on.
An interview questionnaire has specific targeted interviewees in the transport-users group, such
as pregnant women, homemakers, office women, and low-income workers, etc. More
importantly, this questionnaire assesses bottlenecks in using existing travel options, and seeks
to understand the travel needs of beneficiaries and other special user groups.
         Big-data analysis
    Big data built on various sets of data sources–including information from public transit
cards, ETC, vehicle Global Positioning System (GPS) tracking system, and camera and cell
phone positioning tracking system–can be used to obtain the time-space information related to
the travel and trip chain that could further analyze residents’ travel patterns and travel needs.
What needs to be noted is that big data is featured with high facticity, accuracy and reliability,
but many times lacking demographic and economic attribute information, such as gender and
age attributes. Therefore, this study suggests creating a real-name or semi-real-name record
system (gender, age and other user social information) in public transport ITS (public transit
card, ETC, and so on) so that these valuable information can be obtained for decision-making.
         Focus group discussions
    Focus group discussions are held with two major groups of stakeholders. One is a group
of government representatives, decision-makers and ITS operators; the other is a group of
community and resident representatives, etc. The discussions focus on efficiency and equality
in the use of the ITS, understanding the point of view and perspectives of each stakeholder,
exploring gender differences and issues in ITS service, and proposing a plan for facilitating the
shared benefits of both genders from ITS development. Discussion also focus on the issues of
ITS gender development that is involved in projection planning, construction, management,
operation, and implementation, as well as on defining the feasibility of the proposed plan. When
selecting community and resident representatives, they can be grouped separately by their
social backgrounds (gender, income, age, and job) to ensure a full understanding of various
needs of each ITS user group. Additionally, the proposals of a gender-sensitive ITS program
involve with different stakeholders. Focus group discussions provide a platform for exchanging
ideas, as well as negotiating and collaborating among ITS beneficiaries so that a consensus is
reached and a cooperation frame is ultimately established.
                                                                                          P a g e | 11



2 ITS Design

2.1 Intelligent Transport Information System

     Complex traffic situations, together with ever expanding public transport services in major
Chinese cities, are major challenges for the management of the transport department and the
public users’ daily travel. The collection and usage of relevant traffic information from all kinds
of intelligent transport information systems could be a solution. It can not only provide
advanced managerial methods and support for transport sectors, but also provide real-time
traffic information for all transport users, such as pedestrians, public transport users and drivers,
to choose travel modes and plan travel routes ahead. Accurate and real-time traffic
information especially help women to efficiently make trips and mitigate time poverty,
considering the variety of reproductive work for which they are responsible in maintaining a
household.
     2.1.1 Bus positioning, dispatching and information service system

     Bus positioning and other supportive technologies provide real-time operating conditions
of buses for bus dispatchers and passengers to improve the quality and convenience of bus
services. Since men and women have various expectations of and depend on the public transport
service, the design of a bus positioning, dispatching, and information service system should
consider the following aspects:
     The bus positioning system can be applied to regulate driver’s behaviors and increase
the reliability and safety of bus operation. The bus positioning system can track the locations
and routes of buses and monitor road conditions so that the reliability of travel for passengers
can be ensured. In addition, bus driver can be monitored by the on-board unit, which regulates
driver’s driving behavior such as speeding or sudden breaks and thus significantly results in the
decrease of accidents. The elderly, women and children are usually the vulnerable group in
accidents causes by speeding or sudden breaks.
     Bus station electronic boards should provide information about more oncoming
buses. Most bus station electronic boards display the predicted arrival time of only the next
coming bus (or the number of stops remaining before the bus’s arrival), shown in Figure 2.
Providing such bus location information can help relieve passengers’ impatience while waiting.
If the predicted waiting time is too long, most males will choose other means of transportation
such as taking a taxi, while more females tend to continue waiting. Providing the estimated
arrival times or distances of buses, therefore, is helpful for satisfying men’s needs for efficient
                                                                                      P a g e | 12



travel and for assisting them in choosing other
means of transport flexibly. On the other hand,
female passengers like to have information on the
estimated arrival time of the second oncoming bus
as well, so that when the first oncoming bus is
crowded they can decide whether to wait for the
next bus or choose the current crowded one.
      Bus station electronic boards could provide
bus    crowdedness     information.    Passengers,
especially female passengers, want to acquire bus
crowdedness information. Technologies such as
infrared sensor technology and smart card counting are
                                                           Figure 2: Electronic board at bus station
now capable of providing such information. Moreover,
drivers can manually provide information on real-time crowdedness conditions (crowed,
normal or less crowed) to the bus monitoring center to be displayed on electronic boards.
      The service coverage of the bus information system should be expanded. Besides
electronic boards at bus stops, traffic information displays can be set up in community business
service centers, supermarkets and shopping malls, and elementary/middle schools where
women are more likely to visit. This information could help women plan their route.
      2.1.2 Variable message signs

      Variable message signs are placed on a city’s main roads and provide traffic information
for a variety of situations, including weather condition, traffic restriction rules, emergencies,
road congestion and closures and so on. It not only increases the efficiency of travel for men,
but also improves confidence and secure feelings for women. To better satisfy the different
travel needs of men and women, the following aspects should be considered in the process of
designing variable message signs:
      The accuracy of real-time traffic condition information should be improved through
data sharing and data fusion. Both male and female drivers pay high attention to real-time
road information. However, they are concerned about the accuracy of traffic congestion shown
on electronic boards. Traditional road information comes from an embedded loop vehicle
detector, infrared sensor and video image processor on major roads. In recent years, GPS-based
probe vehicles have increased the coverage of traffic information. All kinds of this information
belong to different departments. Therefore, data sharing through data fusion and processing can
significantly increase the accuracy of real-time traffic information (road accidents, congestion
and maintenance). This supplemental information allows drivers to decide if a need exists to
change routes.
      Variable message signs should display readable content and reduce the frequency of
updating information. Some drivers, especially female drivers, face difficulties in capturing
                                                                                         P a g e | 13



pictures and text information in a short time while driving. Therefore, if the board displays large
size text, this limits the amount of content that can be shown at once and reduces the frequency
of updating information.
     2.1.3 Parking guidance information system

     Parking guidance information system can deliver parking information to the public in a
timely manner, help drivers to save a lot of energy when looking for parking lots, and further
mitigate traffic congestion. It improves the utilization of parking facilities and reduces parking
violations. The system also provides a better way of managing available parking lots, lowering
operating costs and further promoting social and economic development.
     The coverage of parking information should be expanded. When parking lots are full,
people generally drive around to look for another one nearby. In addition, men tend to park
illegally via temporary occupation of road side, while women tend to wait until a space becomes
available. Therefore, the expanded coverage of parking information can provide more options
for males so that parking violations can be reduced.
     The distribution channels of parking information should be diversified. When males
know that their destinations have busy parking lots before they travel there, most still choose
to drive there and look for spaces, while females typically choose other means of transport or
simply cancel their travel plans. Currently, most parking information is only shown on LED
screens located near the parking lots. The provision of parking information before trip making
through the internet or smart phones could help people make more reasonable trip mode choice.

  Box 3: Case study: Parking guidance information system in Ningbo

  The Ningbo parking guidance information system is one of the functions in an intelligent transport
     ，
  app called “Ningbo Expert”. Parking information is displayed spatially by color: red, blue and
  yellow. Blue indicates that enough parking lots are available; red means all lots are full. Yellow
  represents the fact that lots are busy (the number of available parking lots is shown when one clicks
  for details). In addition, local residents in Ningbo have multiple way of acquiring parking
  information, such as traffic-induced screens and a parking guidance website. It is more efficient for
  drivers, especially female drivers to make parking choices in advance.

         ：
  Source http://www.feiaock.com/news/639.html

     Parking information should be enriched. The results of a survey reveal that females are
more concerned about parking information than males are. In addition to the availability of
parking lots, they are eager to know the parking fees at their destinations. Parking fee
information can be published in advance through the channels mentioned above, and it can also
be used to adjust travel needs dynamically.
     2.1.4 Personal service information and applications

     Besides the intelligent transport information system that the government provides, all
kinds of mobile data terminals such as GPS, mobile phone apps and the internet are actively
being developed in the private sector to provide travel information to the public. The
                                                                                                 P a g e | 14



participation of the private sector can improve the quality of service and further favor all kinds
of users.
       The government and private sectors should take advantages of the internet for
publishing information. Internet and smartphone service have been common in China.
Compared to government-invested intelligent transport infrastructure facilities, such as bus
station electronic board and variable message signs, mobile data terminals have the advantages
of lower prices and a wider coverage. However, bus service information in China is still limited,
mainly because the government owns real-time traffic information, and private sectors face
difficulties with acquiring such data for developing personal information services. Therefore,
transport departments should adopt open data policies so that the private sector can be
involved into data service, and provide more diversified information services for both men and

         Box 4: Open data and contest of apps

    In 2015, “Shanghai Open Data Apps” was successfully held with more than 1,000 GB of big
    transport data being opened to developers around the world. More than 100 well-designed transport
    applications and solutions were received from all over the world. In the same year, the city of
    Weihai (a city in Shandong province) also held “Internet and Open Data Innovation,” collecting
    all sorts of innovative projects that are beneficial to the public.

    Local government and urban transport departments hold such contests for creative open-data apps.
    The public sector opens a series of urban traffic data to the developers, and request for specific
    solutions for improving urban transport service and the convenience of travel.

         1   ） Open traffic data include, but are not limited to following: real-time metro schedule, real-
                time bus information, taxi information, smart cards data, real-time traffic data, air quality,
                weather conditions, accidents and annual the household travel survey.

         2   ） “Gender-equality in travel” element can be one them for the contest. The contest can call
                for innovative apps that can improve gender equality and create a safe and convenient
                travel environment for females. A combination of open data, data analysis, and a proposed
                project serves to promote the efficient implementation of better travel programs.

women through market competition.
       The following is an example of intelligent transport apps (shown in Figure 3) in China: in
2013, the city of Ningbo promoted an ITS app, called “Ningbo Expert”, which provides 18
various services including “real-time bus information, the best taxi pick/drop site , public
bicycle, parking guidance system, long haul buses, road condition report, and car-moving
assistance.” Moreover, it combines the information of traffic policies, weather, and others from
multiple department sectors. Together with traffic information, including the transport
infrastructure, the means of transportation and traffic events, this app provides comprehensive,
real-time traffic information to travelers2. Up to June of 2014, “Ningbo Expert” gained 400,000
users.


2
    Source: http://www.zj.xinhuanet.com/dfnews/2013-09/09/c_117285954.htm
                                                                                          P a g e | 15



                                               Traffic information should be easy to use. With
                                         the development of informatization and technology,
                                         vulnerable    groups in       society may further be
                                         marginalized and be unable to equally enjoy the
                                         benefits of intelligent transport information and
                                         services. The major users of these transport information
                                         apps are adolescents and adult men. The usage of these
                                         apps by the elderly and by women is relatively lower.
                                         Therefore, traffic services should be designed
                                         practically and be easy to use by the general public.
                                         Moreover, trainings should be provided to elderly and
                                         female users particularly when conducting market
                                         promotions.
                                         2.1.5 User-friendly methods

                                               At present, it is still not very easy for all people to
                                         access, understand and operates various intelligent
     Figure 3: Ningbo Expert app          transport information systems in China. Especially for
groups such as homemakers and the elderly who still are unfamiliar with internet, electronic
device or its complicated system, it is a big challenge. Therefore, it is important to build a user-
friendly, down-to-earth and easy-to-read system for the promotion of the ITS.
         •   Inquiry steps should be simplified, avoiding complicated and long operating
             processes. All kinds of inquiry functions and information should be clearly
             classified.
         •   The interface should be easy to read and down to earth. For example, “where
             to go,” “where to depart” and “how to get there” can be used instead of
             complicated technical terms such as “destination,” “place of departure,” “means
             of transportation,” and so on.
         •   A user-friendly operating method should be utilized. Convenient and efficient
             inquiry methods should be promoted, such as a touch screen and voice answering
             system.


2.2 Smart Cards

     Smart cards, such as the public transit IC card, have been widely used in China to replace cash
transaction and have benefited many citizens. Many cities have begun to promote multi-
function cards, which are used not only for transport service, but also for many other daily
consumptions, such as paying a taxi, shopping in a supermarket, and paying a parking fee, to
further promote the urban transport service. Compared to men, women rely more on public
                                                                                         P a g e | 16



means of transportation and tend to have more transfers within a single travel experience. Hence,
generally, more women than men own smart cards.
     2.2.1 Public transit card swipe option

     Females usually carry hand bags or other items on their daily travel, while men do not.
Therefore, the improvement of the design and swipe option of the public transit card can benefit
females significantly.
     IC card readers could be more sensitive and allow users to pay fares without taking
their card out, considering the inconvenience of making a payment when a woman is carrying
bags and other belongings. This improvement will not only increases the convenience of taking
public transit for women, but also reduce the potential risk of theft – surveys show that women
are likely to expose their personal belongings when reaching for the IC card in the bag. A card
will be charged only once during a single trip to avoid an accidental swipe caused by high
sensitivity.
     Various forms of public transit cards can be provided. It is not easy to keep a single
traditional public transit card. A new generation of smart cards in small, potable forms, such
as key chains, bracelets, phone chains and bag accessories, thus should be introduced for the
convenience of commuters who use them every day. In China, Guangzhou and Shenzhen have
launched and made this a successful practice into the urban transit system. Moreover, some
mobile payment services, such as NFC and Apple Pay, can be used as well. In this way, there
will be no need for passengers to take many small items on their travels.
     2.2.2 Flexible ticket pricing system

     Compared with traditional fare-collection approaches, including ticket counters and coin-
operated machines, public-transit smart cards enable urban public transport systems to
implement fare-price flexibility, which better meets the travel needs of riders of both genders.
     Peak versus non-peak pricing. Generally speaking, men tend to take much more linear
trips from origin to destination, accounted for by their daily work commutes during the morning
and evening peak hours. Women tend to take more, shorter trips at more varied times during
the day, accounted for by their meeting household needs. A system of peak vs. non-peak pricing
could mitigate congestion during peak hours, while costing women who travel for household
works during off-peak hours less.
     Time-based fare. Women make more and shorter trips that may consist of multiple stops.
For instance, on the way to work, they may need to stop by daycare or school. Within that trip
chain, travel distance is similar to the distance to work, but women need to pay more because
of the transfers involved. From a fairness of view, if people has a transfer within a certain period
of time (e.g. 20 minutes), he/she should pay the same amount as a direct trip. Intelligent public
transit cards can be programmed to allow riders to leave the transit service for a short period,
and re-enter to continue the trip without paying more. In addition, it can also provide discounts
                                                                                          P a g e | 17



for transfers between various public transport routes. This benefits women significantly a lot
on their chain trips.
     In addition to traditional flat fares, peak pricing and time-based fares, a mix of the fare
structures is possible. Although such a mix would increase the technology requirements to
collect fares, it would not only increase profits of transit operator, but also satisfy the travel
needs of passengers and improve their willingness to pay. For example, in Brazil, the city of St.
Paul adopted a multi-fare structure for its bus service. It charged a flat fare in the central city,
but reverted to a distance-based fare structure for riders going to satellite destinations.
     2.2.3 Real-name information system

     Compared with males, females have higher rates of public transit card ownership, since
they rely more on public transportation and are more concerned about travel costs. The loss of
their public transit card causes problems and inconvenience. Hence, in the absence of a real-
name system, females may frequently recharge their transit cards with small amounts of money
to avoid potential financial losses if their cards are lost. This frequent recharging is inconvenient.
Therefore, the introduction of a real-name information system and a system to report loss
and replace cards can better ensure card security and can increase the efficiency of card
use. In particular, the development of a “multi-function card system” would enable public
transit cards to be widely used to pay in supermarket, pay utility bills and make other daily
purchases, thereby, finally making it feasible to recharge cards with larger amounts.
Furthermore, a real-name information system for public transit cards would become a key
aspect in furthering the development of smart cities.
     Finally, a real-name information system can associate transit payments with personal
social information, including gender and age, so that travel behavior analysis that includes
those demographic statistics can be conducted using the data from public transit card.
     2.2.4 Convenient public transit card recharge

     Currently, recharging at station vending machines, on the internet, and through mobile
apps recharge has not yet been widely adopted. Most passengers still use ticket counters and
other traditional means of recharging.
     Intelligent recharge should be promoted. Currently, the percentage of stations in
Chinese cities with ticket vending machines and ticket counters is still low. As a result,
recharging is quite inconvenient, disproportionately affecting women because they rely more
on public transport. To address this issue, more auto-refill machines with easy, concise
interfaces and understandable introductions should be added to city bus stations, and in business
centers that have high passenger volumes. In addition, to improve the efficiency of auto-refill
process, internet and mobile phone apps should be combined to develop online recharging
platforms, including auto-refill phone apps, Alipay, and WeChat.
     Ticket counters should be optimized and improved. Specific groups, such as women
and the elderly, always face difficulty in using intelligent auto-refill services. More sites are
                                                                                            P a g e | 18



needed that provide manual refill services, especially at locations that women and the elderly
visit frequently such as supermarket, community service centers and convenience stores. In
addition, the payment options at ticket counters should be convenient and diverse. Some
intelligent payment options, including Alipay, and WeChat, should be adopted soon.
2.3 Intelligent Monitoring Facilities
    2.3.1 Comprehensive monitoring services

     Safety and security during travel is everyone’s top priority, but especially women’s.
Personal security includes security from physical assault, and verbal harassment, robbery, theft,
and so on. In public spaces and on public transit, harassment is a serious issue that influences
women’s travel behaviors and patterns. To further increase people’s personal security during
their daily travels, many Chinese cities have implemented comprehensive monitoring systems,
including municipal, transit and bus monitors.
     Coverage of monitoring facilities should be expanded. Crimes like harassment and theft
usually take place on buses and metros. Monitoring in these places must be reinforced, and
camera locations should be optimized to cover all directions. Underground walkways, metro
and bus stations, and deserted streets have the highest potential crime risks for women.
Therefore, it is necessary to enhance monitoring and regularly check camera functionality. In
addition, good lighting is important to reduce the opportunities for crime, and to ensure that
cameras can capture bright images. If government funding is limited, capital from the private

 Box 4: Case studies     － Johannesburg and Nairobi’s strategies to improve travel safety.
      In the CBD of Johannesburg, South Africa, the basic social services provided by the
 government and augmented by private partners in the CBD, who have installed monitoring facilities
 and hired private guards to create a safer and more attractive business district. This strategy not only
 improves customers’ travel security, but it also attracts a significant number of investments.

      “Adopt a Light limited” is a lighting and advertising company in Nairobi, Kenya, that aims to
 achieve safer cities by installing adequate street lighting and reinvesting its revenues from
 advertising in community development. So far, the company has installed 185 streetlights with
 advertisements along all the major highways and in slums in Nairobi, resulting in a reduction in
 road crimes, including highway attacks, rapes, and muggings among both drivers and pedestrians.




 Figure 4   ：Adopt a light project（source：http://www.adopt-a-light.com/）
                                                                                        P a g e | 19



sector can contribute to creating safe travel environments. Examples of this include “Adopt a
Light”, a lighting and advertising company in Nairobi, Kenya, and a monitoring system in
Johannesburg, South Africa (see Box 4).
     High-risk places and time should be recognized. Through regular crime investigation
and analysis, high-risk places and time must be recognized so their monitoring can thus be
increased. Then, staff must be allocated at the monitoring center to monitor these high-crime
areas during the night. If necessary, patrols should also be dispatched.
     2.3.2 Timely, efficient incident management

     Monitoring systems not only help administrators see real-time images of public places, but
the videotapes are also invaluable as evidence in criminal and traffic-related cases.
     Monitoring data should be saved properly. The length of time for which monitoring
videos are saved should be maximized according to relevant regulations and real needs. In
addition, monitoring facilities should be inspected regularly; and outdated or broken cameras
fixed or replaced timely so that high-quality videotapes can be produced.
     Incident handling should be further improved. Intelligent monitoring system are meant
to serve people. To provide better service, the process for responding to incidents and providing
video evidence for people who need it should be refined. Moreover, routing summary and
reporting results of incidents will make intelligent monitoring system more of a deterrent.
     Security precaution should be established. The Public Security Department, the
Transport Department and the Bus Monitoring Center should implement a process for
publicizing security risks and potential dangers detected by monitoring systems. For instance,
electronic message signs at bus stations or on buses could warn to passengers about potential
safety risks.
     2.3.3 Special attention to women’s safety

     Compared with men, women are more likely to be targeted by crimes, including
harassment and theft. Therefore, an intelligent monitoring system should be designed
particularly to address women’s travel safety and personal security.
     A special security-alarming system could be implemented. To ensure security in
secluded places on campus, some colleges and universities in China have installed security
alarms that have alarm buttons, recording devices, lighting, and warning lights. Similarly, in
secluded or dangerous places, urban management departments can install security alarms in
pillars or kiosks that are equipped with flashing warning lights, lighting, cameras, alarm buttons,
intercom telephones, and recording devices. The locations could also include first-aid kits and
self-defense tools.
     Women-only carriages could be introduced. Survey results indicate that some women
call for women-only carriages on metros during peak hours. In addition, crowded bus line could
either introduce female-only buses or designate special areas inside buses, at least during
summer. Nevertheless, it might be difficult to implement women-only buses. Since women may
                                                                                       P a g e | 20



be inappropriately touched by men especially in crowded buses, increasing the frequency of
bus service may to some extent obviate the need for female-only buses.
     Help and warning buttons could be installed on buses. According to real needs, help
buttons on buses or metros enable women to seek assistance from drivers and control centers.
In addition, warning buttons can alert other passengers to pay special attention to their
belongings through buzz or message signs on bus.
2.4 Traffic Signal Control System

     Technology has enabled many advanced functions in signal-control system, including
adaptive signals, green wave signals, area traffic control and bus priority. However, to improve
access for special groups, basic signal timing need to be improved.
    2.4.1 Intersection layouts and signal-system design

     The signal-timing plan for intersections is always constrained by the size, form and
channelization of each intersection. Therefore, to balance pedestrian safety and traffic flow, the
traffic signal system and timing plan should be addressed when the street intersection is
designed.
     Signal-timing plan should be validated when designing the intersection layout. The
signal-timing plan (including the bus priority scheme) should be developed based on the
physical layout of the intersections, including their size, form and channelization, according to
estimated traffic flow. If the plan does not work, the layout of the intersections should be
redesigned, including the crossing distance, lane arrangement and intersection channelization.
     Reasonable channelization should be realized through triangle islands or refuge
islands. Since wide intersections take more time to cross, the pedestrians face more danger. To
reduce crossing distance, triangle islands or refuge islands with enough space to accommodate
significant numbers of pedestrians should be designed and provided.
     Signal control system should be inspected regularly. The operation of intersection
signals should be monitored closely. Regular inspections of intersection design and signal
timing performance are necessary, so signal timing can be optimized, damaged signals repaired
timely and signal controls added at un-signalized intersections where traffic flow is high.
    2.4.2 Reasonable traffic timings and high priority for pedestrians

     Signal control systems are responsible for distributing right-of-way on urban roads. When
timing the signals, transport administrators in China tend to prioritize motor vehicles,
facilitating traffic flow at the expense of pedestrians and causing many potential dangers and
discomforts to non-motorized travelers (especially women and the elderly) crossing the street.
Modern signal timing design should be pedestrian-oriented, with special attention to the
needs of special groups, including the elderly, women and children. The signal control system
should have reasonable signal times to create a safe, comfortable, convenient travel
environment for all pedestrians.
                                                                                        P a g e | 21



     Scientific, reasonable signal times should be designed. Signal times are calculated
according to the physical characteristics of the intersection and the traffic volume. Minimum
green times should ensure that all pedestrians have enough time to across the intersection, with
special consideration for pregnant women, children and the elderly who walk slower than male
adults.
     Pedestrians should be given sufficient, reasonable right-of-way. At certain
intersections or locations (for instance, in front of elementary and secondary schools or
hospitals), pedestrian crossing buttons should be provided. Pressing the “WALK” button should
trigger the green signal for pedestrians.
     Conflicts between pedestrians and right-turning vehicles should be addressed. If
possible, right-turn-only lanes should be designed at intersections, so that right-turning vehicles
and pedestrians can be controlled in separate phases. More importantly, traffic legislation and
its enforcement mechanism shall be established to further guarantee pedestrians’ right-of-way
and travel security.
     2.4.3 All-red signals

     All-red signals would show a red signal for vehicle traffic in all directions at one point
during the cycle at times of heavy traffic, and at intersections with long crossing distances.
When all signals are red, all vehicles stop, enabling pedestrians to cross straight or diagonally.
This mechanism not only ensures pedestrians’ safety, but also increases efficiency at
intersections by reducing congestion caused by accidents and conflicts. All-red signals have
been successfully implemented successfully at intersections in Tokyo and Hong Kong with
high pedestrian volumes.
     All-red signals are appropriate in the following situations:
          •   At intersections with long crossing distances and high pedestrian volume,
              including commercial pedestrian streets, near kindergarten, elementary schools,
              secondary schools and supermarkets.
          •   At peak hours, after which they can revert to normal signals. For example, all- red
              signals can be implemented at intersections near preschools, elementary schools,
              and secondary schools during the morning drop-off and afternoon pick-up times.
          •   All-red signals should be tested due, because situations can be complicated and
              vary among cities. This system should be further promoted only if it works well.

2.5 Electronic Police System
     “Electronic police” is a camera system street intersections that automatically detects traffic
violations and takes candid photos. In many cities in China, electronic police systems play an
increasingly important role in detecting traffic violation, including running red lights, speeding
and driving on irregular carriageway. Enforcement cameras now deal with more violations than
                                                                                       P a g e | 22



policeman do on site. To make the electronic police system more efficient and more of a
deterrent, its design should integrate the travel behaviors and habits of both men and women.
     HD cameras could be used to acquire drivers’ pictures and identities. Our survey
results showed that males more often violated traffic regulations than females, but they were
less likely to receive penalties from enforcement cameras. Further research found that male
drivers may memorize the specific locations enforcement cameras and avoid them. In addition,
women drivers in the same household accepted the traffic tickets issued to men in the household,
which circumvented justice in traffic-law enforcement. HD traffic cameras could be introduced
to take clear pictures of drivers from the front that can identify gender, thus avoiding deception
and enabling a justice result.
     Law enforcement and safe-driving education should be combined. Rather than issuing
penalties, the purpose of the electronic police system is to make the streets safer by regulating
driving behaviors. Therefore, traffic administrators should implement a more equal and
transparent law enforcement system. For example, the locations of electronic police cameras
can be publicized regularly, and distinctive signs should identify areas where speed is measured.
In addition, to raise citizens’ awareness of safe driving, the factors underlying these actions,
along with the traffic laws, should be publicized.
                                                                                      P a g e | 23



3 ITS Operation

3.1 Government Initiatives

     International community-development experiences tell us that the more effort local
governments make, the more successful gender mainstreaming will be. Only when the decision-
makers in charge of allocating public resources recognize the existence of gender inequality
and the importance of gender equality, can they create impartial, effective policies to improve
urban environments for both men and women. Therefore, the government should take greater
responsibility for promoting gender equality in ITS.
          ITS gender-equality policy goal
     Focusing on the social benefits brought about by ITS, the government should make
“considering the interests of both genders equally and meeting the needs of both genders
equally” a policy goal by way of a gender action plan and a gender equality assessment of ITS
operation. Currently, gender policy is relatively independent of transport development policy
in China mainly because transport is driven by the economy and technology instead of by social
issues. Unlike other national policies, gender policy is executed solely by the Women’s
Federation and other women-centered organizations. Therefore, gender-equality policy should
be included in the national transport development framework at all levels of government.
Through unified planning, clarified operations guidance and gender management programs,
gender-equality policy can be better realized, assessed and monitored.
          Gender equality in allocating institutional personnel
     The government should maintain gender balance among top leaders in the transport
department to prevent transport planning and design from being male dominated. By
implementing nomination of exemplary employee and similar practices, the government can
commend female leaders and employees in ITS planning, design, and operation encouraging
females to apply their traits and skills in the field of intelligent transport.
          Gender equality in ITS vocational-skills training
     Implementing ITS practices, including IC cards and intelligent dispatch systems is likely
to replace traditional, manual operation positions, including bus conductor and dispatchers, jobs
mainly held by females. Rather than laying off these employees, the government and private
enterprises should offer related vocational-skills training to help these female workers
and other workers gain knowledge needed for new jobs. With skills in using operating
software and systems, workers can be more adaptive and qualified for new positions.
          Gender awareness in government personnel
     Leaders and members of intelligent transport departments should be trained to be more
 gender-conscious.
                                                                                               P a g e | 24



3.2 Stakeholders in Developing ITS

        Stakeholders in developing ITS consist of four major groups, shown as follows.

                       Table 3-1 Stakeholder framework in developing ITS
                              II. Department in
 I. Government                                          III. Operator               IV. Residents
                              Charge
 •       Emphasizing          •    Doing surveys on     •    Sticking strictly to   •    Being
         social equality in        residents’ travel         the principle of            cooperative in
         transport                 traits and needs          equality and                resident travel
         development          •    Studying and              providing                   needs surveys;
         planning                  analyzing ITS             diversified and             focusing on own
 •       Providing                 gender needs              differentiate travel        needs for ITS
         sufficient                                          services that can           services, use
                              •    Establishing a
         financial support                                   meet the needs of           preferences and
                                   diversified,
         for ITS gender                                      both gender.                giving voice to it
                                   human-based and
         equality                  equal ITS            •    Providing special      •    Involving eagerly
         development               platform for              travel services for         in suggestion
 •       Making laws and           suggestion                special groups              collection on ITS
         regulations to            collection                including                   development
         protect special                                     pregnant women,        •    Actively
                              •    Striking a balance
         groups and setting                                  the elderly and             providing
                                   between
         relevant                                            children                    feedbacks on the
                                   efficiency and
         technological             equality in ITS      •    Focusing on the             uses of ITS
         indexes                   planning and              individual needs       •    Offering help all
                                   design                    for travel services         one can to special
                                                             and providing               groups in daily
                              •    Establishing
                                                             human-based                 travel
                                   monitoring and
                                                             travel services
                                   feedback
                                   mechanism in ITS     •    Collecting
                                   operation and             information and
                                   using                     data on residents’
                                                             travel behaviors
                              •    Assessing gender
                                                             and ITS using
                                   equality in ITS
                                                             behaviors which
                                   using
                                                             are marked with
                                                             corresponding
                                                             demographic
                                                             information
                                                             including gender,
                                                             age etc.

3.3 Media Publicity and Public Participation

        Introducing ITSs and providing operating guidance for its use in the mass media could be
key to realizing policy transparency, gender equality, and service efficiency. However, ITS,
integrated with modern transport information science and technology, still is not widely
accessible to all people because of differences in incomes, educational levels, genders and ages.
Females, especially homemakers, along with children, the elderly, and the low-income are
disadvantaged in adopting new technology and pay less attention to it, thereby, ITS operators
and managers need to take various measures to bring these groups the same convenience by
explaining them what ITS is and how to use it. Mass media provides a good avenue to for doing
this.
                                                                                          P a g e | 25



         Publicizing ITS at the community level
     Regular activities introducing and promoting ITS should be held in various city
communities and should emphasize teaching homemakers and the elderly how to use various
urban intelligent transport services, including public transport information apps.
         Publicizing ITS in the mass media
     Various channels, including bus station boards, publicity boards, billboards and TV
advertising should be used to briefly introduce, explain the advantages of, and provide
instructions on the use of various ITSs.
         Social groups participation
     During the planning, design, operation and monitoring stages of ITS, female-rights related
  organizations such as women’s federation and NGOs should take an active role as the
  facilitators and catalysts. Their involvement ranges from providing the government with
  information about gender-specific requirement in travel, suggestions for planning and design,
  and feedback on the operation and usage of ITS applications, as well as comprehensive
  social/gender data for transport.
         Involvement of social organizations
     During ITS planning, design, operation and M&E, women’s federations, NGOs and other
  social organizations should play the role as drivers, supervisor and catalyst. They could work
  with the decision-maker in identifying the gender needs in transport and propose gender-
 Box 5: Case Study   －Improving urban transportation services through public participation
       The Liaoning urban transportation project in China adopted participatory methods during the
 following three key phases of the project cycle:
      • At the project design and feasibility stage, public participation was used to identify the
         public’s major travel concerns;
      • At the project-appraisal stage, public participation provided reaction to the way the public’s
         concerns had been addressed in the project design.
      • At the project implementation stage, public involvement in project monitoring and
         evaluation was encouraged.

       The recruited participants can be classified into walkers, bus users and bus drivers, and so on,
 according to trip mode. Vulnerability-driven groups of transport users like the poor disabled,
 migrants and the elderly should be considered. More importantly, men and women should be
 separately interviewed so that women will feel engaged. Their travel needs and preferences can also
 be known through focus group discussions and in-depth interviews. For example, the interviews
 indicate that most people who usually travel on foot, by bike or public transit do not own a car. The
 interviews also show that travels are mainly for daily commuting, schools and hospitals, instead of
 leisure activities. Besides, key transport issues for local people are damaged pavement of secondary
 roads, undesirable drainage system, sidewalks and road equipment, mixed road rights of motor
 vehicle and non-motor vehicle, and lack of street lighting and signals.

       The interviews also indicate that women are less satisfied with transport system, especially in
 terms of safety – poor lighting, long waits for bus and lack of sidewalks and intersections. With
 residents’ engagement, especially the voices of women, the initial project design towards to improve
 the conditions of secondary roads, traffic management, sidewalks, public transport service and street
 lights.

 Source World Bank        2010
                                                                                         P a g e | 26



  specific recommendations. In addition, they could monitor and evaluate the issues and
  impacts of ITS projects and provide technical support to system development.
            Public participation
        Before establishing new, large-scale ITS projects, operators and managers should hold
  public hearings to gather suggestions and concerns. Likewise, ITSs already in operation
  should provide hotlines or email addresses to gather feedbacks or suggestions and complaints
  from various group of users about their problems or inconvenience in using the ITS.
3.4 Personal Privacy

        ITS functions by analyzing and making use of the personal information and video data it
collects. For example, the electronic police system identifies information about related vehicles
and drivers; intelligent monitoring systems collect videos in public places; a significant number
of intelligent transport information services are based on information about personal location.
However, as more and more information is gathered, users begin to feel uneasy about their
personal privacy and cautious about using ITSs.
        A survey showed that some mobile phone users, mostly females, refused to use GPS or
other relevant positioning software because they were afraid their location information might
be disclosed. However, safety counts more than privacy for females. Even though real-time
monitoring cameras installed on streets, at stations or on buses might compromise personal
privacy, a majority of females still stand by ITS.
            Monitoring personal privacy
        To guarantee the public’s privacy and safety, relevant departments should create laws and
regulations regarding the use of personal information in the context of transport data.
            Protecting Data security
        ITS departments, including those in the government and private sectors should take strict
protective actions to avoid the disclosure of user information caused by attacks on data storage
servers. If necessary, third party can be commissioned to store data. In addition, data masking,
a technology that transforms sensitive, private information according to certain rules, should be
applied to data collection and processing to better protect sensitive, private intelligent transport
data.
            Scientific and wide publication
        In areas covered by intelligent monitoring devices or electronic police systems, signs
should announce the use of such systems to the public. In addition, the permission of users
should be obtained before personal position information is collected through mobile phones
and GPSs. Furthermore, relevant government or enterprises should reveal to the public how
they collect, process and use data. Knowing how information is collected and for what purposes
may help alleviate public concerns and misunderstandings.
                                                                                      P a g e | 27



4 ITS Monitoring and Feedback

     Transport departments should implement efficient ITS monitoring and feedback
mechanisms based on various social attributes, including gender and age. During monitoring,
participatory methods can be used to allow all project members and transport users to express
their voices, and participate in the process of establishing and operating ITSs . In addition,
feedback channels should be established so that errors can be reported, problems addressed
and the performance and timeliness of the ITS improved.
4.1 Monitoring and Assessment Methods

    Transport departments should objectively and scientifically monitor and assess various
effects of ITS on all users. The focus should include suitability and feasibility for vulnerable
groups, including females, and the elderly, travel benefits to males and females, respectively,
costs paid by males and females when using ITS; and so on. Firstly, a monitoring and
assessment index of ITS gender effects should be implemented to assess the results and effects
of ITS in terms of gender equality. Secondly, surveys, targeted interviews, and big data where
applicable shall be conducted periodically to measure the impact of ITS redesign and
interventions on gender and benchmark against the baseline data. Thirdly, social and gender
experts should be invited to monitor and assess all planned and operational ITS project. Finally,
feedback channels, including e-mail addresses and hotlines, should be provided.
     Based on the local situation, the government can also adopt a gender audit checklist to
monitor the implementation of a gender-sensitive transport system. This checklist would
include the following:
         •     Assessment of how well local transport operators or authorities satisfy females’
               travel needs.
         •     Priorities that were determined by negotiations.
         •     Assessment of the progress made by transport operators and authorities on gender-
               oriented project development.
4.2 Assessment Indices

    In the process of assessing gender equality in urban transportation services, there are two
suggestions: 1) people can be grouped by age and income to investigate the differences between
low-income men and women’s travel behaviors and the elderly men and women’ travel
behaviors; 2   ）people can be grouped by type of urban community they reside in to investigate
their travel traits, transport service quality, and the proportion of male residents and female
residents in low-income communities, affordable housing communities, and aged communities.
                                                                                        P a g e | 28



     The following indices can be used to assess gender equality in ITS use:
          Popularity by gender
     This can be assessed by comparing the respective proportion of male and female ITS users
to the population of males and females. To some degree, this also reflects the level of service’s
quality regarding accessibility and suitability of ITS services.
          Gender proportion of users
     Ratio of male users to female users in a certain ITS service can be used to reflect to some
 degree gender equality level in suitability and practicality of ITS services.
          Use frequency /sufficiency
     The average number of times both males and females use of a certain ITS service during
 a unit period can be used to reflect its level of gender equality level.
          Affordability
     Affordability can be calculated from the average amounts spent by male and female ITS
users in a unit period. In addition, this can also partly reflect whether the fare structure of ITS
service is reasonable for females, who are generally less wealthy than males, and whether the
fare structure could prohibit ITS use by females.
          Satisfaction
     Ratings and grading can assess male and female ITS users’ satisfaction with convenience,
comfort, and cost. These rating and grading can efficiently and directly reflect the ITS service’s
level of gender equality.
          Safety/security
     The perceived and real threat to safety and security of male and female users could be
collected through surveys to verify the effectiveness of safety-related ITS and reflect the level
of gender equality.
          Accident frequency
     The proportion of males to females involved in accidents recorded either by ITS or in
complaints can directly reflect the level of gender equality in the suitability and safety of the
ITS service.
                                                                             P a g e | 29



Annex A: General Steps for Incorporating Gender into ITS

        Existing ITS application               Newly planned ITS application
   Data Collection                        Data Collection
    - Questionnaire                        -     Questionnaire
    - Semi-structured interview            -     Semi-structured interview
    - Focus group discussions              -     Focus group discussions
    - Big-data analysis
   Gender analysis to detect any gender   Gender analysis to identify gender
   imbalances and gender specific needs   specific needs for ITS
   Redesigning ITS application            Designing and developing the ITS
   (or) Reconfiguring ITS application     application
   Monitoring and evaluation              Designing monitoring and evaluation
                                          framework
                                                                                     P a g e | 30



Bibliography

    Anand, Anvita and Geetam Tiwari. (2006). A Gendered Perspective of the Shelter-Transport-
Livelihood Link: The Case of Poor Women in Delhi. Transport Reviews, 26: 1, 63-80.
    Lara M. Gómez   （2000）.Gender Analysis of Two Components of the World Bank Transport
Projects in Lima, Peru: Bikepaths and Busways, World Bank Project.
     World Bank. (2010). Mainstreaming Gender in Road Transport: Operational Guidance for
World Bank Staff. Transport Paper.TP-28
