Knowledge and Learning for Human Rights and Development




                   ProgressReport
                   January–December2015
2   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
Knowledge and Learning for Human Rights and Development




                       ProgressReport
                       January–December2015

         The Nordic Trust Fund (NTF) is a knowledge and learning initiative
         with the objective of helping the World Bank develop a more
         informed view on human rights. It is designed to improve existing
         Bank involvement on human rights in the overall context of the
         Bank’s core mission of promoting economic growth and poverty
         reduction. This report provides a summary of progress made
         under the NTF program during 2015, building on earlier activities
         and results achieved during the five previous reporting periods. It
         shows how the supported grants and knowledge and partnership
         program continued to pursue the stated program objective by
         building and consolidating the NTF program as a platform for
         human rights related debates and discussions among World Bank
         staff, management and partners. This report and the five previous
         ones are available at http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/
         nordic-trust-fund.




                                      Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015   iii
                                                                 CONTENTs

	
	 Abbreviations & Acronyms	                                        vi
1.	 Summary of Progress	                                           1
2.	Introduction	                                                   3
3.	 Activities, Results and Outcome Indicators	                    4
  3.1 ACTIVITIES 	                                                 4
  3.2 RESULTS	                                                     8
  3.3 OUTCOME INDICATORS	                                         10

4.	 Events, Research and Grants	                                  12
  4.1 KNOWLEDGE AND PARTNERSHIP EVENTS 	                          12
  4.2 APPLIED RESEARCH 	                                          16
  4.3 NTF GRANT PROGRAM EXAMPLES 	                                17

5.	 Financial Summary	                                            19
6.	 Looking Ahead	                                                21

  ANNEXES
  Annex A	
  Nordic Trust Fund Knowledge and Learning Activities in 2015	    23
  Annex B	
  NTF Program Grants Approved in 2015	                            29




                                                                            v
     Abbreviations & Acronyms

     HRBA     Human Rights Based Approach
     HOI      Human Opportunity Index
     HR       Human Rights
     HRDD     Human Rights Due Diligence
     ICT      Information and Communications Technology
     K&P      Knowledge and Partnership
     KPI      Knowledge Product Index
     MDBs     Multi-Lateral Development Banks
     NTF      Nordic Trust Fund
     OHCHR Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
     OPCS     Operations Policy and Country Services Vice Presidency
     PS       Performance Standards (IFC)
     SF       Sustainability Framework
     SOGI     Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
     UN       United Nations
     UPR      Universal Periodic Review
     WBG      World Bank Group
     WBL      Women, Business and the Law
     WBCKL    World Bank Change, Knowledge and Learning
     WDR      World Development Report
     WPA      Work Program Agreement
     WTO      World Trade Organization




vi   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
1                  Summary of Progress

This report describes progress made under the Nordic Trust Fund (NTF)
program in 2015 and also provides a summary of achievements in the
previous years since activities started in late 2009. Program activities in 2015
continued to provide a vibrant venue for human rights related debates,
discussions and learning among World Bank staff, management and
partners. Through the two established program components—an internal
grant system and a knowledge and partnership program—work focused
on pursuing the NTF’s objective to develop a more informed view of how
human rights relate to the work of the World Bank. This report and the five
previous annual progress reports are available at http://www.worldbank.
org/en/programs/nordic-trust-fund.

Following the completion of Phase 1 of NTF in 2014, work in 2015 focused
on the establishment and start of Phase 2. This included, first, preparatory        A total of 22 learning
efforts such as the finalization of financial arrangements and agreements for
technical support (human rights expertise) for the NTF Secretariat with the          events and 5 studies
donors as well as the putting in place of a new NTF Steering Committee
to make decisions on overall directions and on which grant proposals to                 or reports were
support. Second, implementation started with the preparation and delivery
of a number of NTF Secretariat managed knowledge and partnership events            supported, delivered or
and the mid-year launch of a new round of 31 NTF grants for Bank teams
seeking to explore the role of human rights in their respective activities.        substantively completed
A total of 22 learning events and 5 studies or reports were supported,                  during 2015.
delivered or substantively completed during 2015, either by the 31 teams
who started implementing NTF grants or by the NTF Secretariat under its
Knowledge and Partnership (K&P) program. Grants and activities had a
wide reach into most of the operational and analytical units in the World
Bank Group.

It is estimated that about 60 percent of the current grants and activities
focused on human rights methodology and principles in Bank-supported
programs (with government approval when activities took place in-country).
One quarter involved the development of human rights related analytical
tools and practices designed to inform work in client countries. The final
quarter of work carried out formed part of larger analytical or operational
programs and supported the exploration of human rights in the respective
tasks. Two activities supported policies and procedures in the Bank: the grant
for the International Finance Corporation to implement its new performance
standards and the grant for the Bank’s team coordinating the review of the
safeguard policies.




                                                                                           Summary of Progress   1
    The NTF continued to reach large internal and external    on the NTF grant program, 15 percent on the NTF
    audiences. Past and current grant receiving teams make    Secretariat managed K&P program, and 2 percent on
    up a core group of about 350 professional level Bank      administrative fees.
    staff that have worked extensively with human rights
    aspects of their programs. Earlier estimates show that    Work during 2016 will focus on supporting the continued
    about half of Washington based staff and a quarter        implementation of the 31 grants that were approved
    of country offices are familiar with NTF. In 2013 about   in 2015, the launch of a new round of grants in mid-
    1,700 staff had attended a NTF event, and that number     2016, and the continued delivery of a comprehensive
    is estimated to have grown to about 2,500 by end 2015.    K&P program by the NTF Secretariat. Work with the
    NTF also reached large Bank and outside audiences         31 current grants will focus on ensuring that the teams
    through its support of larger Bank programs such as the   implement high quality activities with relevant human
    2017 World Development Report on Governance and           rights content and with most of them holding at least
    the Law, and through the continued dissemination of       one learning event during the year. An additional grant
    previously supported major reports.                       round for 20–25 grants was launched in May 2016
                                                              and will included human rights training sessions as
    Following agreement in 2014 by the five Nordic donors     prerequisites for applying and for the selected teams.
    to support a second (2015–2018) phase of the program,     The NTF Secretariat will continue to complement and
    and with Germany joining as a new donor, total funds      support the grant program with select events and
    received grew to US$28.8 million by end 2015 with an      studies, possibly focusing on synergies among the
    additional US$6 million promised by donors. This brings   grant teams, fragile states, the role of the Global South
    the total amount of funds to US$34.8 million of which     in shaping human rights standards and policies, and
    US$17.7 million had been spent by end 2015. Of this       the role of human rights in promoting tolerance and
    total amount, 83 percent has been or will be spent        combatting extremism and radicalization.




2   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
2                                  Introduction

NTF supports a knowledge and learning program to develop a more informed view of how human rights relate to
the Bank’s work. This is done in the context of the Bank’s twin goals to end poverty and boost shared prosperity with
due regard for the World Bank’s Articles of Agreement (available at www.worldbank.org).

The program draws on recent thinking in both the
human rights and development communities. Human
rights thinkers have sought to complement the legal
architecture with “how-to” and good practice oriented
tools and methodologies, including the now well-
established principle of progressive realization of
economic, social and cultural rights, acknowledging
that it can take time for countries to meet agreed-on
obligations. Similarly, development agencies, both with
and without explicit human rights mandates or policies,
have seen the gradual adoption of human rights inspired
ideas into good development practice. For example,
the World Bank has put in place social and environmen-
tal safeguards and other mechanisms to prevent
supported programs from causing harm, and many
supported operations contribute to the realization of
rights through, for example, improved governance and
better provision of services. Nevertheless, knowledge
remains limited about how a systematic consideration of     The previous five NTF progress reports provide a
human rights could influence development outcomes.          summary of program achievements and content from
There is little evidence-based material available on the    the start in September 2009 until December 2014. They
value added of including human rights in development        describe the establishment and implementation of the
programs, and agencies continue to explore how to           two main program components: (i) the NTF human
best prevent and respond to alleged and documented          rights grant program under which task teams across
violations of human rights.                                 the World Bank Group (WBG) obtain financial and
                                                            technical support to explore the role of human rights
A World Bank staff survey in 2009 identified institution    in their particular tasks, and (ii) training, studies partner-
specific knowledge gaps about how human rights              ships and capacity building activities delivered through
laws, definitions, standards, principles and institutions   a NTF Secretariat managed Knowledge and Partnership
relate to the Bank’s work, and provided a framework         (K&P) program. The reports also describe the NTF
for the design of NTF-supported activities. Activities      management and governance structure, including a
largely draw on core human rights instruments               senior management steering committee that provides
adopted by the United Nations (UN) and regional             overall direction and guidance and takes decisions on
entities, widely accepted human rights principles (e.g.,    the allocation of funding across Bank units, sectors and
nondiscrimination, accountability, participation and        themes. The NTF Secretariat is responsible for running
transparency) and good practices employed when              the program and oversees the financial and technical
working with human rights in development programs.          support provided.




                                                                                                          Introduction       3
    3               Activities, Results
                  and Outcome Indicators

    3.1 ACTIVITIES

    In 2015

    After the successful completion of Phase 1 of the NTF in 2014, work during 2015 aimed at launching the second
    program phase as agreed between Bank management and donors and based on the same two work streams: (i) the
    NTF Grant Program comprising studies, learning events and other activities carried out by Bank task teams, and (ii)
    workshops, studies and other work by the NTF Secretariat under the K&P Program.

                                           NTF Grant Program: A Bank-wide call for proposals for NTF financial
                                           support was issued in April and more than 80 proposals were received and
                                           assessed. Employing the agreed upon selection criteria (i.e. clear human
                                           rights link, activities of interest to large audiences within the Bank) the NTF
                                           selection committee approved 31 proposals for funding of up to $250,000
                                           each, amounting to US$7.2 million in total. The 31 winning teams then
                                           completed the arrangements for the transfer of the funds, held concept
                                           note reviews with their respective management, finalized the two-year plans
                                           for implementation, presented their plans at the NTF Annual Workshop
                                           in November, and started activities. Although implementation was still in
                                           the early stages by end 2015, some teams completed deliveries before
                                           year end; a total of 22 workshops or knowledge events and five written
                                           outputs were completed. Annex B provides a comprehensive summary
                                           of the 31 grant proposals, their work to date, and plans for 2016. Table 1
                                           shows the geographic and thematic allocation of the 31 selected grants:
                                           the left column indicates that 60 percent of funds support regional/country
                                           focused proposals and the remaining 40 percent are for global (not regional
                                           specific) work, while the right column shows the thematic distribution and
                                           illustrates the dominance of governance, social/urban/rural, and social
                                           protection topics.




4   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
Table 1. Allocation of Grant Funds

 NTF: Allocation of US$7.2 million for 31 grants approved in 2015 and to be implemented between 2015
 and 2017. (US$ million) across (a) regional/global focus and (b) units/thematic focus
 (a) Regional/global focus                                   (b) Units/thematic focus
 Africa                                           1.4        Development economics, WDR                 0.25
 East Asia                                        0.6        IFC                                        0.25
 Europe, Central Asia                             0.8        Education                                  0.25
 Latin America, Caribbean                         0.8        Environment/land                           0.25
 Middle East, North Africa                        0.5        Governance                                 1.75
 South Asia                                       0.3        Health                                     0.75
 Global                                           2.8        Poverty                                    0.35
                                                             Social protection                          0.75
                                                             Social, urban, rural                       1.75
                                                             Transport                                  0.09
                                                             Water                                      0.13
                                                             Legal and operational policy               0.63
 TOTAL                                            7.2                                                   7.2


NTF K&P Program: The NTF Secretariat delivered 12 workshops or other
learning events in 2015, and also organized or attended many other
meetings and seminars. The major ones included: (i) the NTF Annual
Workshop where the 31 selected grant teams made presentations and
had their work and plans critiqued by invited human rights experts from
the UN, donors and academia, and (ii) three seminars during the Bank’s
Law, Justice and Development week on how to integrate human rights
approaches in development work, on research by the Bank-supported
Human Rights Community of Practice, and on how international financial
institutions work with human rights. Secretariat staff participated in human
rights related conferences, met partner institutions and supervised NTF
grants implemented in-country. The NTF Secretariat also provided support
to human rights related work inside the Bank including in the context of the
ongoing review of the World Bank’s safeguards, a Justice Reform project
in Kenya and IFC’s implementation of its revised performance standards.
Annex A provides a detailed list of select events and tasks during 2015.

Throughout 2015 the NTF Secretariat was hosted by the Inclusive Institutions Department in the Governance
Global Practice. At the beginning of the year the Secretariat included the Program Coordinator and one consultant/
assistant. In August the team was joined by a Senior Program Officer/Human Rights Expert (funded by Finland) and
in October by a Consultant/Senior Human Rights Expert from academia. The expansion of the team made it possible
to provide proactive advice to the grant teams and also intensify deliveries of the Secretariat’s K&P program.




                                                                         Activities, Results and Outcome Indicators   5
    Since start

    Adding the 2015 activities to those carried out during the previous years (since program start in 2009) shows that
    NTF by end 2015 had delivered over 240 workshops, seminars or similar learning events and about 180 written
    outputs (including both self-standing pieces and human rights related chapters/discussions in larger studies). Eighty-
    six grants have been approved.


    Table 2. Activity Outputs

     NTF: Activity outputs since program start; number of events and written outputs

     Phase 1                                          Workshops, seminars                     Written outputs
     2010 (28 grants approved)                                   18                                    3
     2011                                                        40                                   50
     2012 (27 grants approved)                                   75                                   45
     2013                                                        34                                   37
     2014                                                        55                                   40

     Phase 2
     2015 (31 grants approved)                                   22                                    5
     Total (86 grants approved)                                 244                                 180



    A total of US$17.7 million had been spent on activities (since program start) by end 2015. Table 3 showing the
    allocation of funds spent indicates activities have had a broad and comprehensive outreach to the parts of the Bank
    doing operational and analytical work. The top of the table shows that the vast majority of funds (US$14.6 million,
    or 83 percent of the total) was spent on activities in the Grant Program. US$2.4 million, or 15 percent, supported
    activities in the K&P program. The remaining US$0.5 million, or 2 percent, paid for administrative fees.

    The lower part of the table proves a more detailed breakdown of how funds spent under the Grant Program were
    allocated across the World Bank Group before (left column) and after (right column) the July 2014 reorganization of
    the World Bank.

                                            First, the lower left of the table shows funds spent under the organizational
                                            set-up that was discontinued on July 1, 2014. Here, NTF grants were
                                            managed in all six geographical regions, the anchor units for the four main
                                            thematic networks as well as the World Bank’s research arm (Development
                                            Economics), the Legal Department and the World Bank Institute.

                                            Second, the lower right part of the table shows that grants were held in 11
                                            different thematic units after July 2014, reflecting the fact that most staff
                                            (and all grant receiving teams) were assigned to such units. Most activities
                                            and spending were by the Governance Global Practice, followed by the
                                            Urban, Rural and Social Development Global Practice. Human rights in
                                            the provision of health, social protection/labor and in research and the
                                            World Development Reports (WDR) (Development Economics) also figured
                                            prominently.




6   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
Table 3. Allocation of Disbursed Funds

 NTF: Allocation of disbursed funds, US$17.7 million, as of end of 2015 (US$ million)

 A: NTF grant program                                                                                    14.6

 B: NTF secretariat—Knowledge & partnership program, fund management                                     2.5

 C: Administrative fees                                                                                  0.6

 D: Total                                                                                                17.7

 NTF: Detailed allocation of the US$14.6 million disbursed grant program funds across (a) units/themes
 and (b) regional/global focus

 Before July 2015 organization                            After July 2015 organization
 Regions, of which                               2.8      Development economics, WDR                     1.4

 Africa                                          1.7      Fragility, conflict and violence               0.8

 East Asia                                       0.2      Gender                                         0.8

 Europe Central Asia                             0.5      Energy and extractives                         0.5

 Latin America Caribbean                         2.0      Agriculture                                    0.2

 Middle East North Africa                        1.5      Finance and markets, IFC                       0.9

 South Asia                                      0.7      Governance                                     3.0

 Network Anchor Units, of which                  5.0      Health and nutrition                           1.8

 Poverty, economic management                    1.3      Poverty                                        0.6

 Human development                               0.3      Social protection and labor                    1.4

 Financial, private sector, IFC                  1.1      Urban, rural and social development            2.8

 Sustainable development                         2.3

 Other, of which                                 2.6
 Development economics, WDR                      1.2

 Legal department                                1.0

 World Bank Institute                            0.4




                                                                        Activities, Results and Outcome Indicators   7
                                         3.2 RESULTS

                                         Results can be summarized in four categories. First, the NTF has established
                                         itself as a vibrant forum for interested Bank staff, the NTF donors and
                                         other bilateral agencies, the UN, EU and other multilateral and regional
                                         agencies, academia and civil society to debate human rights aspects of
      Following the NTF                  development and the Bank’s work. A quantitative measurement of this
                                         is the large number of development partners taking part in activities, as
    LGBT grant in 2012,                  well as the number of events and written outputs since the start (over 240
                                         events and 180 written outputs). Second, results from activities under the
     the Bank established                86 grants span a broad variety of achievements (see “Consideration of
                                         Human Rights to Inform Bank Work” below and Annexes B). Third, there
       a senior level task               has been continued awareness raising and learning among Bank staff on the
                                         relation of human rights to the Bank’s work. Finally, the NTF has had a broad
      force and there are                influence on Bank policies and programs such as the human rights content
                                         in IFC’s Performance Standards, flagship reports such as the WDR, and the
    now several initiatives              consultation process for the Bank’s safeguards. Also, the NTF has pioneered
                                         topics that have continued after NTF support ended. Following the NTF
        under way and                    LGBT grant in 2012, the Bank established a senior level task force and there
                                         are now several initiatives under way and recurring events on LGBT issues.
      recurring events on                Similarly, activities around gender based violence and the role of politics in
                                         development are expanding.
         LGBT issues.
                                         Consideration of Human Rights to Inform Bank Work

                                         The 31 NTF grant funded teams selected in 2015 completed the planning
                                         and application process and started work to explore how human rights
                                         methodology and principles related to their respective tasks and programs—
                                         including in client countries when there was expressed interest from the
                                         respective governments. Work was still in an early stage by end 2015 but
                                         will pick up during 2016 before the scheduled closure in mid-2017. Some of
                                         the teams focused on analytical work and the development of human rights
                                         related practices and tools to inform Bank supported work. Others worked
                                         to add a human rights discussion or component to a larger program.




8   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
Table 4. Early Results and Planned Work for Fourth Round NTF Grants

 NTF: Early results and planned work for the 31 active NTF grants approved in 2015 (details in Annex B)

 Exploring links between human rights and work in Bank country programs

 •	 Increase of Roma participation in      •	 Right to information in South Asia.      •	 Work of Mobile Victims Unit in post-
    preschool education in South East-                                                    conflict Colombia.
    ern Europe.                            •	 Access to justice among vulnerable
                                              groups in sub Saharan Africa.            •	 Gaps between laws and practice in
 •	 LGBT exclusion data and cost of                                                       treatment of women and
    discrimination in Serbia. Vietnam      •	 Land tenure models in Cameroon.             children in the Middle East.
    citizen rights.                                                                    •	 Social protection of the elderly in
                                           •	 Workers’ rights in China.
 •	 Exploitation of migrants on Mexico’s                                                  Moldova and of the disabled in
    southern border.                       •	 Working on indigenous people is-            Egypt.
 •	 Participation and accountability in       sues in Latin America.
    service delivery in Uganda.            •	 Disabled people’s access to trans-
                                              port in Bhutan.

 Development of human rights related practices and tools

 •	 The role of human rights in the work   •	 Human rights and gender aspects in       •	 Human rights tools and approaches
    of citizen service centers.               health development work.                    in Europe and Central Asia.
 •	 What works in promoting girls’ and     •	 Human rights in reproductive and         •	 Collaboration with OHCHR on indig-
    women’s rights.                           maternal health programs.                   enous peoples’ programs.
 •	 Human rights and citizen engage-       •	 Cost of discrimination of sexual
    ment programs.                            minorities.

 Support to integrate human rights components into larger Bank programs/tasks

 •	 Development of rights related ele-   •	 Human rights aspects in the 2017           •	 Role of human rights in sector strat-
    ments in the implementation of IFC’s    World Development Report on Gov-              egies for water, social protection and
    Sustainability Framework at policy      ernance and the Law.                          health.
    and project level.




Awareness and Learning among Bank Staff

The teams implementing the 31 NTF grants approved in 2015 make up a core group of about 125 Bank staff that
benefitted from on-the-job learning as they explored how human rights relate to their respective task and work
programs. Together with the team members that received the previous 65 grants, they make up a group of between
300 and 350 Bank staff that has received extensive applied training on human rights. It is estimated about 2,500
staff had attended some form of NTF event by end 2015. This estimate is based on the mid-2013 staff survey which
showed that about 12 percent of Bank staff or about 1,700 staff, had attended a NTF event at that time.

NTF continued to reach larger Bank and external audiences through its grant support of human rights aspects in larger
Bank programs. The IFC continued capacity building among staff and clients on its recently modified Performance
Standards and related human rights aspects. Dissemination efforts continued for several NTF sponsored reports
published in earlier years, including the WDR on Jobs and its analytical work and discussion on how rights are related
to labor issues, the Bank major report on social inclusion (Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity)
and the report Women, Business and the Law as well as the “Voice and Agency” gender report.



                                                                                 Activities, Results and Outcome Indicators        9
     3.3 OUTCOME INDICATORS


     Table 5. Outcome Indicators Agreed upon by Bank and NTF Donors

                             Indicator                                              Comments

      Dissemination of Annual Progress reports to donors,      The previous (2014) Annual Progress Report was
      Bank staff and external audiences to raise awareness     prepared and disseminated, including at the NTF
      of activities undertaken, knowledge gained and results   external and internal websites. (http://www.worldbank.
      achieved.                                                org/en/programs/nordic-trust-fund)


      Number of training and capacity building activities      About five studies or reports and 22 workshops were
      delivered with satisfactory participant ratings.         delivered or substantially completed during 2015. This
                                                               is in addition to studies and workshops delivered during
                                                               the previous five reporting periods bringing the total to
                                                               180 studies and 244 workshops.


      Timely completion of programming and achievement of      The first round of 28 grants was completed and closed
      knowledge product indexes according to work program      in 2012. The second round of 27 grants was completed
      agreements for individual activities.                    and closed in 2014. A new and current grant round
                                                               supporting 31 grants started in 2015.


      Frequent traffic on website.                             Both the internal and external NTF websites were
                                                               maintained and updated with new publications and
                                                               learning materials. Traffic on the internal site averaged
                                                               around 54 visits per month in 2015, with January hosting
                                                               the highest count with 76 visits. In comparison, the
                                                               external site received less visits with an average of 43
                                                               visits per month, with April showing the highest number
                                                               of visits at 72 visits that month. The average number of
                                                               unique visitors on the external site was 41.



      Increase of human rights awareness among Bank staff      The 2009 base survey and 2013 follow-up survey provide
      based on ex-ante and ex-post survey results.             data on staff attitudes and knowledge about human
                                                               rights, the extent to which they work with human rights,
                                                               and (for 2013) whether staff knows about NTF and have
                                                               participated in its activities. A further survey with the
                                                               same questions would be carried out in 2017/2018.



      Operational thematic and sector work—Assessment of       See table above and Annex B for the current grants.
      consideration of human rights in the thematic/sector
      work of operational teams; outcomes of NTF grants
      intended for teams to consider human rights in country
      related work.




10   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
                     Indicator                                                Comments

Bank policy and procedures—how human rights helped       Two sets of activities continued during 2015: (i) IFC
inform the final outcome of adopted processes or         received a new grant and continued its NTF-supported
procedures.                                              work to assist staff and clients addressing human rights
                                                         related risk in the context of IFC’s recently reformed
                                                         performance standards (See Annex B) and (ii) the NTF
                                                         Secretariat supported the Bank’s Safeguards Team and a
                                                         grant was awarded to enable human rights consultations
                                                         and considerations.


Analytical thematic and sector work—how human rights     See Table 4 and Annexes B for current and previous grants.
helped inform the final study or learning product, the
associated description and, where possible, impact.




                                                                     Activities, Results and Outcome Indicators       11
     4                       Events, Research
                                and Grants

                                          4.1 KNOWLEDGE AND PARTNERSHIP EVENTS

                                          NTF 2015 Annual Workshop

                                          On November 16–18, 2015, the NTF Secretariat organized its Annual
                                          Workshop at the World Bank Headquarters in Washington, DC. The
                                          Workshop was attended by 90 participants in total, and brought together
                                          the 31 current NTF grant teams, NTF donors, external human rights experts,
        The NTF Annual                    NTF Secretariat staff, and a large number of Bank colleagues interested
                                          in NTF’s work and human rights. Human rights experts from the UN, the
        Workshop provided                 Organization of American States, the Danish Institute for Human Rights and
                                          donor governments attended the Workshop.
       opportunity for rich               The main objective of the Workshop was to provide an opportunity for the
     discussion and learning              NTF grant teams to present, discuss and get feedback on their implementa-
                                          tion plans, and through these exchanges, contribute to internal learning on
      on important human                  human rights. The opening plenary session included interventions by the
                                          Executive Directors for the Nordic and Baltic constituency, and Germany,
       rights considerations              respectively, on the importance of the NTF’s human rights work and of
                                          continuing the debate on how human rights relate to the Bank’s operations.
      and their links to the              In line with the objective of the Workshop, much of the event was dedicated
           Bank’s work.                   to presentations by the NTF grant teams on their plans as they embarked
                                          on the implementation phase of the work. Group sessions were organized
                                          thematically, thereby enabling teams who work on similar themes—health,
                                          education, social protection, citizen engagement, accountability, disability,
                                          indigenous peoples, and so on—to learn from and provide feedback to
                                          each other, and identify synergies in their work. Invited human rights experts
                                          attended the grant presentations to provide feedback on the plans and
                                          concrete suggestions on how to strengthen the human rights element in
                                          the grant work.

                                          Four thematic panel discussions were held. The panel on the first day was
                                          on donor approaches and experiences in integrating human rights into
                                          development, organized in the context of the World Bank’s annual Law,



12   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
Justice and Development week (see below). The subsequent panels—organized as lunch-time seminars—focused on
the Human Rights Based Approach (HRBA) to development, on the use of indicators and human rights measurement,
and on the work of the UN Office of the High-Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) on indigenous peoples
and human rights. At the closing plenary session, invited human rights experts reflected on the discussions with
the grant teams and provided valuable take-home points on human rights in development programs. Together, the
plenary sessions and the panel discussions provided a number of opportunities for rich discussions and learning on
important human rights considerations and their links to the Bank’s work.

A survey collected feedback on the Workshop and confirmed that participants found the event to be relevant
for their work and overall of high quality. Respondents appreciated both the smaller group sessions as well as
interactions with human rights practitioners, and indicated an interest in shorter training sessions on key themes such
as the Human Rights Based Approach.


Three human rights panel discussions during the World Bank’s Law, Justice and Development Week


NTF sponsored three panel discussions on human rights and development during the World Bank’s Law, Justice and
Development Week in November 2015. Bank staff and external audiences benefited from more than 90 workshops
and presentations during this recurring annual event.

(i) Integrating Human Rights into Development: Donor Approaches, Experiences and Challenges

An audience of some 200 people attended presentations from current and former staff from the UN Development
Program (UNDP), UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Office of the High Commissioner on Human Rights (OHCHR),
World Bank, and University of Leuven (Belgium) on how donor agencies could and should take human rights into
account in their work. The OHCHR representative noted that human rights are the responsibility of many different
development actors, and that the vision of development and human rights reinforcing each other should be put in
place as donor policy. Good practices such as assisting countries in implementing their own human rights obligations
are at the heart of the UN’s approach to development, but the approach does not imply that donors need to impose
sanctions or to engage in policing. UNDP does not set norms or organize the enforcement of human rights, but does
set its standards so as to have global relevance in the promotion of human rights. In 2014 the UNDP established
new social and environmental standards which were designed to implement a more comprehensive HRBA within
the Program. In this way, UNDP acts as a vehicle for operationalizing norms and as a platform for creating policy
assurance frameworks.



                                                                                        Events, Research and Grants       13
     The (former) UNICEF representative noted that a rights-based approach is a method that “leads with” human rights
     and provides a broad framework for development to guide programming in all sectors. Once countries adopt
     human rights laws obligations, their citizens become claim holders, transforming the government into a duty bearer.
     Challenges include the development community’s focus on outcome rather than on the process which calls for a
     paradigm shift within donor organizations. The World Bank staff members noted that the Bank does not have an
     explicit human rights objective or approach in its activities but cited an example of how principles like constructive
     engagement by all stakeholders (both rights holders and duty bearers), strategic engagement linking human rights
     to the existing engagement with the government without creating a separate program, and continuous engagement
     with all counterparts still can achieve good results.

     The University of Leuven representative noted that the European Commission’s approach to human rights has come
     through three main experiences: the integration of human rights as part of the European Union’s policy on aid, the
     support for a bottom-up approach, and more recently the horizontal integration of human rights into development
     planning. Issues include measurement challenges (indicators, lack of coordination with other development actors),
     problems associated with political contexts or the lack of consensus in the development community.

     (ii) Community of Practice on Human Rights—recent research and developments

     An audience of about 100 attended a two-hour session where researchers and staff from the Universities in
     Copenhagen and Leuven, the Danish Institute for Human Rights and the Government of Belgium presented and
     discussed the findings and recent developments related to four human rights topics.


                                             Human Rights Based Approach (HRBA) Policies of European Donors

                                             A comparative analysis of select European donors found that the main
                                             human rights focus is on activities in the ‘soft sectors’ (social matters,
                                             gender and child issues) and less on ‘hard sectors’ (infrastructure, energy
                                             and agriculture). Within the former area, children’s rights, women’s rights
                                             and rights of persons with disabilities are prioritized. Donors do see a link
                                             between HRBA and democracy, have different strategies and no common
                                             way of measuring impact, and give a lot of direct support for Rule of Law
                                             policies.

                                             Human Rights Based Approach (HRBA) and Global Public Goods (GPGs)

                                             A recent study compared the HRBA and GPG approaches and found that
                                             they stand for different ways of rethinking the process of development
                                             cooperation, are not incompatible, and that donors should feel safe in using
                                             them in complementary ways as long as their normative frameworks are
                                             understood separately and not overstretched. They differ in three ways.
                                             First, while HRBAs constitute a solid normative basis for values and policy
                                             choices grounded in international human rights treaties, GPG is based on
                                             social constructs. Second, the rationale of the HRBA is normative and rights-
                                             based, while the GPGs finds its raison d’être in market failures and is more
                                             instrumentalist and utilitarian-driven. Third, while the HRBA is demand-
                                             driven and aims at empowering people, the GPGs are more focused on
                                             top-down international coordination.




14   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
The operationalisation of HRS in development

A recent study examined arguments for why states must uphold their
human rights obligations when they become members of international
organisations. As representatives on the boards they represent their states
as well as the organisation they work in. Member states therefore exercise a
power in the organisation’s decisions, and their influential capacity allows for
their behaviour to be judged for international law purposes, as development
banks’ decisions impact people’s lives. Therefore, member states must
make sure that the decisions they influence within the organisation do not
undermine their own international human rights obligations. They must thus
engage in due diligence processes in their assessment of projects prior to
making such decisions. The failure to exercise due diligence is therefore
attributable to the States and may engage their responsibility vis-à-vis
individual rights holders.

Experiences from Belgian Development Cooperation

Belgian Development Cooperation (BDC) promotes human rights using
three approaches. The first tackles human rights with incentive tranches. The
second approach creates specific human rights projects such as partnerships
with more traditional development interventions like health. The third
addresses specific sectors dealing with civil and/or political rights, mostly
the justice sector. Challenges include the need to understand the political
character of this approach and the endogenous nature of system change
dynamics, which cannot only be induced from direct external action. Sound
analysis of risks and opportunities of projects needs to be conducted, and
there needs to be cooperation between the different actors and stakeholders
throughout a gradual approach and long-term donor involvement.


(iii) International Financial Institutions and Human Rights Legal and Institutional Considerations

Representatives from the World Bank, the African Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the Bank for International Settlements discussed human rights legal
and institutional considerations in front of about 150 people including World Bank staff and a number of external
guests. The emphasis of the discussion was on the different approaches adopted by the respective organizations.

(iv) Operational support for the Kenya Judicial Performance Improvement project

The NTF Secretariat has supported the Bank team working on the Bank-supported Kenya Judicial Performance
Improvement Project. In addition to facilitating contacts with key human rights parties in Kenya including the
courts system and the Judiciary Training Institute (JTI), support has focused on two initiatives. The first is the public
participation process for the selection of the next chief justice, including aspects of transparency for candidates. The
second is support to a request from the Judiciary on a study of high court rulings to establish patterns in judicial
outcomes, benefiting from the existing online publication of judicial decisions.




                                                                                         Events, Research and Grants        15
     4.2 APPLIED RESEARCH

     Human Rights Due Diligence Report

     The NTF supported the completion of a report by Shift (a center of expertise on the UN Guiding Principles on
     Business and Human Rights) summarizing earlier research, interviews and the outcome of an expert workshop
     about the emerging practice of human rights due diligence (HRDD), the set of ongoing processes for identifying,
     preventing, mitigating and accounting for how an organization, public or private, addresses the impacts that it
     may have on people. The report provides examples and case studies of relevant standards, policies and emerging
     good practices for HRDD by different actors: multilateral institutions, states, public and private financial institutions,
     and business enterprises. Examples of the contributions of civil society organizations to HRDD are integrated
     throughout. The material demonstrates the breadth of recent HRDD efforts across the public and private sectors,
     and identifies some of the trends, challenges and opportunities for different actors. It also illustrates the overall
     momentum that is gathering around the framework of HRDD.

     Themes where further work is needed include clarifying the multiple purposes of HRDD (i.e. addressing impacts, risk
     mitigation, organizational learning, capacity building and empowerment), the use of HRDD for understanding both
     negative and positive impacts on human rights, the need to understand HRDD as more than just impact assessment,
     the relative merits of both stand-alone and integrated approaches to HRDD, the importance of meaningful
     stakeholder engagement and participation for effective HRDD, the need to “translate” human rights in some cases
     to ensure the successful uptake of HRDD, the particular expertise required to undertake HRDD, how transparency
     and early initiation can heighten the effectiveness of HRDD and the opportunities for and growing interest in multi-
     stakeholder approaches to HRDD.

     The report argues that HRDD can provide a systematic and rigorous way of integrating human rights standards and
     principles into development policy and programming on an ongoing basis, rather than as an isolated or tick-box
     exercise. It can also provide a solid foundation for partnerships and multi-stakeholder efforts related to development,
     particularly as the private sector takes on a greater role in contributing to sustainable development goals. HRDD can
     also equip development finance institutions to better meet the expectations of stakeholders and society, by helping
     to ensure that human beings remain at the heart of development efforts. Finally, HRDD is increasingly understood as
     good risk management and can help avoid delays, opposition, conflict and challenges related to projects that give
     rise to negative human rights impacts, in part through meaningful stakeholder engagement.


     Human Rights Standards: Hegemony, Law and Politics

     In collaboration with staff from the SUNY Buffalo Law School at the University of New York, NTF supported the
     finalization and dissemination of Human Rights Standards: Hegemony, Law and Politics1 (Makau Mutua, 2015). It
     examines human rights law and activism from the perspective of the Global South and asks how human rights norms
     are made, who makes them, and why. It traces the history of the human rights project and critically explores how the
     norms of the human rights movement have been created, analyzes key texts and documents published since the
     inception of the human rights movement at the end of World War II, and critiques these works from the perspective
     of the Global South focusing on normative gaps and cultural biases. It argues for further norm development and
     norm-creating processes to be inclusive and participatory to garner legitimacy across various cleavages and divides.




     1	 Makau Mutua. 2016. Human Rights Standards: Hegemony, Law, and Politics. SUNY Press: New York, NY.




16   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
4.3 NTF GRANT PROGRAM EXAMPLES

Evaluating the impact of the Africa Great Lakes Sexual and Gender
Based Violence Project

This grant aims to generate more evidence about effective approaches that
can be scaled up and mainstreamed to respond to and prevent sexual and
gender based violence (SGBV), especially in fragile and conflict affected
states. Activities include several impact evaluations of selected project
activities in each of the three countries covered by the Bank-funded Great
Lakes Emergency SGBV and Women’s Health Project in Burundi, Rwanda
and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). The lessons learned from
the evaluations will contribute to ensuring that services provided through
the Great Lakes SGBV Project are adequately targeted and delivered and
inform future WBG programming of interventions addressing SGBV and
women’s rights.

In the DRC work focuses on the impact evaluation of the project’s mental
health interventions. The choice of the mental health intervention is based
on its policy relevance in low capacity, post-conflict settings as well as on the
level of scientific rigor offered by this study. A collaboration with academic
partners that are supporting the implementation of Cognitive Processing
Therapy and Narrative Exposure Therapy has been engaged to design and
implement the study. In Rwanda tentative plans are to collaborate with other
academic partners to evaluate the impact of working with men and boys
at the community level to promote behavioral change. This may include
adding round(s) of data collection to the study at a later date to measure the
longer term impact of these activities. Activities in Burundi are currently at a
halt due to unrest in the country.


Getting It Right: Learning How to Translate Human Rights Principles into
Social Protection Policy

This grant aims to create operational tools to assist bank staff engaged in
social protection and labor in incorporating human rights into their work.
These ‘how-to’ notes can be used in the dialogue with client countries and
development partners. The notes will provide examples of how to design
and implement technically sound interventions, providing evidence-based
solutions to address common operational and policy challenges. They will
prioritize the review of concrete case studies and country application of
certain relevant human rights principles, over the review of broad research
literature. The proposed activities also learn from the health sector and
its expansion of the universal coverage initiative. The notes will cover six
different topics: a) How to incorporate human rights principles into the
design and implementation of social protection and labor systems; b) How
to improve nondiscrimination in the selection of rights-holders in social
protection and labor programs; c) How to collect, manage and transfer
data for the social protection and labor systems in compliance with human
rights standards; d) How to develop and implement institutional and legal
frameworks that promote the progressive expansion of social protection




                                                                                    Events, Research and Grants   17
     and labor systems; e) How to strengthen accountability to improve social protection and labor systems; and f) How
     to generate legal incentives for the private sector to support social protection and labor interventions. Knowledge-
     sharing activities will be carried out to ensure learning and discuss the application of the ‘how-to’ notes.


     Human Rights and the World Bank’s Citizen Engagement Framework

     An NTF grant team is undertaking research to explore the links between the Bank’s Citizen Engagement Framework
     and human rights. This research is being carried out through the development of case studies in three different
     country contexts: Afghanistan, Paraguay and Serbia. The research looks at grassroots initiatives in these countries
     to analyze how citizen-led movements and campaigns have led to improved services and accountability, and better
     collaboration between governments and citizens. The research will lead to the development of an analytical paper,
     the findings of which will be disseminated through knowledge and learning events at the country level and at
     headquarters. The Bank team leading this research co-leads the Community of Practice for Social Accountability
     and Demand for Good Governance (SA & DFGG CoP) and the team members participate in the Bank’s working
     group to mainstream citizen engagement in Bank operations. As such, the grant represents a strong opportunity to
     mainstream human rights knowledge into the implementation of the CE Framework.


     Grant: Building Human Rights in a Peace Consolidation Scenario: Colombia Mobile Victims Unit
     Impact Evaluation

     In 2011, Colombia passed the Victims and Land Restitution Law to support access to justice for victims experiencing
     crimes due to armed conflict, such as displacement, threats, and violence. In response to the law, in 2012, the
     Ministry of Justice and the Defensoria del Pueblo (the ombudsman agency) created the Mobile Victims Unit (MVU) to
     ensure access to justice for all affected Colombians. Together, these three entities support a mobile van that travels
     throughout Colombia, reaching even the most remote areas, allowing victims to declare and register for reparations.
     Recent figures show the MVU has served 51,821 people since its creation.

     Now, five years after the institution of the Victims and Land Restitution Law and four years after the creation of
     the MVU, the World Bank is partnering with the three entities to conduct an impact evaluation of the unit and its
     services. While the general feedback from communities has been positive, an evaluation will take a deeper look at
     the effectiveness and impact of the mobile van. The NTF grant will be used to fund data collection to increase the
     understanding of how displaced persons and other victims try to enforce their rights, the impact of enforcement of
     their rights, and the effectiveness of different service delivery models in helping displaced persons and other victims
     exercise their rights. The evaluation, in addition to looking at the impact, will also assess cost effectiveness. The
     grant team has collaborated with each of the three entities to determine which questions would be most effective in
     its assessment. The results will not only alert the entities on what aspects and services should be adjusted, but also
     whether the mobile unit structure is useful for replicating it in other contexts and countries. The impact evaluation, as
     with the services of the MVU, is on the quality and emphasis on human rights, not just the number of victims served.




18   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
5                       Financial Summary

Funding Contributions

The original five Nordic donors and Germany had, by December 31, 2015, paid in contributions amounting to
US$28.8 million. Donor funds received had generated investment income in the amount of US$0.3 million. In
addition, the donors and the Bank have signed agreements for a further US$5.9 million to be paid between 2016
and 2018. Accordingly, total funding for NTF, including paid in, investment income and future promised funds,
amounted to US$34.8 million at the end of 2015.


Table 6. NTF Funds as of December 31, 2015 (US$, millions)

 NTF: Activity outputs since program start; number of events and written outputs
                                     Paid in as of             Future (unpaid but
 Source of funds                                                                                    Total
                                     Dec 31, 2015               promised) funds
 Denmark                                  4.6                           —                            4.6
 Finland                                  4.5                          1.9                           6.4
 Iceland                                  0.25                         0.05                          0.3
 Germany                                  1.4                          0.5                           1.9
 Norway                                   9.5                          1.1                          10.6
 Sweden                                   8.3                          2.3                          10.6

 Total donor contribution               28.5                           5.9                          34.4
 Investment income                        0.3                          0.1                           0.4
 Total funds                            28.8                           6.0                          34.8



Allocation and Use of Funds

All funds had been allocated by end 2015, mainly for the NTF grant program (US$28.9 million, 83 percent of total),
for NTF Secretariat activities (US$5.2 million, 15 percent of total), and for administration fees (US$0.7 million, 2
percent of total). US$17.7 million (51 percent of total funds) had been disbursed by end 2015. The balance of
US$17.1 million will be used during the next three years, 2016–2018, for future grants, NTF Secretariat activities and
administration fees as illustrated in Table 7.




                                                                                                  Financial Summary      19
     Table 7. Allocation and Use of Funds as of December 31, 2015 (US$, millions)
                                                                                       Committed
      Category                           Allocated                  Disbursed
                                                                                    (contracts signed)
      Grants Program                       28.9                       14.6                 0.8
      - Economic, social and
                                            4.9                         3.1                0.1
        cultural rights
      - Governance and
                                            3.7                         2.3                0.1
        empowerment
      - Discrimination and
                                            9.3                         6.1                0.5
        vulnerable groups
      - Capacity and institutions           3.5                         3.1                0.1
      - Future grants                       7.5                         —                   —

      Secretariat activities                5.2                         2.5                0.1
      Administration fee                    0.7                         0.6                0.1
      Total                                34.8                       17.7                 1.0




20   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
6                                Looking Ahead


Work during 2016 will focus on (i) supporting the continued implementation of the 31 grants approved in 2015 and
launching the new round of grants, and (ii) the continued delivery of a comprehensive K&P program by the now fully
staffed NTF Secretariat.

NTF grant program: Work with the 31 current grants will focus on ensuring
that the teams implement high quality activities with relevant human rights
content and with most of them holding at least one learning event during
2016 and also attend the 2016 NTF Annual Workshop. Available funding
also permitted the launch of an additional grant round for 20–25 grants in
mid-2016. The NTF Secretariat is working with interested teams to foster
strong applications. This is complemented by a human rights training session
as a prerequisite for applying for a grant, and future training sessions for
successful applicants.

NTF K&P program: The NTF Secretariat will continue to complement and
support the grant program with select events and studies. This is mainly
demand driven so as to focus on select and emerging issues and also to
explore synergies among the grant teams to promote cross-fertilization in
their work. Possible areas of focus include human rights in fragile states, the
role of the Global South in shaping human rights standards and policies, and
the role of human rights in promoting tolerance and combatting extremism
and radicalization.


The new grant round follows the open call for proposals approach that was first used in 2015. A senior level steering
committee will oversee the call and make the final selection of grant proposals to be supported.

In the review of this progress report during the Spring Meetings, April 2016, donors commented that the results
framework should be modified and strengthened and reflect achievements and lessons learned to date. The
Secretariat will work on this during the remainder of 2016.




                                                                                                     Looking Ahead      21
22   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
                                                   Annex A
       Nordic Trust Fund Knowledge and Learning Activities in 2015
Date/Partner/Theme                                                   Audience/Description
2015
A: NTF Annual Grant Workshop and Major Partnership Events

November 16–18, 2015: The three-day NTF         90 participants—74 World Bank staff and 16 external human
Annual Workshop was organized at the            rights experts and representatives from governments and other
World Bank Headquarters in Washington,          organizations. The Workshop consisted of plenary sessions, panel
DC. It was attended by NTF donors, human        discussions and group sessions. Four separate panel discussions
rights experts from other organizations,        looked at donor approaches and experiences in integrating human
NTF Secretariat staff, and Bank colleagues      rights into development, the Human Rights Based Approach to
interested in NTF’s work and human rights. A    development, the use of indicators and human rights measurement,
fuller presentation of this event is provided   and the work of the UN Office of the High Commissioner for
in the main text of this report.                Human Rights (OHCHR) on indigenous peoples and human rights,
                                                respectively. In the group sessions, NTF grant teams presented on
                                                their implementation plans and received feedback from human rights
                                                experts and their peers.


November 16–18: Three panel presentations       The three events were attended by 200, 100 and 150 participants,
and discussions on select human rights          respectively, comprising Bank staff and a wide range of external
topics delivered during the World Bank’s Law,   audiences (private and public sector, academia, civil society,
Justice and Development Week. Panelists         development partners).
included representatives from UNDP, UNICEF,     Integrating Human Rights into Development: Donor Approaches,
OHCHR, Universities of Copenhagen and           Experiences and Challenges. Panelists discussed the different
Leuven, the Danish Institute for Human          approaches employed by donors depending on their human rights
Rights, the Government of Belgium, the          mandate. Three UN agencies and the EU compared their work
Bank for International Settlements, the         based on explicit human rights policies and mandates to that of the
African Development Bank, the Asian             World Bank where human rights typically enters programs through
Development Bank and the World Bank. A          development principles like antidiscrimination, social accountability
fuller presentation of this event is provided   and meaningful participation.
in the main text of this report.
                                                Community of Practice on Human Rights—recent research and
                                                developments. Presentations included experiences on working with
                                                human rights among EU donors and in particular Belgium, how work
                                                on human rights and global public goods are related, and on how
                                                countries deal with their human rights obligations when they are
                                                members of international organizations.
                                                International Financial Institutions and Human Rights Legal and
                                                Institutional Considerations. Representatives from different
                                                international financial organizations discussed the legal and
                                                institutional aspects of human rights in their respective organizations.
                                                This ranged from EBRD which has an explicit human rights policy,
                                                to the World Bank and some regional development Banks that work
                                                without formulated human rights mandates but where work often
                                                aims at the realization of rights and the prevention of human rights
                                                violations, and to the Bank of International Settlements where some
                                                activities have been linked to human rights aspects.




                                            Annex a | Nordic Trust Fund Knowledge and Learning Activities in 2015          23
     Date/Partner/Theme                                                 Audience/Description
     B: Other Events

     February 2015—OAS Policy Roundtable            About 100 participants, mainly government officials, took part in a
     “Regional Agenda for Economic Social and       roundtable discussion in Lima, Peru, on whether human rights could
     Cultural Rights: A look into the future.”      and should guide social protection policies. Many countries in Latin
                                                    America are considering or putting in place minimum standards for
                                                    social protection and access to services, and these programs draw on
                                                    human rights to varying degrees.


     March 2015—Meeting with UN OHCHR               World Bank staff including the Indigenous People Representative and
     representatives.                               the NTF Secretariat met with UN OHCHR staff to discuss a number of
                                                    issues of mutual interest, i.e. training for indigenous peoples’ human
                                                    rights, collaboration through the indigenous people NTF grant
                                                    proposal (later approved) and more broadly on the work of NTF.




     March 2015—NTF workshop on                     About 20 participants, mainly Bank staff. Discussion on e-government
     Government Accountability and Integrity        policies in Australia and other countries to provide better services
     in the Digital Age. Participants included      combined with strategies for Cloud, Digital by Default, Digital Economy
     the Director General from the National         and Digital Transition Policies. Efforts to transform processes and
     Archives of Australia and the President of     information systems to “go digital” focus on the use of the Internet and
     the International Council on Archives, the     agency ICT platforms to automate processes and services. However
     Chief Records Officer for the United States    strategies and policies to assure the essential integrity and continuity
     Government, and the Chief Information          of the underlying information resources, including records, are under-
     Officer for the Government of Moldova.         represented. To fill this policy gap, the National Archives of Australia
                                                    is playing its role in this major transformation and has launched
                                                    its “Digital Continuity” policy, designed to achieve the benefits of
                                                    e-Government without compromising core values of accountability,
                                                    administrative transparency and citizens’ rights.



     March 2015—BBL: Gender, Human Rights,          30 participants met to discuss human rights related issues for the
     and Resilience in Artisanal Mining Towns.      estimated two million people working informally in the artisanal
     The Director for Women in War, Harvard         and small-scale mines of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).
     Humanitarian Initiative, and representatives   In addition to a variety of labor problems the question of human
     from Colby College, Promundo-USA, and          rights abuses, specifically that of sexual violence, has been the main
     independent researchers.                       focus of media and international development concern. Current data
                                                    from a two-phased research project undertaken in the select areas
                                                    of the Kivus and Maniema provinces challenge perceptions of the
                                                    types of discriminations and violence that women face in the mines;
                                                    particularly the perception that rape is the most common form, and
                                                    perpetrated predominantly by armed groups. The research results
                                                    instead revealed a reality of systemic discrimination and violence in
                                                    mining areas—against segments of the female and male population—
                                                    linked to livelihoods and economic access. Civilian and political actors
                                                    were more likely to affect the human rights landscape than armed
                                                    groups. Lack of education on rights and limited availability of social
                                                    forms of organization and protection were equally found wanting in
                                                    most of the areas surveyed.




24   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
Date/Partner/Theme                                                        Audience/Description
April 2015—BBL: Foreign dictation of human           15 participants, mainly Bank staff, met with representatives from
rights. Implications for fragility and policy.       academia to discuss how states treat their human rights obligations
Legal scholars and academia.                         on territories or in institutions outside their own. The conduct of one
                                                     state’s nationals on the territory of another is coming under increasing
                                                     legal scrutiny from other states as well as international institutions.
                                                     What does this mean for state behavior, state fragility and those in
                                                     extreme poverty? As human rights law and the law of war are enforced
                                                     by different bodies and in uneven ways, what is driving or constraining
                                                     whether states use force or support the use of force in other territories,
                                                     and how armed conflict is fought? These questions have significant
                                                     implications for governments’, donors’ and other international
                                                     organizations’ policy and practice.


April 2015—BBL: Human Rights Due                     50 participants met to discuss the role and use of human rights due
Diligence and Development. UNDP, Human               diligence (HRDD) to provide input to a study commissioned by NTF and
Rights Watch and other CSOs, the Danish              carried out by Shift—an expert resource center on business and human
Institute for Human Rights, Nestle and other         rights. HRDD has gained prominence since the Human Rights Council’s
private sector firms and organizations, Bank         adoption of the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights,
staff. The NTF supported study on this topic         but the term remains ill-defined in terms of its content and operational
prepared after this event if described in the        implications. A panel discussed what the term HRDD means, how it
main text of this report.                            has been understood in the context of business and human rights,
                                                     as well as by bilateral and multilateral organizations, including in
                                                     the context of development. The importance of an organization’s
                                                     mandate was explored as a key determining factor as to the relevance
                                                     and applicability of human rights due diligence. The panelists offered
                                                     perspectives from theory and practice, placing particular emphasis on
                                                     practical examples of where HRDD has been applied.


April 2015—Meeting with SOGI activists.              30 participants, mainly CSO representatives from a number of
Bank Information Center and a number of              countries, met with the NTF Secretariat to discuss the SOGI related
CSOs engaged in SOGI issues.                         work supported by the trust fund and by the Bank in general. The
                                                     group identified potential areas of engagement and collaboration.


April 2015—Donors Meeting during Spring              Donors and NTF Secretariat meet to discuss NTF’s work and next steps,
Meetings.                                            and donors’ thoughts about the program.


April 2015—Meeting with American                     15 participants including the NTF Secretariat and Bank staff working on
Bar Association (ABA) Rule of Law Africa             NTF grants related to rule of law met with the Regional Director, Africa
initiative.                                          Center for Justice (Burundi, Rwanda, RDC and Congo) and the Deputy
                                                     Director, Africa Division, both from ABA Rule of Law Initiatives. The
                                                     discussion focused on the two sides briefing each other on activities
                                                     including the scope and content of their respective programs.


April 2015—Meeting with Organization of              The NTF Secretariat met with the OAS coordinator and director for
American States (OAS).                               equity promotion and social inclusion to discuss OAS activities related
                                                     to the implementation of economic and social rights under the San
                                                     Salvador Protocol, and the associated work on indicators. OAS agreed
                                                     to make a presentation on this during the upcoming NTF Annual
                                                     Workshop.




                                                Annex a | Nordic Trust Fund Knowledge and Learning Activities in 2015             25
     Date/Partner/Theme                                              Audience/Description
     July 2015—US State Department.             NTF Staff attended the U.S. State Department’s launch of the 2015
                                                Trafficking in Persons Report hosted by the Secretary of State. The
                                                report is a scorecard and assesses every country based on the 3
                                                P’s (Protection, Prosecution, and Prevention) in regards to human
                                                trafficking.


     November 2015—Donors Meeting during        Donors and NTF Secretariat meet to discuss NTF’s work and next steps,
     the NTF Annual Workshop and the WB Law,    and donors’ thoughts about the program.
     Justice and Development Week.

     November 2015—United Nations               The NTF Secretariat hosted a meeting with the Commission briefing
     Commission of Inquiry on human rights in   the Bank about its work and the human rights situation in Eritrea.
     Eritrea.

     December 2015—UN Special Rapporteur        30 participants, mainly Bank staff and NTF grantees, attended a
     on Health, OHCHR, and the Pan American     workshop with the UN Special Rapporteur on the right to the highest
     Health Organization (PAHO).                attainable standard of physical and mental health, OHCHR staff
                                                supporting the Special Rapporteur and the Human Rights Advisor at
                                                the Pan-American Health Organization. Bank staff presented the work
                                                supported by NTF to the Special Rapporteur and discussed right to
                                                health issues as they affect the LGBTI persons and indigenous peoples.


     C: Analytical Activities and Dissemination, Attendance of External Events

     March 2015—Launch of the Short             150 participants, mainly Bank staff, attended the screening of “Sexual
     Documentary Film: Sexual Minorities and    Minorities & Development: A Short Film,” funded by NTF. The film was
     Development at the World Bank.             introduced by the German Executive Director of the World Bank and
                                                followed by a panel discussion moderated by Slate magazine and
                                                including the Bank’s Nordic Baltic Executive Director and the Vice
                                                President for Climate Change. The film utilizes interviews in many
                                                regions to show how discrimination based on sexual orientation and
                                                gender identity (SOGI) has detrimental impacts on development
                                                outcomes, and keeps individuals in poverty and excluded from
                                                accessing the benefits of development. The film shows appropriate
                                                entry points for the World Bank and other development banks, i.e. data
                                                collection and support for capacity building.



     July 2015—International Bar Association.   NTF attended an event entitled “FIFA & the World Cup: Impunity for
                                                Corruption and Widespread Human Rights Violations Coming to an
                                                End?” sponsored by the International Bar Association and covering
                                                both the legal aspects of alleged corruption as well as the human
                                                rights and business perspective of the World Cup, particularly in
                                                regards to human rights abuses at construction sites. The speakers
                                                discussed whether to put pressure on governments or sponsors to
                                                push change.

     September 2015—Organization of American    NTF staff met with the Chief, Equity Promotion Section, OAS, to discuss
     States.                                    their respective work programs on human rights and also finalized
                                                arrangements around an OAS presentation on human rights indicators
                                                at the upcoming NTF annual workshop.




26   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
Date/Partner/Theme                                             Audience/Description
October 2015—Georgetown University.        NTF attended the Women, Justice and Climate Change event at
                                           Georgetown University.

October 2015—Council of Europe             NTF attended an event with the Council of Europe Commissioner
Commissioner for Human Rights.             for Human Rights, held at the Center for Strategic and International
                                           Studies.

October 2015—US Institute of Peace.        NTF attended an event debating issues related to Women, Peace and
                                           Security at the US Institute of Peace.




                                      Annex a | Nordic Trust Fund Knowledge and Learning Activities in 2015       27
28   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
                                                     Annex B
                            NTF Program Grants Approved in 2015
             The following table details the grants approved under the fourth NTF call for proposals approved
                                               mid-2015 for a two year period.

Title, implementing unit                                     Objectives, plans and activities
1. Evaluating the impact of the Great    Grant supported activities aim to generate more evidence about effective
Lakes Sexual and Gender Based            approaches that can be scaled up and mainstreamed to respond and prevent
Violence Project. Africa Region          Sexual and Gender Based Violence (SGBV), especially in fragile and conflict
                                         affected states. This includes several impact evaluations of selected project
                                         activities in each of the three countries covered by the IDA-funded Great
                                         Lakes Emergency SGBV and Women’s Health Project in Burundi, Rwanda and
                                         the DRC. The lessons learned from the evaluations will contribute to ensuring
                                         that services provided through the Great Lakes SGBV Project are adequately
                                         targeted and delivered and inform future WBG programming of interventions
                                         addressing SGBV and women’s rights.
                                         In 2015, the following activities were conducted: (i) Democratic Republic of
                                         the Congo: the task team and Congolese counterpart agreed to focus the
                                         impact evaluation on the mental health interventions of the project. The
                                         choice of the mental health intervention is based on its policy relevance in low
                                         capacity, post-conflict settings as well as on the level of scientific rigor offered
                                         by this study. A collaboration with academic partners that are supporting
                                         the implementation of Cognitive Processing Therapy and Narrative Exposure
                                         Therapy has been engaged to design and implement the study. The task team
                                         participated in a workshop in July 2015 on the mental health component of
                                         the project; (ii) Rwanda: Discussions with the task team and counterpart were
                                         conducted to define the most appropriate and feasible research questions.
                                         The most promising option is to collaborate with other academic partners to
                                         evaluate the impact of working with men and boys at the community level
                                         to promote behavioral change. This may include adding round(s) of data
                                         collection to the study at a later date to measure the longer term impact of
                                         these activities; (iii) Burundi: The project activities in Burundi are currently at a
                                         halt due to the unrest in the country; (iv) Two consultants have been hired to
                                         support the work in the field, in DRC and Rwanda respectively.


2. Implementation and                    The NTF grant to IFC’s Environment, Social, and Corporate Governance
strengthening of IFC’s Sustainability    Department in 2015 supported work related to human rights due diligence and
Framework. IFC.                          use of security forces, both of which will continue in 2016.
                                         Funds contributed to enhanced capacity building for both internal and external
                                         audiences on the aspects of security forces included in IFC Performance
                                         Standard 4. Consultants provided project-level support to IFC Environmental
                                         and Social (E&S) Specialists and clients, as well as to design and deliver training
                                         to HQ staff, Equator Principle and Export Credit Agency partners (through
                                         the annual Community of Learning event hosted by IFC), and private-sector
                                         companies operating in high-risk contexts in West Africa. For 2016, additional
                                         training is tentatively planned for IFC regional staff and for clients in MENA. NTF
                                         funds will also allow IFC staff to continue to participate in the annual plenary
                                         session of the Voluntary Principles (VPs) on Security and Human Rights.

                                                                                                          (Continued next page)




                                                                        Annex b | NTF Program Grants Approved in 2015             29
     Title, implementing unit                                  Objectives, plans and activities
                                            HNTF funded work includes human rights screening as part of IFC’s
                                            Performance Standard implementation. Here, consultants have been registered
                                            and work is underway of selecting projects to participate in a pilot project. The
                                            objectives are to assess IFC’s incorporation of human rights issues through the
                                            Environmental and Social (E&S) due diligence process, and to assist IFC E&S
                                            Specialists and clients in ensuring that key human rights concerns relevant to
                                            business are covered through application of the Performance Standards (PS).




     3. World Development Report—           The NTF grant is supporting the inclusion of human rights in the World
     Governance and the Law: The role of    Development Report 2017, Governance and the Law. The following activities
     rights and aspirational norms. World   are planned: (i) a Symposium on the role of law in governance on April 12–13,
     Development Report team.               2016, bringing together 18 scholars of law, economics and sociology to discuss
                                            how law is related to power and norms in its efforts to order behavior, order
                                            power, and order contest. The Symposium will examine, among other things,
                                            how international human rights norms translate into local contexts in ways
                                            that empower citizens and constrain the powerful. It will also examine how the
                                            language of rights is used in efforts to hold rulers accountable and to shift the
                                            configuration of power; (ii) engagement with leading experts on law and rights
                                            to review and provide input into the report itself; (iii) a background paper that
                                            provides quantitative evidence of the diffusion of human rights norms and
                                            their implementation.




     4. Inclusion of vulnerable groups      This grant focuses on measures to increase access to Early Childhood
     such as Roma in preschool              Development (ECD) for young children, i.e. children below primary school
     education. Education Global            age, from vulnerable families in Serbia. Initially, three sets of activities had
     Practice.                              been foreseen: awareness raising workshops, small grants to municipalities
                                            to develop programs/actions plans to increase access to ECD and analytical
                                            work summarizing key learnings from the first two activities. However, the
                                            government has recently announced parliamentary elections, in addition
                                            to local elections—a development which would make designing and
                                            implementing the small grant program during the next months very difficult.
                                            The team is thus reworking the concept with the first and third activity
                                            (workshops and analytical work) still being part of the proposal, while instead
                                            of the grants to municipalities, the NTF would tentatively support parenting
                                            programs targeted at vulnerable families which would also be expected and
                                            designed to ease access to preschool for young children from vulnerable
                                            families.
                                            The dialogue on design and implementation of the grant-supported project
                                            has become an important aspect of the team’s policy dialogue in Serbia
                                            and helped put further emphasis on the importance of Early Childhood
                                            Development for the inclusion of vulnerable groups. The discussion on the NTF
                                            grant goes in parallel with the design of a new ECD and Inclusive Education
                                            Project, supported by an IBRD loan and key learnings related to human rights
                                            and preschool education from the NTF grant will feed into project preparation.




30   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
Title, implementing unit                                  Objectives, plans and activities
5. Development and Testing of          The grant team developed a more detailed implementation plan based on
Community-based Land Tenure            consultations with the Bank’s country management unit for Cameroon. Terms
Models for Vulnerable Groups in        of Reference for a consultancy and study on indigenous people and land
Rural Cameroon. Environment and        reform measures under way and proposed were prepared and a consultant
Natural Resources Global Practice.     selected.



6. Effective Citizen Service Centers   A comprehensive database of Citizen Service Centers (CSCs) across the world
and Human Rights: Mutually             that contains information about CSCs in 70+ countries (services provided,
Reinforcing Dynamics.                  implementing agencies, level of service delivery, etc.) has been created. Further,
Governance Global Practice.            a wide range of documents (case studies, toolkits, etc.) related to CSCs have
                                       been collected and uploaded onto a special tab created on the DFGG&SA
                                       online library to serve as repository for these resources. A survey destined to
                                       CSC implementing agencies and a detailed case study template have been
                                       designed in cooperation with U4 who is our external project partner U4.Two
                                       client countries, i.e. Vietnam and Kenya have been identified for the writing of
                                       in-depth case studies on CSCs and the case studies have been commissioned.
                                       A well-attended brainstorming session featuring short presentations of CSCs in
                                       Albania and Malawi was held, during which the great majority of participants
                                       (from 5 Bank GPs) signaled interest to become part of the planned community
                                       of practice (CoP) on CSCs. Contact has been made with other development
                                       partners to identify additional CSC clients and expand the CoP. The team
                                       has also reached out to the Institute for Citizen-Centered Service (ICCS),
                                       Canada and is planning the first event in April–May, 2016, a BBL, in which
                                       representatives from ICCS will share their experiences on CSCs.




7. Building Human Rights in a Peace    Key advances have been made in preparation for the 2016 implementation
Consolidation Scenario: Colombia       of the impact evaluation of Colombia’s Mobile Victims Unit. An in-depth
Mobile Victims Unit Impact             literature review on human rights and identification of how the Victims and
Evaluation. Governance Global          Land Restitution Law gives victims back their dignity, memory and truth, and
Practice.                              creates conditions that deter future perpetuation of conflict, was completed.
                                       Several missions to Colombia were carried out, allowing for the organization of
                                       workshops with the three participating entities (Ministry of Justice, Defensoria,
                                       and the Victim’s Unit) to discuss the process through which municipalities
                                       would be selected for the unit’s 2016 route, and ultimately agree upon the
                                       municipalities to be included within the IE. Additionally, fieldwork to improve
                                       the data collection process was conducted in the municipalities of Ayapel
                                       and Puerto Libertador. The team also had the opportunity to participate in
                                       the annual Nordic Trust Fund for Human Rights and Development event in
                                       Washington, DC.
                                       The following products were completed: i) data for 133 municipalities identified
                                       for potential inclusion in the Route 1 or Route 2 (including key informant
                                       interviews, existing census, administrative, and monitoring data used by the
                                       collaborating entities) was collected and organized in cooperation with the
                                       collaborating entities, ii) a municipal level victims’ needs and institutional
                                       coverage index was constructed to help inform the municipal selection process,
                                       and iii) pair-wise matching and identification of the 30 municipalities that will
                                       be visited in the first round (treatment municipalities) and in the second round
                                       (control municipalities) of the IE was finalized.




                                                                    Annex b | NTF Program Grants Approved in 2015           31
     Title, implementing unit                                 Objectives, plans and activities
     8. Developing Quantitative Data       The grant team has produced a draft working paper summarizing existing
     on the Economic Dimensions of         research experiences (attached) which is now guiding the activity.
     LGBT Exclusion. Governance Global     The team is currently in discussions with two consortia to undertake different
     Practice.                             parts of the research. One consortium is likely to implement the individual
                                           survey that will replicate the Fundamental Rights Agency Europe-wide survey,
                                           and will also include questions from the Serbia living standards survey. The
                                           second consortium will undertake the experimental study which will likely
                                           involve ‘mystery shoppers’ (some LGBT some not) accessing public services
                                           (e.g., employment agencies, public health centers, municipal documentation).
                                           We hope to conclude negotiations in the next few weeks and then begin. Work
                                           completed includes a virtual review of the concept note.



     9. Don’t Mind the Gap: Why the        The grant team identified three countries where the grant would fund case
     MENA region has good laws on          studies forming the analytical basis for the subsequent analysis. Terms
     marginalized women and children       of reference for the work/study in Jordan, focusing on gender issues and
     but does not enforce them.            inheritance were completed and the study carried out. Findings were discussed
     Governance Global Practice.           during a workshop in Washington DC following a presentation of the selected
                                           consultant. Preparatory work was carried out for the other two country
                                           studies—Egypt and Jordan—with work planned to be done in 2016.



     10. The grant would reinforce         The grant team prepared the groundwork for a regional workshop in Sri
     existing Bank efforts to promote      Lanka planned for 2016 to feed into the ongoing work in Right to Information
     the right to information especially   (RTI)—the government recently presented a bill on which the team provided
     in Bangladesh, Nepal and Sri Lanka.   extensive inputs. Discussions were also held on the substance of the policy
     Governance Global Practice.           notes and associated terms of reference for grant funded studies in 2016. The
                                           team also reached agreement with Sri Lanka on the development of a strategic
                                           plan for RTI implementation which the grant will support. Some of this work
                                           has been a delayed due to different opinions about specific provisions of the
                                           RTI bill but the bill is expected to pass in early 2016.



     11. Voices of the Vulnerable          The grant follows an earlier NTF grant that focused on access to justice of
     and Human Rights: Promoting           vulnerable groups in Ethiopia and Sierra Leone. Following grant approval,
     Stakeholder Learning on Access        the grant team worked with Country Management Teams in Africa to select
     to Justice in Sub-Saharan Africa      countries for the follow-on work. Tanzania, Cameroon and perhaps Madagascar
     (SSA)—A Proposal for Scale-Up.        and Mozambique were among the candidates. Preparatory work was done
     Governance Global Practice.           to link the grant activities to the proposed and World Bank supported Citizen
                                           Centric Judicial Reform project expected to be approved in 2016.



     12. Enhancing Citizen’s Rights        A concept note review was held for the Vietnam grant for which the grant team
     in Vietnam. Governance Global         received many useful suggestions in carrying out the grant activities in 2016.
     Practice.                             Building on the early support of the NTF which helped desensitize and open
                                           up more discussions on the subject of human rights in general in the Vietnam
                                           press, among public officials and citizens, in 2016, the NTF grant will focus on a
                                           number of specific rights areas, including the right to information, the right to
                                           associations, and the freedom of doing business. Not only do these rights areas
                                           fit with the current legislative making agenda of the country, but they also
                                                                                                         (Continued next page)




32   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
Title, implementing unit                                  Objectives, plans and activities
                                       contribute to modernizing institutions that could help Vietnam prosper further
                                       in the years to come. The grant team will work with policy makers, civil society
                                       actors, as well as with media groups, including social media to improve their
                                       knowledge and help them practice the rights that have been prescribed for in
                                       the Vietnam’s existing legislation. The grant will also cross-fertilize with other
                                       NTF grants to operationalize the citizen engagement requirements in Bank’s
                                       projects in the context of Vietnam.




13. Operationalizing Gender in         Analytical work aims to define the World Bank Group’s (WBG) engagement
Health. Health, Nutrition and          on gender from the health, nutrition, and population (HNP) perspective and
Population Global Practice.            provide a framework for gender responsive health interventions for WBG
                                       investments/operations within the context of universal health coverage (UHC).
                                       Specifically, this work (i) assesses the WBG’s performance in supporting gender
                                       responsive and inclusive health systems; and (ii) provides a comprehensive
                                       framework for gender mainstreaming within health interventions supported
                                       through WBG lending. The grant is linked to the ongoing Sahel Women’s
                                       Empowerment & Demographics Project (P150080).
                                       During 2015, the team drafted a position paper that aims to define the links
                                       between gender and health, and outline the broad terms of engagement on
                                       gender within health projects. This work has also supported inputs into the
                                       new gender strategy through discussion and written feedback. In addition,
                                       the team has also commenced a review of the World Bank Group’s lending
                                       operations, focusing on HNP lending and grants to access how gender has
                                       been mainstreamed in health, where gaps remain, and what are the challenges
                                       to address these gaps. A draft report based on this review is expected to be
                                       completed by the end of this fiscal year (FY16). This will also give feedback into
                                       the final position paper. The team also expects to deliver at least one learning
                                       event within FY16 based on the findings of this work.




14. Monitoring for maternal and        The program Concept Note review was conducted in September 2015 and
reproductive health results in World   approved by management on September 9, 2015. The proposed work was
Bank projects: what human rights       presented at the NTF Annual Event 2015 on November 19 and benefited from
can offer. Health, Nutrition and       feedback of participants and human rights experts. In the months immediately
Population Global Practice.            following Concept Note approval, the task team has conducted consultations
                                       with task teams to feed into the deepening of knowledge on the nexus
                                       between reproductive and maternal health and human rights; this knowledge
                                       is informing various analytical products currently under preparation. A
                                       database with relevant RMH project data has been completed and cleaned
                                       for analysis. The database contains information on projects tagged with the
                                       “Population and Reproductive Health” thematic code, including financing
                                       amounts, project development objectives, and results framework indicators.
                                       The external partner, the Global Health and Human Rights department at
                                       University of Southern California, are being contracted for analysis of this data.
                                       The first knowledge product—Deepening knowledge on the nexus between RMH
                                       and human rights—is on track for completion in FY16. A substantial amount of
                                       progress is expected for the second knowledge product—Monitoring RMH with
                                       a human rights lens—in FY16 as well.




                                                                     Annex b | NTF Program Grants Approved in 2015          33
     Title, implementing unit                                  Objectives, plans and activities
     15. Producing Standards of             The team has held a concept review meeting on the scope of the work and
     Practice in Adolescent Sexual and      expected outcomes. This was very helpful in sharpening the grant’s focus
     Reproductive Health Projects:          and streamlining the thinking about activities, identifying various types of
     Adding a Human Rights Perspective      stakeholders, and potential partnerships at the global and country level, and
     to the Bank’s Operations. Health,      defining selected countries and country teams with which the team will be
     Nutrition and Population Global        working with on operationalizing Adolescent SRHR within health investments.
     Practice.                              Preliminary reviews on existing evidence has been initiated and the team is in
                                            dialogue with multiple experts on key topics such as human rights, and health
                                            equity for joining the team. Contracts with experts has started to do work in
                                            integrating the concepts of equity, multi-sectoral interventions and Human
                                            Rights Based Approach. The team has planned for and organized a series
                                            of BBLs in FY16 on the evidence base and its operational implications, with
                                            participation from key stakeholders including Bank staff, experts, civil society,
                                            and other external partners.




     16. Exploitation of Female and Child   The Government of Mexico’s first ever Special Migration Program places a
     Migrants on Mexico’s Southern          human rights approach in the center and focuses on effectively managing
     Border. Poverty Global Practice.       migration to improve the well-being of migrants and the communities in
                                            Mexico. Issues include labor market exploitation and access to basic services
                                            among the migrant population. A growing and vulnerable sub-population
                                            are female migrant workers, the number of which has more than doubled
                                            over the last 15 years. Many work in the agriculture and domestic sectors, are
                                            from Guatemala, and engage in cyclical migration. There is little data on the
                                            conditions under which these women work. Legally protected and eligible for
                                            basic services, qualitative studies show these workers suffer from various forms
                                            of labor exploitation and face significant barriers to service access, partly due
                                            to irregular migratory status and their relative invisibility. The government is
                                            interested in better understanding the labor exploitation and the associated
                                            risk factors and is looking to create a Migration Observatory and design a guest
                                            worker program for Guatemalans (bilateral agreement between Mexico and
                                            Guatemala, August, 2014). The lack of data limits the ability of policy makers to
                                            address these issues.
                                            In collaboration with the Interior Ministry (SEGOB), the Ministry of Labor and
                                            Social Protection (STPS), the National Institute of Women (INMUJERES) and the
                                            National Council to Prevent Discrimination (CONAPRED) and with technical
                                            assistance from the University of California, San Diego, the team has begun
                                            the design phase of a quantitative study of the labor status of female migrants
                                            in the agriculture and domestic work sectors in southern Mexico. An inter-
                                            institutional working group that was formed for the qualitative first phase
                                            of the project will continue and will design, super-vise implementation and
                                            analyze the resulting data. At present the Working Groups is exploring various
                                            sampling options. The sample is the most difficult phase of the work, especially
                                            for domestic workers. Other studies that have tried to create a probability
                                            sample of hard to reach populations in Mexico (a respondent-driven sample
                                            of sex workers done in Tapachula; a survey of household servants in the north
                                            of the country, for example) are being examined for replicability. A sampling
                                            expert has also been hired. Some pilot testing of samples will most likely need
                                            to be undertaken. The actual field work dates will be driven by the seasonal
                                            flows of migrants as identified in the qualitative phase of the study.




34   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
Title, implementing unit                                     Objectives, plans and activities
17. Social and economic security         A Concept Note review for the work on Economic Security of the Elderly in
for the elderly in Moldova. Poverty      Moldova was carried out on September 2015. In addition, a workshop on
Global Practice.                         Aging Challenges in Moldova and Economic Security of the Elderly was held
                                         in Chisinau on November 2015, allowing for establishing partnerships (with
                                         UNFPA in Moldova and the NGO HelpAge International) and increasing the
                                         visibility of the work. All sections of the proposed report are underway, and
                                         first drafts on the sections on labor markets, old age poverty, social protection
                                         and demographic trends are expected at the end of January 2016. Moreover,
                                         a review of the international and country-specific literature and framework
                                         on aging and human rights has been commissioned and will be ready at the
                                         beginning of February 2016, to enhance our knowledge on the challenges and
                                         legal tools available around aging and human rights. Importantly, preliminary
                                         analysis has already informed the Concept Note of the Moldova Systematic
                                         Country Diagnostic, a key technical diagnostic that will inform the World Bank
                                         engagement in the country.



18. Balancing workers’ protection        In 2015, the NTF helped with shaping a country work program. A concept note
and labor market flexibility in China.   review on a programmatic task “Strengthening China Social Protection and
Social Protection and Labor Global       Labor Systems” was held. A component of this programmatic task on informing
Practice.                                labor market policy reforms was also reviewed and the combined work
                                         program financed by Bank budget and the NTF was endorsed by the meeting.
                                         A systematic search and tabular desk review of the relevant empirical literature
                                         on labor regulations in China were finalized and TORs for further work were
                                         drafted. The task team discussed the work program with counterparts in China
                                         and identified potential local collaborators.
                                         There was improved understanding among Government officials and Bank staff
                                         of the significance of labor rights and the importance of balancing workers’
                                         protection and labor market flexibility.



19. Understanding Fairness in            The Grant builds on the Minister of Social Solidarity’s (MoSS) Takaful and Karma
Assessment and Classification            Program (Cash Transfer) objective to reach persons with disabilities who are in
of Disabilities in Egypt. Social         poverty and enroll them in the cash transfer program. The program procedures
Protection and Labor Global              require identification of a) poverty and b) disability and MoSS has requested
Practice.                                assistance to help improve the disability identification to move away from
                                         purely medical model to more of a social model, and to help institute a more
                                         simple operational procedure, for the purpose of fair and less cumbersome
                                         procedures.
                                         The Grant supports: (i) an assessment and stock-taking of current system
                                         and operational processes for identification and certification of disability; (ii)
                                         benchmarking of Egypt’s current system and processes against other models
                                         from international experience; (iii) providing recommendations for improving
                                         the Egyptian model and/or the Cash Transfer model.
                                         Progress to date: (i) a team composed of a MoSS disability specialist,
                                         international consultant and national consultant (hired by the Grant) and a
                                         Bank specialist staff has been established and has started discussions and data
                                         collection; (ii) in-depth data collection and desk review of the current processes
                                         for disability certification/classification is in progress through desk reviews of
                                         policies, guidelines and manuals; meetings and discussions with a range of
                                                                                                        (Continued next page)




                                                                       Annex b | NTF Program Grants Approved in 2015            35
     Title, implementing unit                                Objectives, plans and activities
                                          stakeholders; and field analysis/stocktaking; (iii) a Task Force committee
                                          has been established under the auspices of MoSS to serve as an advisory,
                                          coordination, and policy dialogue forum. The Grant team supported the
                                          development of the ToRs of the TF which has been endorsed by MoSS, and TA is
                                          provided to the TF’s functions; (iv) a 2016 Bank mission will advance the stock-
                                          taking and assessment work. A draft report of the first deliverable (assessment
                                          of the current system and processes) is expected by February 2016; (v) MoSS
                                          is developing the national strategy for Disability and the grant activities will
                                          assist the MoSS team with concepts and frameworks related to streamlining the
                                          human rights aspects in the National Disability programs.



     20. The impact of citizen’s          The impact evaluation of transparency, accountability and anti-corruption
     civic participation and social       seeks to evaluate the effectiveness of strengthening social accountability.
     accountability on Service Delivery   Based on randomized study, the evaluation seeks to generate evidence on the
     and Quality of Development Project   value-added of strengthening citizen’s participation in local decision making on
     in Uganda. Social Protection and     the quality of development projects. It will contribute to the evidence on how
     Labor Global Practice.               promoting human rights, citizen’s voice and civic participation can accelerate
                                          the development process.
                                          The team has collected data on the quality of approximately 1,000 sub-projects
                                          implemented as part of the program, and will next turn to analyzing the extent
                                          to which social accountability training affected the quality of these projects.
                                          Information collected will be shared with a subset of communities through
                                          a scorecard pilot which has been designed. The team has also started the
                                          preparation of a community-level survey to understand the effects of social
                                          accountability training on access to information, beneficiaries’ voice and
                                          behaviors. The survey will provide an opportunity to seek selected human
                                          rights indicators at a disaggregated level.



     21. Human Rights and Development     Grant activities seek to deepen understanding of how rights relate to core
     in Europe and Central Asia. Urban,   development issues in the ECA region and to promote sensitivity to regional
     Rural and Social Development         rights issues. It focuses on building staff awareness, knowledge and capacity
     Global Practice.                     around rights issues and on mainstreaming rights issues within existing/
                                          planned activities rather than creating stand-alone initiatives. It is a direct
                                          follow-up to a 2012–2014 NTF Grant which included work on land rights,
                                          gender rights, indigenous peoples, fragility and conflict and SOGI inclusion.
                                          To date this grant has launched 3 activities: (i) Support to preserve Indigenous
                                          Culture in the Russian Federation—support for the Ministry of Culture of
                                          the Republic of Karelia to develop a strategy for the promotion of Finno-
                                          Ugric culture. Currently underway are a mapping of existing policies and
                                          programming for indigenous people’s rights and language and culture
                                          preservation, and data collection on Finno-Ugric culture development. A
                                          validation workshop with local experts and World Bank representatives
                                          is planned for March 2016; (ii) Qualitative Study on the situation of Roma
                                          migrants in Western Europe—research to collect the voices of Roma migrants
                                          on their motivations for migration, aspirations, survival strategies and
                                          integration challenges and successes—recognizing the uninformed and often
                                          inflammatory discourses on Roma migrants in many parts of Western Europe.
                                          Work will include analysis of political reactions to the settlement of Roma
                                          migrants in Belgium at the level of the local community, media, public services,
                                                                                                        (Continued next page)




36   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
Title, implementing unit                                 Objectives, plans and activities
                                      social workers, and local and national policy makers in the host community;
                                      (iii) resettlement and gender: examining land rights, livelihoods and outcomes
                                      for women in ECA—the World Bank policy involuntary resettlement pays
                                      particular attention to the needs of vulnerable groups, such as women, the
                                      elderly, the landless, etc. during resettlement planning and implementation.
                                      This activity will review international best practice with a view to produce a
                                      guidance note on integrating gender considerations into projects. An in-depth
                                      desk review of the gender-sensitivity of existing resettlement instruments, as
                                      well as qualitative data collection (key informant interviews and focus group
                                      discussions) will be undertaken in two countries (Georgia and Bosnia and
                                      Herzegovina). Dissemination of the guidance note will include a presentation to
                                      Bank staff and relevant clients, and use in staff training events (e.g., safeguards
                                      boot camp, resettlement trainings). To date, the TOR for this assignment has
                                      been finalized and the recruitment of an international consultant to undertake
                                      this review is underway.



22. Promoting Women and Girls’        Activities aim at assessing the impact of Engaging Men through Accountable
Rights: Collecting Evidence on What   Practice program (EMAP), an innovative pilot tool designed to prevent Sexual
Works to Prevent Sexual and Gender    and Gender Based Violence (SGBV). This evaluation will inform future Bank
Based Violence. Urban, Rural and      programming on what works to prevent violations of human rights, in relation
Social Development Global Practice.   to SGBV against women and girls. It will inform and possibly be replicated in
                                      the US$107 million IDA-funded Great Lakes Emergency Sexual and Gender
                                      Based Violence and Women’s Health Project (P147489). The NTF grant is
                                      contributing to the baseline data collection activities for this impact evaluation
                                      to be conducted from February to April 2016.
                                      In 2015, the following activities were conducted: (i) The research team was
                                      identified, and the study will be conducted by a World Bank team from the
                                      Gender Innovation Lab, including two economists, one qualitative lead
                                      researcher, one qualitative research assistant, and one field coordinator based
                                      in eastern DRC, in collaboration with the International Rescue Committee,
                                      and the London School for Hygiene and Tropical Medicine; (ii) The task team
                                      conducted two missions to Bukavu, DRC, respectively in June and July 2015,
                                      to discuss and explore the study design and implementation plan with the
                                      implementation partner; (iii) The study design was finalized, and the study sites
                                      were assigned to treatment and control status using a pair-wise randomization
                                      methodology; and (iv) The study protocol was submitted to an International
                                      Review Board and conditional approval for the survey was obtained.



23. Sectoral Good Practice Notes on   Activities include preparation of good practice Notes on Indigenous Peoples
Indigenous Peoples rights and their   rights and their practical application for inclusive and sustainable development
practical application for inclusive   in Latin America and the Caribbean. To date the detailed work plan has been
and sustainable develop-              developed in conjunction with the Latin American Indigenous Network, Foro
ment in Latin America and the         Indigena Abya Yala and the Coordinating Consultant and Research Assistant
Caribbean. Urban, Rural and Social    have been hired. These consultants are currently working on the template for
Development Global Practice.          the good practice notes. They are also systematizing the specific relevant rights
                                      for each of the six sectors to be covered and identifying relevant international
                                      experts and experiences in the Latin American region where Indigenous
                                      peoples rights have been effectively applied. Expert roundtables to develop
                                      each Note’s content are foreseen to commence in April–May, 2016.




                                                                    Annex b | NTF Program Grants Approved in 2015           37
     Title, implementing unit                                  Objectives, plans and activities
     24. Enhancing Operational              This grant is implemented in collaboration with the Office of the High
     Knowledge on Indigenous Peoples’       Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR). A joint workshop was held in mid-
     Human Rights. Urban, Rural and         2015 to plan activities for the global level, regional level in Latin America and
     Social Development Global Practice.    the Caribbean (LAC) and country level in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
                                            (DRC). Two knowledge sharing events were held at the global level, titled “How
                                            to operationalize Indigenous Peoples’ rights? An Exchange with OHCHR” and
                                            “Land Legalization and Tenure for Improved Living Conditions of Indigenous
                                            Peoples and Local Communities.” In LAC, several meetings have been held
                                            with the Victims Unit of Colombia to define the TORs of the study and the
                                            international event to take place in 2016. A contract with the Universidad
                                            Nacional de Colombia (UNAL) is likely to be signed in early 2016. UNAL has
                                            started working on the first products of the study, intended to identify best
                                            practices nationally and internationally in reparation processes aimed at ethnic
                                            minorities, and prepare a long list for the event and for the systematization of
                                            repertoires of reparation. In DRC, a study on Indigenous Peoples’ rights related
                                            to land tenure is being designed (procurement stage to hire the consultant).
                                            The study will be implemented in partnership with national and local IP
                                            organizations.
                                            Planned activities for the second half of FY 2016 and FY 2017 include: (i)
                                            Global level: staff training based on good practices and lessons learned from
                                            operational work, including presentations of NTF project work from both LAC
                                            and DRC—LAC: An international event on reparation strategies for ethnic
                                            minorities affected by conflict and violence, and the final draft of the study on
                                            reparation processes—DRC: completed study and a country level workshop
                                            on Indigenous Peoples’ rights related to land tenure in DRC. Planned outcomes
                                            include: Improved understanding of the World Bank staff about the Indigenous
                                            Peoples’ Human Rights and how to apply these rights in the operational work
                                            of the World Bank; specific project support related to activities in the Latin
                                            American region and at the country level in DRC; improved knowledge and
                                            systemization of repertoires on reparation strategies aimed at addressing the
                                            special needs and points of view of ethnic minorities afflicted by conflict and
                                            violence. Close collaboration with OHCHR has been an asset in enhancing
                                            staff’s knowledge and awareness of Indigenous Peoples’ rights.




     25. Citizen Participation is a Human   Grant objectives include increased awareness among World Bank staff of the
     Right: A Human Rights-Based            link between citizen participation and human rights and the relevance of the
     Approach to the World Bank’s Citizen   citizen engagement agenda for development beyond the corporate goals; and
     Engagement Mandate. Urban, Rural       improved understanding of the importance and value of citizen-led initiatives
     and Social Development Global          demanding their rights and improved development outcomes.
     Practice.                              During 2015 a lead researcher and two consultants were hired, completing
                                            the research team. A draft research design and an extensive set of interview
                                            questions for the case studies were developed. A partnership with Integrity
                                            Watch Afghanistan (IWA) has been set up and processes are under way for
                                            partnerships with a youth-led movement in Paraguay and a citizen initiative in
                                            the Balkans. A panel on citizen participation and human rights in Afghanistan
                                            will take place at the FCV Forum in March 2016, featuring IWA representatives
                                            and other experts. In addition, the research project will be presented to World
                                            Bank staff and external participants through a BBL.




38   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
Title, implementing unit                                  Objectives, plans and activities
26. Global Adaptation of “In Her      This grant will adapt the “In Her Shoes” training to illustrate discrimination
Shoes” to Illustrate Discrimination   against LGBTQI persons. Funds were used to procure the license for “In Her
against LGBTQI people. Urban, Rural   Shoes” as well as a technical assistance agreement. The team presented the
and Social Development Global         grant concept to local civil society organizations (CSOs) and teams in the
Practice.                             World Bank for collaboration and consultation purposes, including the World
                                      Bank’s Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity (SOGI) Task Force. The team also
                                      coordinated with various international actors, such as ILO, UNDP, and USAID,
                                      to understand complementary projects and to better define the methodology
                                      based on existing data. The grant team provided input into the Systematic
                                      Country Diagnosis (SCD) for Thailand, and committed to Thailand as the pilot
                                      country for data collection. Data collection will be conducted in four countries
                                      throughout the course of the grant. Multi-stakeholder consultations are being
                                      prepared and finalized with LGBTI groups in Bangkok to enable a focus on
                                      LGBTI rights in the SCD as well as for consulting on the methodology of the “In
                                      Her Shoes” adaptation. The methodology and questionnaires for focus groups
                                      and key informant interviews are being prepared for data collection.
                                      Through presentations within the World Bank and externally, the team is
                                      strengthening the connection of LGBTI rights and development. Outreach and
                                      communication with the World Bank’s SOGI Task Force and CSOs are enabling
                                      future consultations and collaborations for this team and LGBTI research in
                                      general. The SCD in Thailand also improves the Bank’s role on LGBTI work in
                                      development. Thailand’s SCD is only the second in which the World Bank has
                                      included an LGBTI focus.



27. Improving public transport        The concept review for work under this grant took place in Nov. 2015. A design
access for persons with impaired      adviser (an architect) is engaged and developing bus infrastructure concepts
physical motility in Thimphu.         to address accessibility challenges based on international examples. His
Transport and ICT Global Practice.    assignment focuses on adapting good practice to what is feasible in Bhutan
                                      given local materials, contractor capabilities, affordability, etc. An accessibility
                                      Specialist and Transport Expert (individuals) are engaged and developing
                                      data collection instruments/methodologies to gather information on travel
                                      needs for persons with physical impairments that affect their ability to use bus
                                      services.
                                      A Bank team will be in Thimphu in early 2016 to progress field work. Some
                                      work such as scoping of bus stop locations at places that we already know to
                                      be critical for access (e.g., the national trauma hospital, and the central market)
                                      has already taken place. The team will also kick off the primary data collection
                                      activities which are critical to the whole assignment.



28. Beyond Good Governance—A          Work Description: The NTF funding will leverage the Governance and Political
Human Rights Based Approach           Economy component of the Multi-country Programmatic Approach WASH
to Shared Prosperity in Water and     Poverty Diagnostic (WPD). The WPD is a shared initiative between the Water,
Sanitation. Water and Sanitation      Governance and Poverty practices to help in building evidence to identify
Global Practice.                      the gaps in access faced by the poorest and the institutional constraints for
                                      adequate service expansion. The challenge is to obtain a detailed diagnostic
                                      in selected Country Case Studies on the options that are needed to bring the
                                      same standard of quality, reliability and access across the population, with
                                      special emphasis on those who are predominantly poor and have access to
                                      water under substandards of service. The NTF resources are being used to
                                                                                                      (Continued next page)




                                                                    Annex b | NTF Program Grants Approved in 2015             39
     Title, implementing unit                                   Objectives, plans and activities
                                             garner useful information to answer a key question: What are the water supply,
                                             sanitation, and hygiene service delivery constraints and solutions for the poor and
                                             bottom 40 percent to realize their progressive rights to water? Mozambique has
                                             been rolled out as a case study and another two to three countries are in the
                                             process of rolling out WPD that can be incorporated into the case studies based
                                             on pre-identified information and criteria.
                                             Planned Activities for FY 2016: i) Report identifying political economy and
                                             institutional bottlenecks in rights to water in WASH subsectors with a focus
                                             on services for the poor and bottom 40% of population; ii) Field research in
                                             selected case-study countries; iii) Knowledge sharing events focused on Bank
                                             staff on how to operationalize the identified issues from reports; iv) workshops
                                             with country counterparts and Bank staff to discuss lessons and findings to
                                             reinforce the dialogue with country-based water sector institutions.
                                             Work Completed in FY 2015: i) Improved understanding of methodological
                                             tools to apply a human rights based lens to study water-governance linkages;
                                             ii) Internal Workshop on methodology and scope of work; iii) Literature review
                                             of governance and political economy bottlenecks; and iv) Development of
                                             preliminary field instruments.


     29. Getting It Right: Learning How to   The Project’s objective is to deepen Bank staff knowledge about the role of
     Translate Human Rights Principles       human rights standards in the process of designing, implementing, monitoring
     into Social Protection Policy. Legal    and evaluating social protection systems. The grant finances the preparation
     Department.                             of ‘how to’ notes for Bank staff providing very practical guidance on how
                                             to incorporate human rights standards into their work. The notes will be
                                             complemented by training on the topics covered by the notes.
                                             In 2015 the team organized a series of meetings with regional and global
                                             managers and staff to understand their priorities in terms of human rights
                                             topics to be covered by the ‘how to’ notes, and identify partners that could
                                             support the team and consultants in the identification of case studies to be
                                             included in the notes. The team concluded that the main knowledge gap
                                             is related to the role of national legal frameworks, including human rights
                                             standards, in the process of designing, implementing, monitoring and
                                             evaluating social protection systems. Teams and managers acknowledge that
                                             human rights legal standards are a key factor to take into consideration in their
                                             work and about what they will like to know more.
                                             Based on the meetings, the team developed terms of reference for five studies:
                                             (i) Study on the development of a conceptual framework to assess social
                                             protection legal frameworks’ compliance with human rights standards. (ii) A
                                             comparative study of best practices related to the collection and management
                                             of personal data in social protection, in light of the right to privacy of social
                                             protection beneficiaries. (iii) Study on assessing whether national legal
                                             frameworks can generate incentives for the private sector to partner with
                                             the public sector supporting the progressive realization of the right to social
                                             protection, in particular through on-the-job training and apprenticeship
                                             interventions. (iv) Study on assessing the different models of grievance
                                             redress mechanisms used in social protection interventions and whether
                                             there is a correlation between the type of information that beneficiaries
                                             receive about social protection programs and their ability to use the GRMs
                                             effectively. (v) A comparative analysis of best practices in different countries
                                             that customized their social protection interventions in a way to prevent or
                                             overcome discrimination of different vulnerable groups, including indigenous
                                             communities, LGBTIs, minority groups, etc.




40   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
Title, implementing unit                                 Objectives, plans and activities
30. Law for development: equity and   In 2015 the Bank team presented the project at the NTF workshop and initiated
inclusion in health and education.    three desk reviews aimed at understanding: (i) the meaning of “minimum
Legal Department.                     core” under the ICESCR generally; (ii) the meaning of “minimum core” under
                                      the ICESCR with respect to Article 12 (right to health); (iii) the meaning
                                      of “minimum core” under the ICESCR with respect to Article 13 (right to
                                      education). In 2016 the Bank team has scheduled a concept review of the desk
                                      reviews, and then will proceed to their finalization and integration into a single
                                      report to be presented at knowledge event(s) at the World Bank, and further
                                      disseminated to Bank staff in the form of simple explanatory notes



31. Implementing the Environmental    As part of the ongoing review and update of the World Bank’s safeguards
and Social Framework. Operational     policy, four events focusing on nondiscrimination and inclusion are planned.
Services and Policy Support Vice      The first will take place in Tokyo on February 4 and will focus on disability
Presidency.                           issues as well as gender issues. For this event, 17 participants from East Asia
                                      and South Asia have confirmed their attendance. A High-Level Dialogue on
                                      Indigenous Peoples is planned for February 11–12 in Addis Ababa. Invitations
                                      have been issued to members of Indigenous Peoples groups, multilateral
                                      development institutions, government officials from Kenya, Tanzania, and
                                      Ethiopia, officials from the African Union, as well as Executive Directors of the
                                      World Bank representing constituencies with Indigenous Peoples. This event
                                      will work toward finding common ground on a number of challenges regarding
                                      the implementation of the proposed Environmental and Social Standard on
                                      Indigenous Peoples. An expert focus group on nondiscrimination is planned
                                      for March 3 in Brasilia. This event will focus on children and the elderly
                                      (topics to be confirmed) and will include experts from Latin America and the
                                      Caribbean. The World Bank will also host an expert focus group on Religious
                                      Considerations in the context of nondiscrimination. This event is planned for
                                      March 8 in Washington, DC, and will bring together specialists from different
                                      faith traditions and intra-faith initiatives.




                                                                   Annex b | NTF Program Grants Approved in 2015           41
42   Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015
Photo Credits
Page IV: © Simone D. McCourtie/World Bank
Page V (left to right):
	         © Imal Hashemi/Taimani Films/World Bank
	         © Dominic Chavez/World Bank
	         © Jonathan Pavluk/World Bank
Page 2:	 © Graham Crouch/World Bank
Page 3:	 © Simone D. McCourtie/World Bank
Page 4:	 © Chhor Sokunthea/World Bank
Page 5: 	 © Curt Carnemark/World Bank
Page 6: 	 © Dominic Chavez/World Bank
Page 8 (left to right):
          © Curt Carnemark/World Bank
	         © Julio Pantoja/World Bank
	         © Arne Hoel/World Bank
Page 11:	© Gerardo Pesantez/World Bank/World Bank
Page 13:	© Simone D. McCourtie/World Bank
Page 14:	© Khasar Sandag/World Bank
Page 15: 	© World Bank
Page 17: 	© Stephan Gladieu/World Bank
Page 18:	© Dominic Chavez/World Bank
Page 20: 	© Mohamed Azakir/World Bank
Page 22: 	© Nugroho Nurdikiawan Sunjoyo / World Bank
Page 28: 	© Imal Hashemi/Taimani Films/World Bank
Page 42: 	© Khasar Sandag/World Bank




                                                       Nordic Trust Fund Progress Report | 2015   43
