SUBNATIONAL DEBT MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE
          ASSESSMENT (DEMPA)
                    METHODOLOGY

September 1, 2016
Table of Contents
Abbreviations 3
Acknowledgments          4
1         Introduction 5
2         Assessment Methodology         7
    2.1   Scope and Coverage of the Framework 7
    2.2   Debt Management Performance Indicators   8
    2.3   Scoring Methodology 9
    2.4   Subnational Debt Management Performance Report         9
3         Debt Management Performance Indicators 11
    3.1 Governance and Strategy Development11
       DPI-1    Legal Framework         13
       DPI-2    Managerial Structure 19
       DPI-3    Debt Management Strategy         23
       DPI-4    Debt Reporting and Evaluation 28
       DPI-5    Audit 32
    3.2 Coordination with Fiscal and Budgetary Policy 35
       DPI-6    Coordination with Fiscal and Budgetary Policy 35
    3.3 Borrowing and Related Financing Activities       39
       DPI-7    Domestic Borrowing      39
       DPI-8    External Borrowing      44
       DPI-9    Loan Guarantees, On-lending, and Derivatives 48
    3.4 Cash Flow Forecasting and Cash Balance Management 53
       DPI-10   Cash Flow Forecasting and Cash Balance Management 53
    3.5 Debt recording and Operational Risk Management           57
       DPI-11   Debt Administration and Data Security 57
       DPI-12   Segregation of Duties, Staff Capacity, and Business Continuity   63
       DPI-13   Debt and Debt-Related Records 68
Annex 1: Differences between the Sovereign and the Subnational DeMPA Tool 71
ABBREVIATIONS

    Comsec      Commonwealth Secretariat
    DeM         debt management
    DeMPA       Debt Management Performance Assessment
    DMFAS       Debt Management Financial Analysis System Program
    DMO         debt management office
    DPI         Debt Management Performance Indicator
    DRP         disaster recovery plan
    DSA         debt sustainability analysis
    FABDM       Financial Advisory and Banking Debt Management Department (WB
                    Treasury)
    INTOSAI     International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions
    IT          information technology
    MEFMI       Macroeconomics and Financial Management Institute of Eastern and
                    Southern Africa
    MFM GP      Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice
    MTDS        Medium-term debt strategy
    N/A         not applicable
    N/R         not rated or assessed
    PEFA        Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (Program)
    PI          Performance indicator
    SAI         Supreme audit institution
    SN          Subnational
    SNG         Subnational government
    UNCTAD      United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
    WAIFEM      West African Institute for Financial and Economic Management
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This revision and update of the Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment
methodology (SN DeMPA) was overseen by Mark Roland Thomas (Macroeconomics and Fiscal
Management Global Practice (MFM GP)). The methodology review process was led by Lilia
Razlog, in cooperation with Abha Prasad and Ying Li. The authors wish to thank partner
institutions, including the Macroeconomics and Financial Management Institute of Eastern and
Southern Africa (MEFMI); the West African Institute for Financial and Economic Management
(WAIFEM); the Commonwealth Secretariat (Comsec); and United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development’s (UNCTAD) Debt Management Financial Analysis System Program (DMFAS),
and DMF Panel of Experts for providing inputs and suggestions to the SN DeMPA review. World
Bank colleagues, Lili Liu, Coskun Cangoz, Marcelo Tricarico, Rodrigo Cabral, Fritz Bachmair,
Cigdam Aslan and Baudouin Richard, provided additional insights during the revision of the
methodology.




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 4     OF   75
    1       INTRODUCTION
Subnational debt levels in developing countries are becoming increasingly significant as central
governments continue to decentralize spending responsibilities, revenue-raising authority, and
borrowing rights to subnational governments1 (SNGs). The trend began in the 1990s and is now
prevalent in developing countries with both federal and unitary political systems. The World
Bank, in collaboration with other partners, has developed a global knowledge program on
subnational fiscal reform and debt management. The program aims to strengthen developing
countries’ institutional capacity to maintain subnational fiscal sustainability and prudent debt
management alongside a stable macroeconomic framework; effective infrastructure finance to
support inclusive growth; and capital market development. A key component of this global
knowledge program is the application of the Debt Management Performance Assessment
(DeMPA) methodology for SNGs.

The DeMPA is a methodology for assessing the full range of government debt management
functions through a comprehensive set of indicators. It highlights strengths and weaknesses in
debt management practices and facilitates the design of plans to build and augment capacity and
institutions tailored to specific needs of a country. The indicator set for the central government
(the sovereign DeMPA) has evolved as an internationally recognized standard in the central
government debt management (DeM), and was updated in July 2015.

The subnational DeMPA highlights strengths and weaknesses at the level of subnational DeM
practices. This performance assessment facilitates the design of plans to build and augment
capacity and institutions tailored to the specific needs of a subnational. The subnational DeMPA
(SN DeMPA) also facilitates the monitoring of progress over time in achieving the objectives of
subnational DeM in a manner consistent with international sound practice.

Both sovereign and subnational DeMPA methodologies are modeled after the Public Expenditure
and Financial Accountability (PEFA) framework. If the DeMPA exercise precedes a PEFA
assessment, the latter can use the DeMPA results to inform its assessment of the relevant
indicators, alternatively the DeMPA provides a detailed assessment of the underlying factors
leading to poor PEFA ratings in the area of DeM. The PEFA framework was also significantly
revised in 2015; it was first published in 2005.

While many indicators of the sovereign DeMPA can be applied to the SN DeMPA evaluation, the




1
 Subnational government (SNG) refers to the governments sector below national government, and include states or
provinces at second tier, and counties, cities, towns, municipalities, and districts at lower tiers.
sovereign and SN DeMPA differ in critical areas. First, SN DeMPA must reflect the specific inter-
governmental framework of a country. The central government may have enshrined fiscal and
procedural rules for SNGs to incur debt, for example, resulting in SNGs’ limited ability for fiscal
adjustment, when required. SNGs may be asked to inform or report debt management activities
to the central government. Another difference is that in many countries the central bank does
not hold the SNG bank accounts or act as a fiscal agent for SNGs. Central banks also do not
typically purchase subnational bonds for liquidity management to support monetary policy
targets. Thus, the aspects relating to clarity of separation of monetary policy operations and debt
management transactions have to be carefully analyzed for their relevance in the context of
subnational government operations.

Similarly, SNGs do not typically have market development as a clearly defined objective of their
policy. And unlike central government, SNGs frequently rely on loans from (commercial) banks
to meet the financing needs, instead of accessing the domestic capital market by issuing debt
securities. The SN DeMPA tool incorporates the above qualifications.

A subnational entity that has political power in a federal country often differs from a subnational
entity in a unitary country in terms of ex ante fiscal rules and procedural rules for incurring debt
and coordination with the central/national government. Second, different size of subnational
entities will have different implications for coordination with macroeconomic fiscal and
monetary policies.

Importantly, the SN DeMPA methodology is to be applied to individual SNG entities and not the
entire SNG sector. It applies to SNGs with the capacity to incur debt, or that plan to do so in the
short term and have debt outstanding. Therefore, even in a country where the central
government on-lends to SNGs, and SNGs cannot borrow directly from financial markets,
subnational DeMPA can still be applied to the SNG that has debt outstanding to the central
government.

SNGs can differ significantly in terms of size and degree of autonomy from central government
across countries. In some countries, SNGs are guided by borrowing rules stipulated by central or
local government legislation. For example, they may only borrow in domestic currency; borrow
in foreign currency only after approval of the central government; or borrow only for capital
expenditure, etc. Such borrowing rules have significant implications for the conduct of debt
management operations, the organization of the SNG debt management functions, and the legal
framework among other SN DeMPA indicators. Thus a key issue for the SN DeMPA exercise is the
degrees of freedom that the SNG operates in, and if the SNG operates within that framework
with an appropriate focus.

The SN DeMPA assessment must examine the borrowing frameworks for the SNG and the
intergovernmental fiscal system, including reliance on the transfers from the center, which effect
the type of debt management strategy and managerial structure that is required by the SNG for
DeM. The variability in size of debt outstanding and/or the number of loans or securities,
together with the degree of reliance on central government funding, will have a bearing on the
minimum requirements for effective DeM in some areas of the SN DeMPA exercise.

The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 6            OF   75
Notwithstanding, the minimum requirements will apply for all SNGs. However, for very small
SNGs, such as those holding a very small number of loans or securities is or whose borrowing and
debt related activities are so infrequent that it is not feasible to complete an assessment, then a
not rated or assessed (N/R) or not applicable (N/A) can be assigned, depending on the situation.
The differences between the sovereign and the SN DeMPA tool are set out in Annex 1.

2        ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY
2.1 SCOPE AND COVERAGE OF THE FRAMEWORK

The SN DeMPA covers subnational government DeM activities and closely related debt
management functions. It assesses debt incurred by municipal owned enterprises or other public
sectors entities when guaranteed by the assessed subnational government, but not otherwise.
There are different tiers or types of subnational entities which include, inter alia, states and
provinces within a federation, counties, cities, towns, municipalities, and districts. The SN DeMPA
can be applied to any tiers or types managed by their local governments and that have capacity
to incur debt. For example, if the subnational DeMPA is applied to a state within a country, then
the assessment will examine the debt management and related activities of this state. Similarly,
if the assessment is applied to a municipality within a federal or unitary country, then only the
debt management activities of the municipality will be assessed. The fiscal relations among the
tiers of the government are outside the scope of the SN DeMPA.

While evaluating SNG’s DeM activities, the assessment focuses on borrowing activities, such as
borrowing planning, issuance of subnational bonds and other debt securities, borrowing from
external creditors (through the central government), issuance of loan guarantees to support a
certain entity or projects, on-lending, and cash flow forecasting and cash balance management.
The SN DeMPA, like the sovereign tool, does not assess the ability to manage implicit contingent
liabilities, such as the capacity of the SNG to monitor and supervise the non-guaranteed
borrowings and other activities of its public enterprises.

In addition, whereas SNGs in many countries own substantial assets, such as land, public
buildings, and infrastructure assets, the SN DeMPA does not assess these assets. The scope of
the assessment is contained to the direct liabilities and explicit contingent liability side of the
subnational balance sheet and its associated cash flows.

Table 1 illustrates the scope of the SN DeMPA as limited to the SNG debt (an explicit direct
liability) and SNG loan guarantees (an explicit contingent liability).

Table 1: Scope of SN DeMPA

                        Direct liabilities                   Contingent liabilities

    Explicit Debt       E.g. debt (loans contracted and E.g. loan   guarantees   (other
                        debt securities issued)         indemnities such as deposit
                                                        insurance and other government


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 7           OF   75
                                                                       insurance schemes and uncalled
                                                                       capital are not included in the SN
                                                                       DeMPA evaluation)

     Implicit Debt (not E.g. social security schemes and E.g. default by municipal owned
     covered by SN future public pensions not enterprises including commercial
     DEMPA              mandated by law                  banks and strategically important
                                                         private firms and natural disaster



2.2 DEBT MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE INDICATORS

The SN DeMPA tool assesses 31 dimensions of subnational debt management activities (and
closely related areas), organized into 13 debt performance indicators (DPIs).2 It aims to measure
SNG DeM performance and capture the elements that are indispensable to achieving sound DeM
practices (table 2). The assessment is incorporated into a Debt Management Performance
Report.

Although the SN DeMPA does not offer recommendations for reforms or staff capacity and
institution-building needs, the performance indicators for each dimension do stipulate a
minimum level that should be met under all conditions (see section 2.3). Consequently, an
assessment showing that the SN DeMPA minimum requirements have not been met indicates an
area that should be considered a priority for reform or capacity building or both.

      Table 2 Debt Management Performance Indicators
         Number             Title
         Governance and Strategy Development
         DPI-1              Legal Framework
         DPI-2              Managerial Structure
         DPI-3              Debt Management Strategy
         DPI-4              Debt Reporting and Evaluation
         DPI-5              Audit
         Coordination with Fiscal and Budgetary Policy
         DPI-6              Coordination with Fiscal Policy and Budgetary Process




2   The sovereign DeMPA covers 33 dimensions organized into 14 DPIs.



The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 8                    OF   75
      Borrowing and Related Financing Activities
      DPI-7            Domestic Borrowing
      DPI-8            External Borrowing
      DPI-9            Loan Guarantees, On-lending and Derivatives
      Cash Flow Forecasting and Cash Balance Management
      DPI-10           Cash Flow Forecasting and Cash Balance Management
      Debt Recording and Operational Risk Management
      DPI-11           Debt Administration and Data Security
      DPI-12           Segregation of Duties, Staff Capacity, and Business Continuity
      DPI-13           Debt and Debt-Related Records


2.3 SCORING METHODOLOGY

The scoring methodology assesses each dimension and assigns a score of A, B, or C, depending
on the criteria listed. The A score reflects sound practice for that particular dimension of the
indicator. The B score lies between the minimum requirements and sound practice for that
aspect. A minimum requirement set out in C is considered the necessary condition for effective
performance under the particular dimension being measured. If the minimum requirements are
not met, then a score of D should be assigned. A score of D signals a deficiency in performance
normally requiring priority corrective action.

There are situations in which a dimension cannot be assessed. These could be because (a) the
dimension is not applicable when an activity is not undertaken (for example, there are no
derivatives or loan guarantees are not issued), in which case the term N/A (not applicable) should
be assigned; or (b) the dimension is difficult or impossible to assess due to insufficient
information, in which case a designation of N/R (not rated or assessed) should be assigned.

When criteria for a specific score require certain legislation and procedures manuals to be in
place, they must be followed. If that is not the case, these laws, manuals, or instructions should
be considered nonexistent for the purpose of the scoring. The same principle applies to the
requirement of a DeM strategy to steer daily borrowings and other DeM activities. When the
strategy document in practice is not respected, the strategy should be considered nonexistent.

2.4 SUBNATIONAL DEBT MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE REPORT

The objective of the Subnational Debt Management Performance evaluation is to provide an
assessment of subnational government DeM performance based on the indicator-led analysis in
a concise and standardized manner.

The report is a comprehensive document (25 pages to 35 pages) containing the following
structure and content:



The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 9          OF   75
   An introduction that explains the process for undertaking the assessment and preparing the
    report

   A summary assessment that describes the performance assessment of all dimensions for each
    DPI

   If it is a follow-up SN DeMPA, a section on the SNG DeM reform process that briefly
    summarizes reform measures implemented by the subnational government since the last
    assessment as well as any deterioration in the assessed areas

   A background section providing country-related contextual information, and the SNG
    macroeconomic context, pertaining to DeM performance. This section should include, when
    relevant, the degree of decentralization; fiscal rules; the main laws governing the SNG and
    the evolution of subnational borrowing framework; past debt restructuring or bailouts by the
    central government; and any constraints on the borrowing choices available to the
    subnational

   The main body of the report, which assesses the current performance of government DeM
    on the basis of the criteria set up for each DPIs



As mentioned earlier, the report is a statement of current SNG DeM performance and does not
include recommendations for reforms or action plans. If the views of the assessment team and
the subnational entity on the findings of the report differ, all opinions will be reflected in the
report.




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 10           OF   75
3        DEBT MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
3.1 GOVERNANCE AND STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT

In the context of SNG DeM, the term “governance” refers to the legal and managerial structure
that directs the operations of government debt managers (figure 1). Governance includes the
broad legal apparatus (statutory legislation, decrees, and so forth at national and subnational
level) that defines goals, authorities, and accountabilities. It also embodies the management
framework, covering issues such as the formulation and implementation of strategy, operational
procedures, quality assurance practices, and reporting responsibilities.

    Figure 1 Simplified Subnational DeM Governance Structure




The legal framework governing subnational debt activities varies across countries. In federal
political systems, states or provinces,3 usually the second tier of government structure, often
have power to enact legislation governing their borrowing activities. In many (but not all) federal




3 In some federal countries (such as Australia, Brazil, India, Nigeria and the United States), states are the second tier
government, while in other countries (such as Argentina and Canada), provinces are the second tier. For convenience,
this document refers to the second tier as states.



The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 11                             OF   75
countries, municipalities are political sub-divisions of states; hence municipal borrowing and debt
are regulated by these states. However, a country’s constitution may set limits on some aspects
of subnational borrowing activities (for example, the Indian Constitution prohibits states from
borrowing directly in foreign markets). In Brazil’s federal political system, the sovereign Fiscal
Responsibility Law governs some key aspects of states’ borrowing and debt operations.

In a unitary country, the central government typically sets the regulatory framework governing
subnational borrowing and debt management activities, while some debt-related activities may
be regulated under the constitution. However, SNGs in unitary political systems may have
considerable freedom in managing their debt activities within the broader parameters set by the
central government.

The types of legislation for subnational DeM vary across countries, and can be found through
different legislative documents at both the central and subnational level, such as the constitution,
fiscal responsibility law, budget law, public finance law, local government law, debt management
law, government securities law, etc.

Regardless of the types of legislation and the level of government passing legislation, the primary
concern of SN DeMPA is whether the legal framework clearly specifies the authorization to
borrow, purposes of borrowing, debt management objectives, types of debt instruments
allowed, and procedural rules for DeM strategy development.

The principal DeM entity referred to in this document is the dedicated SNG entity whose prime
responsibility is to undertake debt transactions, formulate and execute the DeM strategy. Within
this structure, it is acceptable that some DeM activities are conducted by other entities as agents
for the principal DeM entity. In these cases, the rights and obligations of the parties should be
clarified, preferably in a formalized agency agreement, in local legislation, or in both.

Some small SNGs may find it efficient to combine certain DeM functions, such as back-office
functions and the risk control function, with similar functions not directly related to debt
management, particularly when financing transactions are few and infrequent. This would
provide the scale to facilitate the segregation of responsibilities described in the DPI on
segregation of duties (DPI-12), e.g. a treasury back office would process other transactions as
well, such as payables and receivables, or a risk monitoring and compliance function could cover
all risks and procedures in a finance department, not just those relating to debt.

Since many SNGs do not have a principal DeM entity, the SNG DeMPA is neutral with regard to
the structure of DeM entities.4 If an SNG has multiple DeM entities, however, it is essential that




4   Only the “A” score in dimension 1 of DPI-2 (Managerial Structure) requires the existence of a principal DeM entity,


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 12                            OF   75
these entities closely coordinate their DeM activities through a coordinating mechanism, such as
a committee, or with the entity leading the coordinating effort. This activity is reflected in the
governance indicators.

In many SNGs whose daily DeM activities have been delegated to a principal DeM entity or to
different DeM entities, the local minister of finance, treasurer or equivalent political position will
commonly retain the power to formally approve any borrowing and to sign the loan agreements.
This approach is acceptable within the structure described earlier, provided no undue political
interference exists.

DPI-1             LEGAL FRAMEWORK

Rationale and background

Dimension 1: The existence, coverage, and content of the legal framework on authorization to
borrow and undertake other DeM activities and to issue loan guarantees

The rationale for DPI-1 is to ensure that the legal framework clearly assigns authority to borrow
at the SN level, undertake debt-related transactions (such as debt exchanges and currency and
interest rate swaps, where applicable), and issue loan guarantees.

The legal framework for SNG DeM comprises both primary legislation (laws enacted with
approval of the parliament or congress or local legislature) and secondary or delegated legislation
(executive orders, decrees, ordinances, and so forth) determined by the executive branch of
government.

The legal framework should include the following:

        Clear authorization to borrow and, where applicable, undertake debt-related transactions
         (for example, debt exchanges and currency and interest rate swaps)

        Specified borrowing purposes

        Clear DeM objectives

        Requirement to develop a DeM strategy

        Mandatory annual reporting of DeM activities covering evaluation of outcomes against




in line with sound international practice.


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 13              OF   75
       stated objectives and the approved strategy to a local assembly or similar body

      Clear authorization to issue loan guarantee (where applicable).

The following sequence is recommended to assess whether the minimum requirements have
been met:

   1. Check the legal decision-making process for borrowing in the domestic and external
      markets, such as issuing debt securities (where applicable) and concluding common loan
      agreements and debt-related transactions. Borrowing authorities often are vested in the
      local assembly (or similar body), the executive council, and the local equivalent to the
      minister of finance. In some countries, the SNG must receive central government approval
      for any or certain types of borrowing.
   2. Once the approval process has been clarified, and assuming this process is adhered to,
      check the signing of necessary documentation pertaining to particular borrowing.
      Commonly, some official (or officials) has the authority to sign such documents on behalf
      of the government. The governor or local minister of finance (or his or her equivalent)
      often has this power through expressed authority in law or in his or her capacity as head
      of the SNG or the SNG ministry or unit that is responsible for borrowing and other DeM
      activities. For the loans (usually external loans) provided under the guarantee of central
      government or on-lent by the central government to the SNG, there should be a
      guarantee or subsidiary loan agreement or memorandum in place defining the terms and
      conditions of guarantee or on-lending. A similar approach is recommended for checking
      the decision-making process for undertaking debt-related transactions and for issuing
      loan guarantees.

To meet the minimum requirements, legislation also must specify the purposes for which the SN
authorities can borrow. The main reason to include borrowing purposes in the legislation is to
safeguard against borrowing for speculative investments or to finance operating deficit, or to
finance expenditures that have neither been included in the annual budget nor approved by the
local assembly or equivalent, in some other fashion. In such cases, SNGs may be forced to raise
taxes or cut expenditures to service the debt contracted to finance such expenditures or require
central government bailout. All relevant laws should be referred to in the SN DeMPA report.

Examples of borrowing purposes found in legislation are:

      to finance capital expenditure only
      to finance budget and cash balance deficits
      to finance investment projects approved by the local assembly or equivalent
      to refinance and pre-finance outstanding debt
      to finance honoring of triggered guarantees
      to mitigate the effects caused by natural or environmental disasters

For practical reasons, however, the executive sometimes delegates the borrowing authority to


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 14         OF   75
implementing entities (that is, the DeM entity or entities), which contract on behalf of the SNG.
This delegation is found in secondary legislation, such as executive orders, decrees, ordinances,
and so forth.

A clear line of delegation is important both for internal control and for due diligence. All creditors
and lenders require a legally binding and enforceable contract with the SNG in its capacity as the
borrower. The same parameters apply to the issue of loan guarantees and debt-related
transactions such as swaps.

Another rationale for DPI-1 is to ensure that the legal framework, at least for the higher scores,
also includes (a) clear DeM objectives; (b) a requirement to develop a medium-term DeM
strategy; and (c) a reporting requirement to the local assembly on DeM activities and loan
guarantees.

Common DeM objectives are:

      to meet the SNG’s borrowing requirements; and
      to minimize the medium- to long-term cost, while keeping the risks in the debt portfolio
       at acceptable levels.

These objectives may help to anchor DeM strategies. It is preferable and increasingly common to
specify the SNG’s DeM objectives in the legislation.

Once the DeM objectives are set, they must be translated into an operational strategy that
defines the medium-term framework under which the SNG will achieve its DeM objectives. In
accordance with sound international practice, a requirement in the legislation to develop a DeM
strategy has also been included in this indicator for the highest score.

Reporting to the local assembly increases transparency and strengthens accountability. This
reporting requirement is commonly found in any policy-based legislation that includes longer-
term objectives.

The key requirement for the evaluation of this dimension is to review the legislation to see
whether it meets the requirements of the dimensions to be assessed. It is also important to
determine the extent of adherence to the legislation, since it may be sound but not fully
enforced. If legislation is not followed, the following indicator should be read as if the legislation
were not in place.

Dimension 2: Extent of a legal limit for direct access to financial resources from the central bank

The rationale for DPI-1, dimension 2 is to ensure that any borrowing by the SNG from the central
bank is legally restricted, if allowed. Monetary financing of government deficits, whether by
central or subnational governments, imposes undesirable constraints on monetary policy
operations by increasing the money supply.



The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 15              OF   75
In some countries, the central bank may lend funds to the private sector and SNGs, provided
these borrowers pledge collateral as security for the loans, and on terms determined by the
central bank. These secured loans are not considered monetary financing in the SNG DeMPA
methodology. Any right of access to financing from the central bank is normally regulated under
central bank law.

Dimensions to be assessed

The following dimensions should be assessed according to the requirements laid out in table
3:

   1. The existence, coverage, and content of the legal framework for authorization to borrow,
      undertake other DeM activities, and issue loan guarantees
   2. The extent of a limit to direct access to financing from the central bank

   Table 3 Assessment and Scoring of Legal Framework
     Score          Requirements
     A              1. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, the legislation
                        requires development of a medium-term DeM strategy and
                        mandatory annual reporting to the local assembly or similar body
                        covering evaluation of outcomes against the approved DeM
                        strategy.
                    2. Direct access to financing from the central bank is —by law—
                        prohibited or limited to emergency situations in which other funding
                        operations are not viable and, when used, the tenor is limited to two
                        weeks.
     B              1. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, the
                        legislation includes clear DeM objectives and requires annual
                        reporting to the local assembly or similar body covering the DeM
                        activities and issued loan guarantees.
                    2. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, access to
                        financing from the central bank is—by law—limited to a tenor of not
                        more than three months.
     C              1. Within the framework of the national constitution and restrictions
                        imposed by the central government, the legislation provides clear
                        authorization to borrow and to issue new debt, to undertake debt-
                        related transactions (where applicable), and to issue loan guarantees
                        (where applicable), all on behalf of the SNG. In addition, the
                        legislation specifies the purposes for which the executive branch of
                        government can borrow.
                    2. Access of the SNG to financing from the central bank, if applicable, has
                        a ceiling limit imposed by legislation.
     D              1. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
                    2. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 16          OF   75
Supporting documentation for DPI-I

       A copy of all primary legislation, which should be available on the websites or in print
        manuals of the central government, subnational government, ministry of finance,
        principal or other DeM entities, or central bank
       A copy of all secondary legislation, which should be available on the websites or in print
        manuals of the central government, subnational government, ministry of finance,
        principal and other DeM entities, or central bank
       If the list of legislation is extensive, it may be sufficient to obtain a copy of the most
        significant or relevant laws, together with a list of all secondary legislation
       Copies of reports (including debt reports, just-in-time reports for policymakers, and
        copies of annual budget documents) that fulfill the legal requirements
Indicative questions to ask

       Has the central government imposed restrictions on SNG borrowings? If so, what are
        those restrictions, which legislation includes these restrictions, and what are the relevant
        sections or clauses?

       Is there clear authorization in legislation to approve borrowings and loan guarantees on
        behalf of the SNG assigned to the local assembly (or similar body), the governor, the
        executive council or directly to the local minister of finance (or equivalent)? If so, which
        legislation provides authorization, and what are the relevant sections or clauses?

       Who signs the loan documents and other necessary documents related to a particular
        borrowing? Which legislation provides this authorization, and what are the relevant
        sections or clauses?

       Is there clear authorization in legislation to undertake debt-related transactions and to
        issue loan guarantees on behalf of the SNG? If so, which legislation provides
        authorization, and what are the relevant sections or clauses?

       Which sections or clauses in the legislation cover specified borrowing purposes; clear
        DeM objectives; a requirement to develop a medium-term DeM strategy; annual
        mandatory reporting to the local assembly or similar body covering DeM activities and,
        where applicable, issued loan guarantees? Has there been any instance in the past five
        years in which the laws have not been followed? If so, what were the instances, why
        were the laws not followed, and what were the consequences?

       Does the SNG have an overdraft or ways and means facility with the central bank? If so:

        o Is there a ceiling imposed by legislation, and what is the ceiling?

        o Does the legislation impose a tenor on the duration of this facility, and what is the


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 17             OF   75
          tenor?

       o Has the SNG used the facility, and if so, how often, for what amounts, and for what
         tenors?

       o When does the facility have to be reduced to a zero balance?

      How well are borrowing and transactions validated against the medium-term DeM
       strategy?

      A copy of the agency agreement between the SNG principal DeM entity and the central
       bank (if such an agreement exists)




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 18      OF   75
DPI-2             MANAGERIAL STRUCTURE

Rationale and background

    Dimension 1: The managerial structure for SNG borrowings and debt-related transactions
The rationale for DPI-2, dimension 1 is to ensure that the managerial structure for borrowing
and debt-related transactions5 is effective and includes a clear division between:

    -    the political level, namely the local assembly (or similar body), the executive council, the
         governor or mayor, and the local minister of finance, who sets the overall SNG DeM
         objectives and decides on the risk level that the government is willing to tolerate by
         approving the medium-term DeM strategy; and
    -    the execution level, which includes the entities responsible for implementing policy
         decisions and DeM strategy, and therefore reflects the organization at the execution level
         of DeM policy within the SNG.

The division between the political and execution levels enables policymakers to make major
decisions about the overall volume of indebtedness and the acceptable risks in the debt
portfolio—in terms of their effect on the budget, taxes, government spending programs, or other
such fiscal indicators, while allowing technical professionals to seek the optimum risk-adjusted
outcome within those parameters. This separation helps diminish the risk of fiscal or budgetary
policy dominance over prudent debt management, for example, by lowering the debt interest
cost in times of budgetary constraint at the expense of higher risk in the debt portfolio.

The evaluation of this dimension also includes assessment of undue political interference. An
example of such interference is when a local minister of finance or equivalent presses the debt
manager to borrow in the short end of the yield curve or in a low-coupon currency to reduce the
short-term debt service cost at the expense of an increased risk in the debt portfolio that goes
against an approved strategy. Other types of behavior that should be avoided at the political level
are (a) involvement in the discussions of any cutoff price after the bids have been received in an
auction of government securities; (b) selection of borrowing currencies in single loan
transactions; and (c) selection of the lead manager and banks for syndicated securities issuance
in the domestic capital markets, or through loans from select commercial banks.

This DPI dimension also introduced a requirement at the B level that “the borrowings and debt -
related transactions be steered by a formalized medium-term DeM strategy.” The criteria for
evaluating whether such a strategy exists are described in DPI-3.1 (“Debt Management Strategy”)




5
 Debt-related transactions are transactions in the market, such as swaps to change the risk profile of the debt portfolio,
or debt buybacks of illiquid debt securities.


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 19                              OF   75
and apply at the C level. This implies that at least C is required in DPI-3.1 to qualify for a B in this
dimension.

Although recommended, the SNG DeMPA tool at the B and C levels does not require the
establishment of a principal DeM entity or a debt management office (DMO). If the SNG has
multiple DeM entities, however, it is essential that they regularly share information and
periodically coordinate their DeM activities through formal mechanisms. One of the entities can
be selected to facilitate coordination, or a coordination committee can be set up to share
information at regular meetings. Coordination is essential to avoid over-borrowing and to keep
track of debt portfolio risks. This aspect is particularly important when DeM activities are steered
by a medium-term DeM strategy and an annual borrowing plan.

To receive the highest score on this dimension, there must be a principal DeM entity that is
responsible for undertaking all borrowings and debt-related transactions. Under such a structure,
it is acceptable if other entities act as agents for the principal DeM entity to perform some DeM
activities. In these cases, the rights and obligations of the parties should be clarified, preferably
in a formalized agency agreement, in secondary legislation, or in both.

Dimension 2: The managerial structure for preparation and issuance of SNG loan guarantees

The rationale for DPI-2, dimension 2 is to ensure that the managerial structure for preparation
and issuance of SNG loan guarantees is effective. Loan guarantees extended to third parties are
explicit contingent liabilities that typically are issued to extend financial support to a certain
beneficiary or project or to a specific sector of the economy. Since this is a political decision, the
use of the guarantees can be decided at the political level. However, as with debt transactions, it
is desirable to leave overall responsibility for the preparation and the actual issuance of the loan
guarantees to one entity, that is, a principal guarantee entity responsible for

   independently assessing and pricing the credit risk;
   mitigating the financial effects of a default or trigger event;
   monitoring the risk during the term of the loan guarantee;
   coordinating the borrowings of the guarantee beneficiaries with SNG borrowing; and
    recording and reporting these guarantees properly.

Under this structure, it is acceptable if certain loan guarantees are issued by other entities as
agents for the principal guarantee entity. For example, a designated guarantee entity may issue
individual loan guarantees to support farmers under a certain guarantee scheme. In these cases,
the rights and obligations of the parties should be clarified, preferably in a formalized agency
agreement, in the secondary legislation, or both.

It is also desirable that decisions on individual guarantees be steered by a formal SN government
policy or framework document. A formal SNG policy or framework can provide transparency on
which sectors of the economy or types of projects are to be supported by guarantees, and thus
helps to reduce the risk of ad hoc decisions or political favoritism. The policy or framework
document could also provide criteria for assessing eligibility, including thresholds for credit risk.

The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 20               OF   75
A designated procedures manual may include the processes to be followed (such as those listed
earlier as responsibilities of the principal guarantee entity).

Some SNGs mandate the principal DeM entity to prepare and issue the loan guarantees once the
political decision to support a certain beneficiary or project by guarantees has been made. Apart
from the technical skill normally found at the principal DeM entity, this approach also ensures
effective coordination with SNG borrowing operations. In SNGs with few staff members
adequately trained in finance, this managerial structure is particularly relevant for better
coordination and beneficial use of scarce technical skills.

In the case of a more fragmented managerial structure, it is important that the entities in charge
of preparation and issuance of loan guarantees regularly exchange information and closely
coordinate their respective activities both between themselves and with the DeM entity or
entities. This should be done through a formalized institutional arrangement whereby
information flows are regularly shared.

In some instances, the legal framework authorizes the SNG to issue loan guarantees, but no
guarantees have been issued for an extended period of time (more than five years). In such cases,
the score N/A should be applied.

In the SN DeMPA tool, loan guarantees do not include export credit guarantees or other explicit
or implicit contingent liabilities.

Dimensions to be assessed

The following dimensions should be assessed according to the requirements laid out in table 4:

         1. The managerial structure for SNG borrowings and debt-related transactions

         2. The managerial structure for preparation and issuance of SNG loan guarantees


   Table 4 Assessment and Scoring of Managerial Structure
     Score          Requirements
     A              1. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, borrowings and
                        debt-related transactions are undertaken only by the principal DeM
                        entity.
                    2. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, loan guarantees
                        are prepared and issued by a single guarantee entity, which may be
                        the principal DeM entity.
     B              1. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, the
                        borrowings and debt-related transactions are steered by a
                        formalized medium-term DeM strategy and undertaken without
                        undue political interference.
                    2. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, the
                        decisions are steered by a formalized guarantee framework or

The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 21           OF   75
                             government policy.
       C                 1. Borrowings and debt-related transactions are undertaken either by
                             the principal DeM entity or, if there is no principal DeM entity, by
                             DeM entities that regularly exchange debt information and closely
                             coordinate their respective activities through formal institutional
                             mechanisms.
                         2. If applicable, loan guarantees are prepared and issued by one or
                             more SNG entities that regularly exchange information and closely
                             coordinate their respective activities through formal mechanisms
                             among themselves and with the DeM entity or entities.
       D                 1. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
                         2. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
Supporting documentation

          The organizational chart and secondary legislation defining the entities involved in SNG
           DeM and the preparation and issuance of loan guarantees and their respective roles and
           responsibilities
          A copy of the documented and approved guarantee framework or government policy
Indicative questions to ask

          Which entities are responsible for SNG DeM activities? What are their respective roles
           and responsibilities?
          What is the process, and which entity is responsible, for negotiating and contracting new
           debt (concessional, multilateral, bilateral, commercial, domestic, etc.)?
          What role does the local assembly or similar body, the executive council, and local
           minister of finance play in any new borrowing, particularly with regard to the
           authorization to borrow and during the contract negotiation and transacting process?
          If there are two or more DeM entities, what debt and other information are exchanged
           between them? How frequently is this information exchanged? Do the entities closely
           coordinate their respective activities to avoid excessive borrowing and keep track of the
           portfolio risks, and what mechanism is used for this coordination?
          Is there a documented and approved policy or framework document that specifies criteria
           for deciding whether guarantees are to be granted and the processes to be followed?
          Who is responsible for preparation and issuance of loan guarantees in SNG? How are
           these loan guarantees prepared?
          If there are two or more guarantee entities, what information is exchanged between
           them? How frequently is this information exchanged? Do the entities regularly coordinate
           their respective activities to avoid inconsistencies in approach (for example, thresholds
           for credit risk)? What mechanisms are used for coordination purposes?
          Are guaranteed borrowings by the beneficiary of loan guarantees coordinated with SNG
           borrowing, and if so, how?




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 22             OF   75
DPI-3          DEBT MANAGEMENT STRATEGY

Rationale and background

Dimension 1: The quality of the DeM strategy document

The rationale for DPI3, dimension 1 is to ensure that the SNG has prepared and approved a
medium-term DeM strategy that is based on the longer-term DeM objectives and set within the
context of the SNG’s macroeconomic assumptions and budget framework.

Design of a subnational DeM strategy should be separated from a debt sustainability analysis
(DSA), although the information from each is complementary and provides essential information
to debt managers. The subnational DSA is a key fiscal and budgetary policy tool to assess the
long- or medium-term sustainability of the future debt path under certain set of macroeconomic
assumptions and fiscal policy, while the DeM strategy is a plan that the government intends to
implement over the medium term to achieve a desired composition of its debt portfolio, which
captures its preferences regarding the cost-risk trade-offs. It operationalizes the DeM objectives
and has a strong focus on managing the risk exposure embedded in the debt portfolio —
specifically, potential variations in the cost of debt servicing and its impact on the budget. A DeM
strategy also indicates how cost and risk characteristics vary with changes of composition of the
debt portfolio. A DeM strategy should cover all SNG existing debt and projected borrowing
(including from the central bank, if applicable) with a minimum of three years’ scope. It should
be reviewed and updated annually to assess whether the assumptions still hold in light of
changed circumstances. Such a review should be undertaken preferably as part of the budget
process, and if the existing strategy is viewed as appropriate, the rationale for its continuation
should be stated.

The content of the strategy and risk indicators will vary depending on the stage of economic
development, the sources of SNG funding, the breadth and depth of the local debt market, and
the transactions used to manage SNG debt. The DeM strategy document preferably includes the
following:

   DeM objectives and scope (categories of debt covered and strategy timeframe)

   Description of the market risks being managed (currency, interest rate, and refinancing or
    rollover risks), and historical context for the debt portfolio

   Description of the future environment for SN DeM, including fiscal and debt projections;
    assumptions about interest and exchange rates; and constraints on portfolio choice, including
    those relating to market development

   Description of the guidelines to indicate the direction of key indicators that are expected to
    evolve over time in line with the DeM objectives

   Description of the analysis undertaken to generate the recommended DeM strategy,


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 23            OF   75
    clarifying the assumptions used and limitations of the analysis

   Recommended strategy and its rationale.



The following indicators are most likely to be assessed in the DeM strategy:

   Total debt service under different scenarios, particularly sensitivity to interest rate and
    exchange rates volatility

   Maturity profile of the debt under different scenarios

   Strategic benchmarks, such as:

       o ratio of foreign currency debt to domestic debt;

       o currency composition of foreign currency debt;

       o minimum average maturity of the debt;

       o maximum share of debt that is allowed to fall due during one and two budget years;

       o maximum ratio of short-term (up to one year) to long-term debt;

       o maximum ratio of floating rate to fixed rate debt; and

       o minimum average time to interest rate re-fixing.

It is noted that all of these risk-based parameters may not be equally relevant to the various
situations and debt composition of the SNG.

The recommendations of the DeM strategy should specify targets and ranges for key risk
indicators of the portfolio and the financing program over the projected horizon. As an interim
step, it would be sufficient to express the strategy as guidelines indicating the direction in which
certain key indicators are expected to evolve, for example, the strategy may contain a statement
that “the amount of local currency debt maturing within 12 months shall be reduced ”.

The strategy essentially is a decision on the SNG’s preferred risk tolerance that must be updated
to reflect changed circumstances. DeM activities should be steered by the strategy. Therefore,
an annual update of the DeM strategy is required to receive the score C. An out-of-date or
ineffective strategy is treated as nonexistent.

To receive higher scores (A or B), the target ranges for the risk indicators should be based on an
analysis of costs and risks. This analysis should provide an understanding of the evolution of debt
service flows and borrowing alternatives under the expected values of future interest and
exchange rates. An analysis of less favorable environments in the domestic and external debt

The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 24            OF   75
market, including interest rate and exchange rate shocks, is also required. Such an undertaking
should assist debt managers in selecting realistic ranges for the chosen risk indicators. A further
refinement in the cost-risk analysis could be achieved through improved selection of relevant
future interest- and exchange-rate scenarios, including shocks that may have occurred in the
past.

SNGs with significant financial assets should take these into account when conducting cost and
risk analysis. For instance, the exposure to currency risk could be significantly mitigated for
governments with foreign currency assets. The manner in which assets can be included in the
analysis will depend, among other factors, on the horizon for holding such assets and the SNG’s
ability to use them to hedge the risks of the gross debt portfolio. In addition to the cost-risk
analysis and the asset position, the DeM strategy should be consistent with the macroeconomic
framework and the domestic market development level (see Medium-Term Debt Strategy
(MTDS) Guidance Note6).

Dimension 2: The decision-making process and publication of the DeM strategy

The rationale for DPI-3, dimension 2 is to ensure that the SNG has a robust decision-making
process for strategy development, and that the strategy is published.

A DeM strategy should be developed in an open and transparent manner. The principal DeM
entity (or DeM entities together) prepares a strategy proposal; and the executive council, the
governor or mayor, or SNG political decision-making body approves the strategy document. For
extra quality assurance, the SNG may set up a specialized advisory board to comment on the
draft strategy before it is approved.

Although the strategy should be specified for the medium term (with three to five years scope),
it should be reviewed annually to assess The DeM strategy should be an integral part of the
budget preparation process. The budget document provides the sources of financing, and these
should be aligned with the analysis and recommendations expressed in the debt strategy. The
annual borrowing plan should thus cohere with the medium-term debt strategy.

Once the strategy has been finally approved, it must steer the borrowings and other DeM
activities; that is, the strategy provides guidance on the current DeM activities. If that does not
occur, the following indicators should be read as if the strategy were nonexistent.

The following dimensions should be assessed according to the requirements laid out in table 5:




6
    http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/debt/brief/mtds



The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 25            OF   75
       1. The quality of the DeM strategy document
       2. The decision-making process and publication of the DeM strategy

   Table 5 Assessment and Scoring of DeM Strategy
     Score          Requirements
     A              1. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, the target ranges
                        for the risk indicators are based on comprehensive analyses of costs
                        and risks that identify the vulnerability of the debt portfolio to
                        shocks in market rates, and these analyses are clearly described and
                        contain clear explanations of the assumptions used and limitations
                        used in the analyses.
                    2. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, the annual plan
                        for the aggregate borrowing position is based on the approved
                        strategy.
     B              1. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, the DeM
                        strategy has realistic target ranges for indicators of the interest rate,
                        refinancing, and foreign currency risks, reflecting specific country
                        and subnational contexts.
                    2. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, the strategy
                        is well integrated in the SNG budget document and the medium-
                        term expenditure or budget framework.
     C              1. A medium-term debt management strategy is in place covering all
                        existing and projected SNG debt, based on the DeM objectives. The
                        strategy is expressed at least as guidelines for the preferred direction
                        of evolution of specific indicators for interest rate, refinancing, and
                        foreign currency risks.
                    2. The strategy proposal is prepared by the principal DeM entity or, if
                        there is no principal DeM entity, jointly by the DeM entities. The
                        strategy is formally approved; and the strategy is made publicly
                        available, including through publication on official website(s) and in
                        print media.
     D              1. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
                    2. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
Supporting documentation

      A copy of the most recent DeM strategy
      Monitoring reports of DeM strategy implementation
      The document that defines process of strategy formulation and approval
Indicative questions to ask

   Has the SNG prepared and approved a medium-term DeM strategy? If so:
    How was the strategy produced?



The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 26            OF   75
      Which SNG DeM entities or people were responsible for producing the strategy, and what
       were their respective roles?

      Which entity or person authorized or approved the strategy?

      What analysis was undertaken in formulating the strategy?

      How was the analysis undertaken, which entity or person was responsible for setting
       economic and budget parameters, and which entity or person was responsible for debt
       forecasts?

      Does the strategy cover the items required to meet the minimum requirements?

      Was the strategy made publicly available? If so, when was it published, and in what
       format?

      How has the strategy been implemented?

      How often has the strategy been updated?




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 27       OF   75
DPI-4          DEBT REPORTING AND EVALUATION

Rationale and background

Dimension 1: Publication of a statistical bulletin on SNG debt, loan guarantees, and debt-
related operations

The rationale for DPI-4, dimension 1 is to ensure that the SNG periodically prepares and publishes
a debt statistical bulletin (or its equivalent).

A debt statistical bulletin or its equivalent covering domestic and external SNG debt, loan
guarantees, and debt-related operations ensures transparency of the debt portfolio and
outstanding loan guarantees. Its information is vital for investors in the SNG debt. Such a
statistical bulletin may be published in print media, posted on SNG official websites, or both. The
bulletin should be published at least annually (preferably quarterly or semiannually) and provide
information on SNG debt stocks (by creditor, instrument, currency, interest rate basis, original,
and residual maturity); debt flows (principal and interest payments); debt ratios and indicators
such as the share of debt to SN GDP, share of debt to revenue, share of debt service to revenue;
and basic risk measures of the debt portfolio. Loan guarantees should also be decomposed by
creditor, instrument, currency, interest rate basis, original, and residual maturity, and clarify how
much of the loan has already been amortized. Some basic risk measures on guaranteed debt
should be provided, including ratios of guaranteed loans in foreign currency to total guaranteed
debt; and the proportion of the guarantees triggered over the past five years, among others.

At higher rating levels, a debt statistical bulletin or its equivalent should cover the following risk
measures:

   Share of fixed rate to floating rate debt

   Share of short-term to long-term debt

   Average time to interest rate refixing

   Share of interest rate to be refixed within one year

   Share of foreign currency to domestic currency debt

   Currency composition of foreign currency debt

   Average time to maturity of the debt

   Redemption profile of the debt

   Share of debt to be refinanced within one year




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 28              OF   75
Dimension 2: Reporting to local assembly and central government

The rationale for DPI-4, dimension 2 is to ensure that the SNG is accountable for its DeM
operations to the local assembly or similar body and to the citizens by providing frequent reports
on DeM and debt-related operations and making these reports publicly available; and reports
regularly to the central government if required by law and other legislation. This approach
promotes transparency in DeM operations and good governance through greater accountability
for the substantial responsibilities that are delegated to DeM entities.

In addition to providing full information about public debt outstanding, accountability is
strengthened by submitting a detailed annual report evaluating the DeM operations, including
borrowing, liability management operations such as debt exchanges, loan guarantees extended,
and on-lending made to the local assembly or similar body, and then publishing the report on the
SNG’s website. These actions help to insure that DeM operations have been executed in
accordance with any objectives set by the legislature and with the DeM strategy that was
approved by the executive.

The report should include enough information to enable the local assembly or similar body to
evaluate how successful the DeM operations —including new borrowings and debt-related
transactions—have been in meeting the DeM objectives. If there is a principal DeM entity, this
report is prepared and sent to the legislature by this entity; if there is no principal DeM entity,
the DeM entities prepare this report jointly and submit it to the parliament or congress. In either
instance, the report should be published on the respective entities’ websites.

To receive higher scores on this dimension, the report should include information on the chosen
DeM strategy, as well as an assessment of compliance with it and an explanation of potential
deviations.

If there are no explicit objectives or strategy, it is possible to meet the threshold of a C score by
producing an annual report that thoroughly accounts for DeM operations during the period,
together with the rationale for those operations. The rationale could include how DeM
operations contributed to the achievement of budget and fiscal objectives and policies. The
report should also include reference to the management of risks (outlined in dimension 1), cost-
effectiveness, and the judgments made in trading off cost against risk.

For scores of C and B, the annual report may be part of another document, such as a report on
budget execution or notes to financial statements, provided that it fully addresses the areas
identified in this description. Since in some countries, SNGs are required by law or secondary
legislation to report to the central government on debt and guarantee, this threshold also
ensures such statutory requirement is met.

Dimensions to be assessed

The following dimensions should be assessed according to the requirements laid out in table 6:



The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 29             OF   75
       1. Quality and timeliness of the publication of a debt statistical bulletin (or its equivalent)
          covering SNG debt, loan guarantees, and debt-related operations

       2. The presentation and content of an annual evaluation report to the local assembly or
          similar body on DeM activities and performance and report to central government (if
          applicable)



   Table 6 Assessment and Scoring of Debt Reporting and Evaluation
     Score          Requirements
     A              1. The requirement for score B are met. In addition, a debt statistical
                        bulletin (or its equivalent), which includes main basic risk measures
                        of the debt portfolio, is published at least semiannually, with debt
                        data that are not more than two months old at the date of
                        publication.
                    2. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, the stand-alone
                        annual report contains an assessment of: (a) outcomes against
                        stated DeM objectives; (b) the chosen DeM strategy and rationale
                        behind it; and (c) compliance with that strategy.
     B              1. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, a debt
                        statistical bulletin (or its equivalent), which includes main basic risk
                        measures of the debt portfolio, is published at least annually, with
                        debt data that are not more than six months old at the date of
                        publication.
                    2. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, the annual
                        report (or section of a wider report) contains an assessment of how
                        the SNG DeM activities have complied with the SNG’s documented
                        and approved DeM strategy.
     C              1. A debt statistical bulletin (or its equivalent), with the main categories
                        listed in the “rationale and background” section of this DPI (with the
                        exception of the basic risk measures of the debt portfolio), is
                        published annually, with debt data that are not more than six
                        months old at the date of publication.
                    2. A report (or section of a longer report) providing details of outstanding
                        SN debt and DeM operations is submitted annually to the local
                        assembly or similar body and is also made publicly available. If
                        required, regular reports to central government on SN debt are
                        provided.
     D              1. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
                    2. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
Supporting documentation

      A copy of the most recent publication of the stocks and flows of the external and domestic


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 30              OF   75
       debt of the SNG
      A copy of the most recent debt statistical bulletin or its equivalent
      Copies of the annual evaluation reports
      Copies of the report to central government if required
      Copies of other reports (for example, the budgetary implementation report), which
       include details of DeM activities
Indicative questions to ask

      What is the process, and who is responsible for preparing, a debt statistical bulletin or
       equivalent debt report? How frequently is this debt information published? Is it publicly
       available? If so, how and in what format?
      Does the debt statistical bulletin or equivalent include:
       o information on SNG debt stocks (by creditor, instrument, currency, interest rate basis,
          and residual maturity);

       o debt flows (principal and interest payments);

       o debt ratios or indicators or both; and

       o basic risk measures of the debt portfolio?

      What other debt reports are produced by the SNG? Are they publicly available? If so, how
       and in what format?
      What is the time period or lag from the debt reporting period to the period when reliable
       debt reports are produced? What validation measures are used to ensure the accuracy of
       these reports?
      Who is responsible for authorizing the release of these reports?
      Is an annual report on DeM activities submitted to the local assembly or similar body, and
       is the report detailed enough to form the basis for an evaluation of the borrowing and
       other DeM activities?
      Does this report contain (a) an evaluation of how the DeM activities have complied with
       the SNG’s DeM strategy; (b) the chosen DeM strategy and rationale behind it; and (c) an
       assessment of outcomes against the stated DeM strategy?

      Is the report made available publicly?

      Is the SNG required to report to the central government? If yes:

       o How often?

       o What information is required to be included in the report?

       o Is the report regularly submitted?




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 31          OF   75
DPI-5          AUDIT

Rationale and background

Dimension 1: Frequency and comprehensiveness of financial audits; compliance audits;
performance audits on the effectiveness and efficiency of SNG DeM operations, including the
internal control system and its effectiveness; and publication of the external audit reports

The rationale for DPI-5, dimension 1 is to ensure that the DeM activities, policies, and operations
are subject to scrutiny by the external and internal audit bodies.

Accountability for SNG DeM is strengthened by regular external and internal audits of SNG DeM
activities in relation to (a) the reliability and integrity of financial and operational information;
(b) the effectiveness and efficiency of DeM operations, including compliance with the stated DeM
objectives and strategy (if available); (c) the effectiveness of the internal control system; and
(d) compliance with laws and regulations.

Standards of external audit practice should be consistent with international standards, such as
those set by the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI).
Transparency and the accountability framework for DeM can also be strengthened by public
disclosure of external audit reviews of DeM operations.

Financial audits seek to assess the risk of material misstatement of SNG debt information
disclosed in financial reports, whether due to error or fraud, to issue an opinion on the fairness
of the SNG debt assertions.

Compliance audits first identify the direct and materially significant provisions of laws and
regulations, and then perform tests to determine whether DeM has complied with the legal
provisions.

Performance audits are audits of the effectiveness and efficiency of the DeM operations. The
effectiveness aspect involves checking the achievement of the stated objectives and the actual
impact of activities against their intended impact. It also includes an examination of internal
controls and management of operational risks. The efficiency aspect looks at the efficient use of
resources, and includes an examination of information systems as well as performance measures
and monitoring arrangements. In performance audits, the auditors first identify materially
important areas of DeM that can be examined, and then select specific areas where the audit is
likely to add significant value in promoting effectiveness, efficiency, and economy.

Audits of the internal control system involve assessing whether the control system is properly
designed to (a) provide reasonable assurance for the SNG to achieve its DeM objectives, and (b)
prevent fraud within the organization. Internal control systems that prevent fraud involve, for
example, organizing a DeM unit based on segregation of duties, having sound information
technology (IT) security, and having a risk control and compliance unit that frequently monitors
adherence to these internal rules.


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 32             OF   75
Sound practice suggests that the transparency of DeM operations is enhanced when the results
of external audits are made available to the public.

Dimension 2: Degree of commitment to address the outcomes from the audits

The rationale for DPI-5, dimension 2 is to ensure that the relevant SNG decision makers are
committed to address the outcomes from the audits.

The goal of external and internal auditing is to promote accountability in debt contracting and
management. Mechanisms should ensure appropriate responses from relevant decision makers
following audit reports and the adoption of corrective measures to ensure that the outcomes
from audits are addressed.

To assess requirements under this DPI, meetings should be held with representatives of both the
external auditor (normally, this is the local office of the auditor general), and the internal audit
function covering SNG DeM activities (normally, this is the internal audit function of the local
ministry of finance or its equivalent).

Dimensions to be assessed

The following dimensions should be assessed according to the requirements laid out in table 7:

          1. Frequency of financial audits, compliance audits, and performance audits of the
             effectiveness and efficiency of SNG DeM operations, including the internal control
             system, as well as publication of the external audit reports

          2. Degree of commitment to address the outcomes from the audits



Table 7 Assessment and Scoring of DeM Audits

      Score            Requirements
      A                1. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, the external
                           performance audit reports are made available to the public within
                           six months of completion of the audit.
                       2. The requirements for score B are met. All actions have been
                           implemented within the time line.
      B                1. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, there are
                           regular external performance audits as well as internal audits of the
                           effectiveness of the internal control system used for the SNG DeM.
                       2. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, there is an
                           action plan specifying corrective measures and a time line to address
                           the recommendations. Some actions have been implemented.
      C                1. An external financial audit of DeM transactions is undertaken
                           annually. External compliance audits have been conducted in the


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 33            OF   75
                         past two years. Audit reports are publicly available within six months
                         of completion of the audit.
                     2. The relevant decision makers produce a management response to
                         address the outcomes of the internal and external audits of SNG
                         DeM activities.
       D             1. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
                     2. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
Supporting documentation

      A copy of audit legislation, which may be available on the government or supreme audit
       institution (SAI) website
      A copy of any financial, compliance, and performance audits of DeM activities undertaken
       within the past five years
      A copy of any follow-up response to a financial audit, compliance audit and performance
       audit, particularly to note the reaction and commitment to address the audit findings
Indicative questions to ask

      Have any external financial audits been undertaken by an external auditor on DeM
       activities? If so, when, what was the process, what were the findings, and how have they
       been addressed? Have these been publicly disclosed, and if yes, where?

      Have any external compliance audits been undertaken by an external auditor on DeM
       activities? If so, when, what was the process, what were the findings, and how have they
       been addressed? Have these been publicly disclosed, and if yes, where?

      Have any external performance audits been undertaken by an external auditor on DeM
       activities? If so, when, what was the process, what were the findings, and how have they
       been addressed? Have these been publicly disclosed, and if yes, where?

      Is there an internal audit function in the principal DeM entity or the local ministry of
       finance? If yes:

       o What are the mandate, roles, and responsibilities of this function?

       o What internal audits are undertaken, how frequently, and what is the basis of
         determining the audit program?

       o Have any internal audits been conducted on the effectiveness of the internal control
         system for debt management operations? If so, when, what was the process, what
         were the findings, and how have they been addressed?

       o What is the SNG’s commitment to address audit findings in the area of DeM?




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 34          OF   75
3.2 COORDINATION WITH FISCAL AND BUDGETARY POLICY

DPI-6            COORDINATION WITH FISCAL AND BUDGETARY POLICY

Rationale and background

Dimension 1: Supporting fiscal policy makers through the provision of accurate and timely
forecasts on total SNG debt service under different scenarios

The rationale for DPI-6, dimension 1 is to ensure that reasonably reliable and timely forecasts on
debt service are provided during the annual budget preparation process.

For budget formulation and execution, total debt service forecasts under different scenarios
should be prepared for the fiscal authorities. These forecasts should be conducted based on the
macroeconomic forecasts covering all existing SNG debt and active guarantees and should be
available to meet the deadlines set for the budget preparation. The principal DeM entity (or the
relevant DeM entities) is responsible for providing the debt service projections. The quality of
such forecasts is considered “reasonably reliable” when the difference between forecasted and
actual debt service outturn is less than 10 percent over the past three years. In the event of
unexpected shocks, larger deviations can be accepted but should be duly justified.

In addition to debt service forecasts based on baseline assumptions on exchange and interest
rates, budget authorities should also receive alternative forecasts in case those variables deviate
from their expected values. For these forecasts, two broad categories of stress tests should be
used: sensitivity tests and scenario tests.

A sensitivity test provides the increase in debt servicing costs for a given change in a market
variable, such as a 10 percent depreciation of the local currency. A scenario test could depict a
bleak macroeconomic or market situation in which interest rates increase at the time the local
currency depreciates, for instance, as a result of a prolonged and severe economic downturn.
These tests may be used either separately or in conjunction with each other.

During the assessment, the meeting with the budget department (or equivalent) should check
the reliability of the debt service forecasts,7 and whether sensitivity and scenario tests were used.




7
 The team can ask for past data of three to five years for the estimated and actual debt service numbers to assess
whether the forecasts were reasonably reliable or not.



The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 35                        OF   75
Dimension 2: Availability of key macro variables, an analysis of debt sustainability, and the
frequency with which it is undertaken

The rationale for DPI-6, dimension 2 is to ensure that key macroeconomic variables are available
and shared with the principal DeM entity (or DeM entities) and that debt sustainability analyses
(DSAs) at the SNG level are undertaken and shared with the principal DeM entity (or DeM
entities). Key macroeconomic variables and consequent DSAs are essential for effective analysis
of the cost and risk of the debt portfolio and development of DeM strategy. Both the projections
of the key fiscal variables and the DSA are the responsibility of the fiscal authority.

Key macro variables typically include actual outcomes and forecasts of real, monetary, external,
and fiscal variables that allow users to assess the sustainability of the fiscal position and its
sensitivity to changes in the economic environment.8 The outlook on these variables defines the
environment in which the debt managers operate and informs DeM strategy development.

The key fiscal variables normally include (a) the medium-term fiscal policy objectives and
strategy; (b) total SNG expenses, revenues, and debt level; and (c) the medium-term plan (three
or more years) for total expenses and revenues.

Fiscal sustainability assessments offer critical information to the debt manager(s). The
appropriate DeM strategy depends ultimately on the SNG’s tolerance for risk. The extent of debt-
related risk that an SNG is willing assume may vary over time, depending on the size of its debt
portfolio and its perception regarding vulnerability to economic and financial shocks. In general,
the larger the debt portfolio and the economy’s vulnerability to macroeconomic and exogenous
economic shocks, the larger the potential risk of loss from financial crisis or adverse
developments.

A DSA is undertaken to assess the medium- or long-term sustainability of the future debt
trajectory. A DSA begins with a baseline trajectory for SNG public debt based on the assumptions
underlying the macroeconomic framework. It then tests these baseline assumptions, and
analyzes how materialization of various risks would affect the SNG debt trajectory.

It is important during the assessment to meet with officials from both the budget department
and the macroeconomic unit to receive their views on the key fiscal variables.




8
 The assumption regarding key macro variables should be coordinated between the budget forecasting process and
debt servicing forecasts, in particular with foreign exchange and inflation rates, respectively, if there is foreign
currency or inflation-indexed debt.



The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 36                         OF   75
Dimensions to be assessed

The following dimensions should be assessed according to the requirements laid out in table 8:

   1. Support of fiscal policy makers through the provision of accurate and timely forecasts on
      total SNG debt service under different scenarios

   2. Availability of key macro variables, an analysis of debt sustainability, and the frequency
      with which it is undertaken



Table 8 Assessment and Scoring of Coordination with Fiscal Policy

       Score             Requirements
       A                 1. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, the forecasts
                             include scenario analysis, including worst-case scenarios.
                         2. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, DSAs are
                             undertaken or updated annually by the SNG.
       B                 1. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, the
                             forecasts include sensitivity analyses of the base case to interest and
                             exchange rate shocks.
                         2. The minimum requirements for score C are met. In addition, DSAs are
                             undertaken by the SNG at least once every two years.
       C                 1. As part of the SNG’s annual budget preparation, reasonably reliable
                             and timely forecasts are provided on total SNG debt service.
                         2. Key macro variables (actual outcomes and forecasts) are available and
                             an analysis of the debt sustainability that has been undertaken by
                             the SNG within the past three years is shared with the principal DeM
                             entity (or DeM entities).
       D                 1. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
                         2. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.

Supporting documentation

          A copy of information shared between the principal or relevant DeM entity and the fiscal
           policy or budget authorities
          A copy of the most recent document detailing key fiscal variables (actual outcomes and
           forecasts), such as SNG revenues, expenditures, primary balance, and SNG direct and
           guaranteed debt, and the analysis of debt sustainability that was shared with the debt
           management entities

Indicative questions to ask

          Who is responsible for preparing forecasts of total SNG debt and debt service? What


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 37               OF   75
       assumptions are used in preparing these forecasts, and who is responsible for setting the
       assumptions? Do the forecasts include sensitivity analyses of the baseline to interest and
       exchange rate changes? Do the forecasts include scenario analyses, including forecasts
       for worst-case scenarios?

      What debt and other information are shared between the principal DeM entity (or DeM
       entities) and the fiscal or budget authorities? How frequently is this information shared?

      Does the SNG regularly prepare and update a document detailing key fiscal variables
       (actual outcomes and forecasts), such as revenues, expenditures, primary balance, and
       debt, or undertake a DSA, or both? Is this document or analysis published and widely
       distributed? Are these shared with the principal DeM entity (or DeM entities)? If so, how
       were they used by the principal DeM entity (or DeM entities)?

      When was the DSA last conducted? What entities or people were involved in conducting
       the DSA, and what were their respective roles and responsibilities? Did the SNG receive
       any external assistance? How was the output used?

      Did the result of the DSA inform fiscal or budgetary and debt policies? If so, in what
       manner?




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 38          OF   75
3.3 BORROWING AND RELATED FINANCING ACTIVITIES

DPI-7          DOMESTIC BORROWING

Rationale and background

Dimension 1: The preparation of an annual plan for the aggregate amount of borrowing in the
domestic market, divided between the debt securities and other sources; and the publication
of an auction calendar for securities

The rationale for DPI-7, dimension 1 is to ensure that the SNG prepares a borrowing plan,
documents and accesses the most beneficial domestic borrowing terms and conditions, and
publishes an auction calendar whenever it regularly issues debt securities (short-term bills and
longer-term bonds) through auctions.

In the domestic market, the borrowing options for SNGs typically include borrowing directly from
commercial or development banks by concluding a loan agreement, and borrowing from the
central government, including through on-lending schemes. A key responsibility of DeM entity is
to identify and assess all potential creditors and investors with their respective terms and
conditions. The DeM entity should actively approach creditors offering the best terms and
conditions.

Direct loans from commercial banks comprise a large source of domestic borrowing for SNGs.
While assessing the terms, The DeM entity should evaluate whether the terms and conditions for
commercial bank loans or credits are based on market terms, and do not favor investors in the
government securities’ market. Therefore, the borrowing process should include competitive
selection of the qualified banking institution and formalized through an individual loan
agreement.

Large borrowers such as SNGs commonly use the auction of debt securities as a funding
mechanism. When using auctions, the SNG receives bids from registered bidders or dealers with
which the price of the debt securities is arrived at on either a multiple-price or a uniform-price
basis. International practice has shown that the issuer can benefit from providing market
participants and investors with details of an auction calendar well in advance, and by acting
consistently when issuing new debt securities. This approach can lead to lower costs by providing
investors with greater certainty, creating a level playing field for investors, and thereby increasing
liquidity and broadening the investor base.

Other funding mechanisms in the domestic market include underwriting and syndication, tap




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 39              OF   75
issuance or book building,9 and private placements.

SNGs should prepare an annual plan for the aggregate amount of domestic borrowing – divided
by source of credit– based on the annual budget cash flow forecasts. The overall borrowing plan
should preferably be broken down on a monthly basis based on monthly cash flow forecasts.

For large issuers in this market, the issuing operations should preferably be transparent and
predictable. In case of regular competitive auctions, the SNG should prepare the market for the
issuance by publishing a borrowing calendar in advance for wholesale instruments. Ideally, the
borrowing calendar should contain dates, instruments, and indicative amounts to borrow for
each instrument (on a maturity basis) for the coming quarter.

Dimension 2: The availability and quality of documented procedures for domestic borrowing

The rationale for DPI-7, dimension 2 is to ensure that written procedures are available for all
domestic borrowing operations.

The procedures for domestic borrowing operations should include all steps in the borrowing
process. In the case of direct borrowing from commercial banks, written procedures should cover
the loans’ proposal format, selection criteria, format of standardized loan agreement and
obligations of the lender and borrower. When auctions are used, the procedures should cover
announcement of the auction, bidding time period (opening time and closing time), processing
of bids, approval of auction cut-off interest rate, announcement to successful bidders and the
market, and settlement of the auction. Auction procedures often will be documented in an
information memorandum (or prospectus) or operating procedures that are made available to
market participants. If primary dealers are used, it is important that the incentives and
obligations of the dealers, as well as the eligibility criteria, be well defined and disclosed.

The documented borrowing procedures must be followed by the SNG debt managers. If that is
not the case, the following indicators should be read as if the borrowing procedures were not in
place.

To receive the highest score, the SNG or its agent should have regular meetings with market
participants to exchange views on the borrowing program and direction of domestic market




9
 Tap issuance or book building will involve the acceptance of bids during a ‘window’ open for a set time period at
rates or spreads that have been set. Where these issue mechanisms are used, the SNG should provide information to
the market on the amounts to be issued and the time period. These two issue mechanisms are at times used by SNG’s
in early stages of market development and if present, should be assessed with similar criteria for transparency and
procedures as for loans and issue of debt securities.



The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 40                        OF   75
development.

Dimensions to be assessed

The following dimensions should be assessed according to the requirements laid out in table 9:

       1. The preparation of an annual plan for the aggregate amount of borrowing in the
          domestic market, divided between the debt securities and other sources; assessment
          of the most cost-effective domestic borrowing terms and conditions; and the
          publication of an auction calendar for securities if applicable

       2. The availability and quality of documented procedures for domestic borrowing


   Table 9 Assessment and Scoring of Domestic Borrowing
     Score          Requirements
     A              1. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, the auction
                        calendar for SNG debt securities is extended to at least three
                        months.
                    2. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, the documented
                        procedure for domestic borrowing is formally reviewed and updated
                        annually. And the SN DeM entity meets with market participants at
                        least semi-annually to exchange views on borrowing plans and the
                        domestic market.
     B              1. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, assessment
                        of most beneficial domestic borrowing terms and conditions is
                        conducted at least annually. The auction calendar for SNG debt
                        securities includes indicative borrowing amounts. The issuance
                        result is also publicly disclosed on the day of the issuance at the same
                        time to all participants.
                    2. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, the
                        documented procedure for domestic borrowing is formally reviewed
                        and updated every second year.
     C              1. An annual borrowing plan for the projected aggregate amount of
                        domestic borrowing, divided between debt securities, bank loans
                        and other sources, is prepared. In addition, a borrowing calendar
                        that contains issue dates and instruments for SNG debt securities for
                        the following month that is prepared and published at least one
                        week ahead of the start of the month if SNG regularly issues through
                        auction in the domestic market.
                    2. Adequate and readily accessible documented procedures for all
                        domestic borrowings exist. Terms and conditions and criteria for
                        access to the primary wholesale market and if accessing loans, are
                        provided in print media or on the official or agency’s websites.
     D              1. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 41           OF   75
                      2. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.

Supporting documentation

      A copy of the information memorandum or prospectus for each instrument
      A copy of the operating procedures for investors or participants in the primary market
      A copy of annual borrowing plan
      A copy of the issuance program for SNG debt security announced by the principal DeM
       entity, the DeM entity responsible for the domestic market borrowing, or its agency
      A copy of the agenda of the most recent meeting with market participants
      A copy of operating procedures for other domestic instruments such as direct bank credit,
       if used
Indicative questions to ask

      Which instruments are issued by the SNG in the domestic market, and which techniques
       are used to issue each instrument?

      When does the SNG announce the auction calendar, and what information is provided?
       How frequently is this information updated during the fiscal year?

      What are the processes, institutional or staff roles and responsibilities, and timetable for
       conducting auctions of SNG debt security pertaining to the:

       o announcement of the auction;

       o bidding time period (opening time and closing time);

       o processing of bids;

       o approval of auction cutoff;

       o announcement to successful bidders and the market; and

       o settlement of the auction?

      Is there an information memorandum or prospectus for each SNG debt instrument? Is it
       published in print, or is a soft copy available on the website? What is the content of the
       information memorandum or prospectus?

      Are there operating procedures or guidelines for the issuance of each SNG debt
       instrument?

      How often are meetings with market participants held? Which participants are invited,
       and what topics are discussed at these meetings?



The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 42           OF   75
      How is the interest rate determined, if direct bank credit is used?




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 43          OF   75
DPI-8          EXTERNAL BORROWING

Rationale and background

Dimension 1: Documented assessment of the most beneficial or cost-effective borrowing terms
and conditions (lender or source of funds, currency, interest rate, and maturity) and a
borrowing plan

The rationale for DPI-8, dimension 1 is to ensure that the external borrowing operations are
carefully planned and subject to a thorough analysis of the expected terms and conditions from
all potential creditors and markets.

Many developing countries borrow primarily from foreign or external multilateral and bilateral
sources. SNGs are often forbidden to borrow externally unless it is guaranteed or on-lent by the
central government. The SNG will be eligible for funding on either concessional or market-based
interest rates, depending on their respective borrowing status. The primary tasks of the principal
DeM entity (or the DeM entity responsible for external borrowing) are (a) to liaise with the SNG
entity responsible for formulating the project, in cases where the loan is tied to a specific project;
(b) to identify the creditor that can offer the most beneficial or cost-effective terms and
conditions for the external borrowing; (c) to negotiate with that creditor the terms and conditions
of the loan, including currency, maturity, interest rate, and fees; (d) to liaise and coordinate with
the entity or entities in the central government that are responsible for external borrowing
(where the central government is involved); and (e) to finalize all loan documentation.

During the disbursement period of the loan, coordination with the creditor and the project
implementing entity must occur to ensure that disbursements are completed in accordance with
the loan terms and conditions and recorded in a timely manner. Since DeM strategies that rely
heavily on foreign currency debt may impose high risk, it is important that the principal DeM
entity (or DeM entities) responsible for external borrowings carefully assess and manage the risks
associated with foreign currency debt.

Some large SNGs might also access international capital markets. Provided the SNG is legally
permitted and able to access these markets, the primary task of the principal DeM entity (or the
DeM entity responsible for external borrowing) is to undertake market analysis and consultation
to identify the choice of market and instrument, as well as the loan terms and conditions,
including price, currency, maturity, and interest rate, and to liaise and coordinate with the central
government if necessary.

A fundamental requirement in the external borrowing process is to ensure that all potential
external creditors and markets, including the international bond market, are identified jointly
with the central government, and the respective financial terms and conditions offered by
creditors and investors to the specific debtor are specified. The DeM entity should actively
approach the creditors offering the best terms and conditions. A borrowing plan with expected
disbursements of external borrowing should be developed. The borrowing plan will have its focus
on the coming year, but the following years will also be included because external project


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 44              OF   75
financing normally includes disbursements over a period of years.

The terms and conditions of the loans should be subject to a financial analysis that goes beyond
only concessionality analysis. The focus should be to obtain the lowest possible borrowing costs,
including grants and technical assistance, within the guidelines of the DeM strategy in terms of
currency, maturity, and fixed or floating rate composition. For commercially viable projects, the
total return of the projects, including financing costs, should be calculated as part of the project
proposal. For these projects, the role of the debt manager is to provide full information on
financing costs to those in the SNG responsible for undertaking the analysis and appraisal of
public expenditure and investment. This facilitates the calculation of the yield or net present
value (NPV) for the total project including the financing. The rationale is that the SNG should seek
to invest as profitably as possible. A project with high direct return can also service a relatively
costly financing source. Thus, the standard techniques for investment evaluation, including the
expected revenues and costs for the investment as well as the financing costs, should be applied.

The creditor analysis and the borrowing plan will be subject to changes during the course of the
year due to changes in the creditor offerings, the credit status, and the changes in the external
borrowing requirement.

Dimension 2: Availability and quality of documented procedures for external borrowings

The rationale for DPI-8, dimension 2 is to ensure that borrowing activities from external sources
are well documented, covering all creditors and funding sources.

At a minimum, the documented procedures should identify the organizational entities and the
key functions within them (for example, front, middle, and back office) that undertake the main
processes, as described above, when mobilizing external sources of financing. The procedures
should describe in detail the steps taken in all the processes, including which entities participate
in loan negotiations, the financial analysis undertaken, and recording of the transactions. The
financial analysis should include interest rates including fees, currency, and concessionality of the
loans as well as penalty fees and other charges, the disbursement and maturity profile, and the
impact on the existing debt service profile. The procedure should contain the requirement that
the financial terms of loans be entered into a debt recording system on timely basis. Reading
through the procedures, the DeMPA reviewer should be able to get a clear understanding of the
processes and their soundness.

The documented borrowing procedures should be followed by the debt manager. If it is not the
case, the indicator should be read as the procedures were not in place.

Dimension 3: Availability and degree of involvement of legal advisers before signing of the loan
contract

The rationale for DPI-8, dimension 3 is to ensure that sound legal features are included in the
loan agreements.



The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 45             OF   75
Debt managers should receive appropriate legal advice to ensure that the transactions they
undertake are backed by sound legal documentation. In doing so, debt managers can help SNGs
clarify their rights and obligations and protect their position to the greatest degree possible in
the relevant jurisdictions. Several issues deserve particular attention, including (a) the design of
provisions of debt instruments, such as clear definitions of default events, especially if such
events extend beyond payment defaults on the relevant obligations, for example, cross-defaults
and cross-accelerations; (b) the breadth of a negative pledge clause; (c) the use of pari passu
clauses; (d) the inclusion of collective action clauses; and (e) the scope of the waiver of sovereign
immunity. Disclosure obligations in the relevant markets must be analyzed in detail because they
can vary from one market to another.

Evidence of consultation with legal advisors submitted at various stages of the negotiation
process, such as recommendations on changes in clauses, should be available.

Dimensions to be assessed

The following dimensions should be assessed according to the requirements laid out in table 10:

   1. Documented assessment of the most beneficial or cost-effective borrowing terms and
      conditions (lender or source of funds, currency, interest rate, and maturity) and a
      borrowing plan
   2. Availability and quality of documented procedures for external borrowings
   3. Availability and degree of involvement of legal advisers before signing of the loan contract


   Table 10 Assessment and Scoring of External Borrowing
     Score          Requirements
     A              1. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, assessments of the
                        most beneficial or cost-effective terms and conditions for external
                        borrowing that are obtainable from potential creditors and markets
                        are undertaken before the start of each loan negotiation.
                    2. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, the procedures for
                        all external borrowings are reviewed and updated annually.
                    3. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, legal advisers are
                        consulted from the first stage of the negotiating process to the
                        conclusion of the legal agreements related to the borrowing.
     B              1. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, the
                        borrowing plan and assessment of the most beneficial or cost-
                        effective terms and conditions for external borrowing are updated
                        as changes in the borrowing conditions or requirements become
                        apparent during the year.
                    2. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, the
                        procedures for all external borrowing are reviewed formally and
                        updated at least every second year.
                    3. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, legal

The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 46             OF   75
                             advisers are consulted during the negotiating process.
       C                 1. An annual borrowing plan for external borrowing is prepared and
                             assessments of the most beneficial or cost-effective terms and
                             conditions for external borrowing that are obtainable from potential
                             creditors and markets are conducted annually.
                         2. Adequate and readily accessible internal documented procedures
                             exist for all external borrowings, including from international capital
                             markets, and contain the requirement to enter all financial terms of
                             the loan transaction into the debt recording system within three
                             weeks of signing.
                         3. Legal advisers approve all clauses of the legal agreements before
                             concluding the negotiation process.
       D                 1. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
                         2. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
                         3. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
Supporting documentation

          A copy of the documented procedures for external borrowing
          A copy of the most recent analysis of the most beneficial and cost-effective terms and
           conditions
          Documentation of the involvement of legal advisors, for example, recommendations on
           changes to clauses submitted at various stages of the negotiation process
Indicative questions to ask

          Which instruments are issued by the SNG in the external markets, and which issuance
           mechanisms are used?
          What is the basis for choosing to issue or borrow from multilateral, bilateral, and
           commercial sources? How are the terms and conditions set for each loan, and what scope
           is there to negotiate these terms and conditions?
          What is the decision-making and approval process to contract or issue each external debt
           instrument?
          What are the processes, institution or staff roles and responsibilities, and timetable for
           contracting or issuing each external debt instruments?
          When are legal advisers involved in the contracting of new loans? What is their
           involvement and role?
          Are technical evaluations carried out for new borrowing proposals to analyze their all-in
           cost as well as their effect on the currency composition, interest rate structure, and
           maturity profile of the overall loan portfolio?
          Does an internal borrowing plan for external borrowing exist? How often is it revised?
          Are there documented procedures for borrowing externally, including loans, international
           bonds, etc.? What is the content of the documented procedures?




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 47               OF   75
DPI-9          LOAN GUARANTEES, ON-LENDING, AND DERIVATIVES

Rationale and background

Dimension 1: Availability and quality of documented policies and procedures for approval and
issuance of loan guarantees

The rationale for DPI-9, dimension 1 is to ensure that the SNG has documented policies for the
approval and issuance of loan guarantees and, for the higher scores, that these procedures
include (a) a requirement to assess the credit risk embedded in any loan guarantee before the
decision has been made to issue the guarantee, and (b) a requirement to monitor this risk during
the life of the loan guarantee.

Loan guarantees represent potential financial claims against the SNG that have not yet
materialized but could trigger a financial obligation under certain circumstances (contingent
liability). To cover this risk, the SNG should charge a guarantee fee based on a thorough credit
risk assessment. If it does not, the SNG is subsidizing the beneficiary of the loan guarantee. The
establishment of a contingency fund to protect the budget in the case a guarantee is called is
desirable if the SN government has little fiscal space to accommodate such risks.

Issuance of letters of comfort, letters of intent, and similar letters should be avoided as the legal
status of these letters is unclear. Instead it is better to financially support a certain project or
entity by direct budget means or by issuance of a legally binding guarantee that is properly
entered into government accounts.

Operational guidelines for approval and issuance of loan guarantees should be in place. These
guidelines should provide details of how the credit risk should be assessed, together with
measures to minimize the budget effect of a default or trigger event. This risk assessment should
occur before the decision has been made to support a certain activity by the use of loan
guarantees.

At a minimum, the procedures for approval and issuance of loan guarantees should include (a)
the purposes of the guarantees; (b) the decision-making process; and (c) procedures of
monitoring. Approval and issuance procedures should be updated regularly and approved by
senior management in the local government ministry of finance. For the higher scores, the
procedure should contain the requirements for credit risk assessment and analysis of the
financial impact if the guarantee is called. The DeMPA assessor should be able to clearly
understand the processes and their soundness by reading the procedures.

It is common that the principal guarantee entity be given responsibility to assess the credit risk
and keep records of all outstanding loan guarantees, normally in the debt recording and
management system.

Dimension 2: Availability and quality of documented policies and procedures for approval and
issuance of SNG on-lending


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 48             OF   75
The rationale for DPI-9, dimension 2 is to ensure that the SNG has documented policies and
procedures for on-lending of borrowed funds (domestic or external).

SNGs often support public investment programs, regional business developments, as well as the
business needs of state-owned enterprises through direct lending or on-lending of borrowed
funds. Such on-lending instruments are expected to provide an adequate supply of credit for the
legitimate business or investment needs of the beneficiary, as defined by the respective policy.
The SNG is also expected to price that credit reasonably in line with competitively determined
market interest rates.

SNG on-lending is also often a substitute for guaranteeing loans that are raised directly by the
beneficiary. Thus, to receive higher scores on this dimension, the procedures should include (a)
a requirement to assess the credit risk before the decision has been made to on-lend these funds,
and (b) a requirement to monitor this risk during the life of the on-lending. To cover the credit
risk, the SNG should add a charge on the interest rate based on a proper credit risk assessment.
Otherwise, the SNG is subsidizing the borrower of these funds.

As in the liability management process, government assets used for lending purposes require
regular monitoring. Such monitoring should include regular assessments of the repayment
capacity of the loan beneficiary, risks of misguided spending, or an unexpected economic
downturn.

The monitoring process would involve a detailed analysis of the documentation and collateral for
the largest loans, a review of a sample of small loans, and an evaluation of loan policies to ensure
they are sound and prudent to protect the public’s funds.

At a minimum, the procedures for approval and issuance of on-lending contracts should include
(a) the purposes of the on-lending; (b) the decision-making process; and (c) monitoring
procedures. Approval and issuance procedures for on-lending contracts should be updated
regularly and approved by senior management in the local government ministry of finance. For
the higher scores, the procedure should contain requirements for credit risk assessment and
analysis of the financial impact if the on-lending beneficiary fails to repay the loan.

Dimension 3: Availability of a DeM system with functionalities for handling derivatives and
availability and quality of documented procedures for the use of derivatives

The rationale for DPI-9, dimension 3 is to ensure that the SNG has a debt recording and
management system with proper functionalities for handling financial derivatives; that
documented procedures are in place for the use of derivatives; and, to receive higher scores,
there are (a) rules in place for managing the counterparty exposure risk, and (b) a separate risk
monitoring and compliance unit to monitor all risks connected with the derivatives.

Derivatives used as hedging instruments, such as swaps, caps, and futures, normally entail market
and credit risks as well as substantial operational risks. It is essential that these instruments are
transacted within a clear risk management framework, backed by sound legal documentation,


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 49             OF   75
and to have systems in place for proper recording and accounting of these transactions.

The procedures for the use of derivative transactions should include (a) the purposes of
derivative transactions; (b) a clear decision-making process; (c) rules for debt database entry and
accounting; and (d) involvement of legal advisers from the first stage of the negotiating process
to conclusion of the legal agreements with the counterparty. To receive higher scores, the
procedures should contain the requirement of managing the counterparty exposure risk.

History indicates that derivatives can create significant risks if not properly handled and that it is
necessary to have a system in place for proper recording and accounting of derivative
transactions.

Embedded options in certain loan agreements, such as options to change a floating interest rate
to a fixed interest rate, to cap a floating interest rate, to change the original borrowing currency
to another currency, and to prepay a loan before the final maturity date, are not considered
derivative transactions in the SN DeMPA methodology.

Dimensions to be assessed

The following dimensions should be assessed according to the requirements laid out in table 11:

   1. Availability and quality of documented policies and procedures for approval and issuance
      of loan guarantees
   2. Availability and quality of documented policies and procedures for on-lending of
      borrowed funds
   3. Availability of a DeM system with functionalities for handling derivatives, and availability
      and quality of documented procedures for the use of derivatives


   Table 11 Assessment and Scoring of Loan Guarantees, On-lending and Derivatives
     Score          Requirements
     A              1. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, these procedures
                        contain a requirement to calculate and charge a guarantee fee
                        covering the credit risk, as well as a requirement for the guarantee
                        entity to monitor the risk during the life of the loan guarantee.
                    2. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, these policies and
                        procedures contain a requirement to calculate a charge covering the
                        credit risk, as well as a requirement for the crediting entity to
                        monitor the risks during the life of the credit.
                    3. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, the counterparty
                        credit risk is quantified and managed throughout the life of the
                        transaction.
     B              1. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, these
                        procedures contain a requirement to assess the credit risk before a
                        decision is made to issue a loan guarantee, as well as guidelines on


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 50              OF   75
                             how this assessment would be conducted.
                         2. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, these
                             procedures contain a requirement to assess the credit risks before a
                             decision is made to support a certain activity by credits, as well as
                             guidelines on how this assessment would be conducted.
                         3. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, the
                             documented procedures include rules specifying that all risks
                             connected with the derivatives be monitored by a separate unit
                             responsible for risk monitoring and compliance.
       C                 1. There are adequate and readily accessible internal documented
                             procedures for the approval, issuance, and monitoring of loan
                             guarantees.
                         2. There are adequate and readily accessible internal documented
                             procedures for the approval and provision of credits, in the form of
                             on-lending from external or domestic borrowing sources.
                         3. There is a DeM system with functionalities for handling derivatives. In
                             addition, there are adequate and readily accessible internal
                             documented procedures for the use of derivative transactions.
       D                 1. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
                         2. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
                         3. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
Supporting documentation

          A copy of the operational procedures for issuing loan guarantees including the method
           for calculating guarantee fees, the method for monitoring risks related to guarantees, and
           guidelines to analyze and potentially quantify risks related to guarantees
          A copy of the operational guidelines for on-lending, including the method for calculating
           on-lending fees
          A copy of the risk management framework, policies and procedures, and master
           derivatives agreement for transacting and managing financial derivatives
Indicative questions to ask

          Does the SNG provide loan guarantees? If so:
           o Which entity is responsible for approving and signing loan guarantees?
           o Which entity or is responsible for assessing the credit risks before the approval of any
              loan guarantees?
           o Which risk mitigation tools does the SNG apply (for example, guarantee fees,
              guarantee limits, reporting, budget allocations, contingency accounts, covenants, and
              so on)?
           o Which entity is responsible for monitoring the risk related to loan guarantees,
              particularly credit risk?
           o Does the government charge a guarantee fee? If so, from whom (for example,
              sponsoring ministry or guarantee beneficiary)? How is this fee calculated, and who is


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 51              OF   75
           responsible for calculating and administering the guarantee fee?
       o Does the government appropriate for risks in the budget? If so, are these budget
           allocations transferred to a contingency account?
      Does the SNG provide on-lending? If so:
       o Which entity is responsible for approving and signing the on-lending agreements?
       o Which entity is responsible for assessing the credit risks before the approval of any
           government on-lending agreements?
       o Which entity is responsible for monitoring the risk of government on-lending,
           particularly credit risk?
       o Does the SNG charge the borrower for the credit risk? If so, how is the charge
           calculated, and who is responsible for calculating and administering this charge?
      Does the SNG enter into derivative transactions? If so:
       o Which entity is responsible for negotiating, approving, and undertaking derivative
           transactions?
       o Which entity is responsible for assessing and monitoring the risk of these
           transactions? Are derivative transactions collateralized?
       o Is there a debt recording and management system for handling the derivatives?
       o Are there documented procedures for the use of derivatives? What is the content of
           the documented procedures?
       o When are legal advisers involved in the negotiating process of concluding the legal
           agreements with the derivatives counterparty? What is their involvement and role,
           and how much value or experience do they provide?
       o Which entity is responsible for entering derivative transactions into the debt
           recording or management system? Which data source is used? Who validates the
           data?
       o Which entity is responsible for accounting of derivatives, and which accounting rules
           are applied?
      Are limits imposed on the counterparty exposure risks? If so, what is the basis for setting
       the limits?




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 52           OF   75
3.4 CASH FLOW FORECASTING AND CASH BALANCE MANAGEMENT

DPI-10        CASH FLOW FORECASTING AND CASH BALANCE MANAGEMENT

Rationale and background

Dimension 1: Effectiveness of forecasting the aggregate level of cash balances in SNG bank
accounts

The rationale for DPI-10, dimension 1 is to ensure that reasonably reliable forecasts of the SNG
cash balance are produced and available to the principal DeM entity (or DeM entities). Some of
the forecast information, such as debt servicing, will be produced by the DeM entity, while other
information, such as revenues forecast including revenue transferred from the central
government and locally generated, may be provided to the DeM entity by the relevant SNG
authority.

It is a common procedure for local government line ministries/Treasurer (or the equivalent) to
prepare monthly forecasts of the budget provision, which are used for allocating funds or
providing expenditure warrants on a monthly basis. These forecasts do not take into account the
timing of expenditures and collection of revenues into the SNG bank account(s). For example, the
revenue collection process can have a delay before the funds are received by the SNG. To obtain
reliable forecasts of the aggregated SNG cash balance, it is necessary to determine the
relationship between budget cash management forecasts (normally monthly) and the impact on
the SNG cash balance.

The principal DeM entity (or DeM entities) requires information on the aggregate level of
overnight cash balances for borrowing planning, particularly for short-term instruments, and to
ensure that the cash balance is in accordance with the level or range set by the government
policy. The debt manager therefore requires accurate and timely forecasts of cash flows and the
end-of-day account balances. To reduce the negative cost of carry, the SNG should aim at
borrowing only when the funds are needed.

To assess whether the cash forecasts are “reasonably reliable”, the following guidelines can be
used:

      Forecasts of end-of-day cash balances should be obtained from local government line
       ministries (or their equivalents) and SNG agencies that cover at least 80 percent of
       expenditures and revenues.

      Comparisons of actual outcomes against forecast are undertaken at least monthly to




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 53          OF   75
           identify the variance10 and are used to improve the forecasting system.

          The number of instances in the past 12 months when the aggregate cash balance has
           fallen below a minimum balance (for example, requiring a call on the overdraft or ways
           and means advance) or generated excess funds that were not anticipated and therefore
           could not be invested can be used as a measure to assess reliability of the forecasts should
           be monitored.

Dimension 2: Decision of a proper cash balance (liquidity buffer) and effectiveness of managing
this cash balance in SNG bank accounts (including the integration with any domestic debt
borrowing program, if required)

The rationale for DPI-10, dimension 2 is to ensure that the cash balance is actively managed and,
to receive a higher score, that short-term issuances are planned according to the cash balance
forecast, if applicable.

It is important that the SNG cash balance target be set at a point that provides sufficient
protection against periods of market instability and that actions be taken to keep the cash
balance at this level. Excessive cash will increase the negative cost of carry (borrowing cost is
higher than the risk-adjusted yield on investments), and a cash balance below the determined
level will increase the vulnerability of the SNG. In some SNGs, the principal DeM entity is in charge
of cash balance management. Apart from keeping this liquidity buffer on deposits in the banking
system, it can also be held, in part, in highly liquid instruments, such as central government’s
treasury bills, if available. As with all asset management, the credit risk must be carefully
assessed. Another requirement is the extent to which the management of the aggregate level of
cash balances in SNG bank accounts is integrated with DeM activities such as issuing or buying
back of short term debt or entering into repurchase or reverse repurchase agreements.

If the level of the cash balance is temporarily below the determined threshold, the SNG should
increase its liquidity buffer by borrowing short-term debt, such as using a revolving credit facility,
or issuing short-dated debt securities.

Dimensions to be assessed

The following dimensions should be assessed according to the requirements laid out in table 12:

           1. Effectiveness of forecasting the aggregate level of cash balances in SNG bank accounts
           2. Effectiveness of managing this cash balance in SNG bank accounts (including the




10
     A reasonably reliable forecast would be within 10 percent to 15 percent of actual outcome.



The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 54                               OF   75
              integration with any domestic debt borrowing program)

Table 12 Assessment and Scoring of Cash Flow Forecasting and Cash Balance Management

       Score             Requirements
       A                 1. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, the cash flow
                             forecast for the coming month is broken down on daily basis.
                         2. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, the SNG undertakes
                             transactions, such as the issuance and buyback of short term debt or
                             entering into repurchase or reverse repurchase agreements, weekly
                             to maintain the cash balance target set by the SNG.
       B                 1. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, the cash
                             flow forecast for the coming month is broken down on weekly basis.
                         2. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, issuance of
                             short-term instruments is planned according to the cash balance
                             forecast, if applicable. And the SNG undertakes transactions (such as
                             issuance or buyback of short term debt) monthly to maintain the
                             cash balance target set by the SNG.
       C                 1. Reasonably reliable monthly aggregate forecasts of cash inflows and
                             outflows and cash balances on SNG bank accounts are produced for
                             the budget year and are made available to the DeM entity. In
                             addition, the cash balance forecast is updated monthly.
                         2 The SNG manages its surplus cash (that is, cash in excess of the target)
                             through investment in the market on monthly basis in line with
                             appropriate credit risk limits.
       D                 1. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
                         2. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
Supporting documentation

          Evidence of aggregate daily cash balances in SNG bank accounts
          Examples of forecasts of SNG cash flows
          Examples of forecasts of the aggregate level of overnight cash balances in SNG bank
           accounts
          Evidence of investment of surplus cash
Indicative questions to ask

          Which entity is responsible for forecasting SNG cash flows and aggregate cash balances?
           How accurate are the forecasts? How often are forecasts prepared, and for what period
           are these calculated?
          Which model is used to compare the forecasts with the actual outcomes? Has the
           accuracy of the cash flow forecasts been improved during the last year? If not, what are




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 55              OF   75
           the causes for the inaccuracy?11
          How is the short-term issuance program developed? Is it linked to cash balance forecasts?
          Has the SNG set a target or range for the balance in the SNG bank account? If so, what is
           the range, and who decided this range? How is the range calculated?
          Which entity monitors that the cash balance is within the determined range, and what
           actions are taken to ensure that the cash balance is within this range? How often are
           actions taken to keep the cash balance within the determined range?
          How many instances in the past 12 months has the aggregate cash balance fallen below
           a minimum balance (for example, requiring a call on the overdraft or ways and means
           advance) or generated excess funds that were not anticipated and could not be invested?
          Does the bank pay interest on surplus balances? If so, what is the interest rate?
          Is the SNG able to invest surplus balances? If so, which investments are used?
          Which instruments are used to manage surplus balances or excess liquidity? How are
           these instruments integrated with the SNG’s domestic debt issuance?




11
     Whether any provisioning for the fruition of contingent liability, if it occurred, was included.


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 56                                OF   75
3.5 DEBT RECORDING AND OPERATIONAL RISK MANAGEMENT

DPI-11         DEBT ADMINISTRATION AND DATA SECURITY

Rationale and background

Dimension 1: Availability and quality of documented procedures for the processing of debt-
related payments

The rationale for DPI-11, dimension 1 is to ensure that there are documented procedures for the
processing of debt-related payments, including the following requirements: (a) all payment
notifications are checked with internal records before payments are made; (b) payment
instructions are subject to a minimum two-person authorization process; and (c) payments are
made by the due date. This set of rules and processes should be documented in a procedures
manual.

Processing and controlling payments to effect settlement of government debt and debt-related
transactions are key responsibilities. This settlement involves accurate, timely, and secure
processing with minimal errors. In addition, there should be procedures for monitoring payment
arrears and measures for controlling the level of arrears.

In some countries, the central government on-lends borrowed fund to SNG and deducts the debt
service payment regularly from the central government transfer at the source. It is important for
SNG to keep its own debt records and calculate the debt service payment due.

It is essential that strong controls and well-documented procedures exist for settlement of
transactions. Payments must be secure with controls to ensure that a minimum two-person
authorization process is used to validate and process payments.

The debt administration operations for payments should be checked by testing the validation of
loan payment notifications and controls around the payment process.

Most principal DeM entities will have a debt recording and management system with
accompanying user and technical manuals. These manuals are not sufficient to meet the
minimum requirements because they are generic to the system or software and do not
necessarily reflect the payment process in that country. The documented procedures must
reflect the current practices and be followed. If that does not occur, the indicators should be read
as if the procedures manuals were nonexistent.

To receive the highest score, the internal payment orders are prepared and issued electronically
by straight-through processing. Straight-through processing is the ability to send payment
instructions directly from a management information system to a secure financial messaging
system (for example, SWIFT), the central bank, or commercial banks. With these electronic links
in place, there is no need for reentry of data into payment systems, thus reducing operational
risk and increasing efficiency. Control over the authorization of payments is maintained through


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 57            OF   75
access rights to the system or database, as described in dimension 3, so that the minimum two-
person check can be enforced.

Dimension 2: Availability and quality of documented procedures for debt and transaction data
recording and validation, as well as storage of agreements and debt administration records

The rationale for DPI-11, dimension 2 is to ensure that there are documented procedures for
recording and validating debt data (new debt, disbursements, and repayments) as well as for
storing agreements and debt administration records, including the following requirements: (a)
accuracy of debt data is ensured by segregation of responsibilities for data entry and
confirmation of the accuracy by separate staff before the entries are deemed to be completed;
(b) debt data are constantly validated against received payment notifications; (c) all original,
signed copies of loan and derivative agreements are stored and filed in a secure location; and (d)
all debt administration records are kept in a secure filing system.

An original, signed copy of each loan and derivative agreement should be stored in a secure
location that will protect the documents from incidents such as theft, fire, flood, or other
incidents that may damage or destroy any of these records. A copy of each agreement should be
available with the principal DeM entity (or the DeM entities). All correspondence with the lender
or counterparty during the life of each loan or derivative (referred to as “debt administration
records”) should be kept in a secure filing system. Scanned copies of original loan agreements
and all debt administration records, if backed up and stored securely, will meet the requirements
for this dimension.12

It is essential that strong controls and well-documented procedures exist for maintenance of the
financial records.

To receive the highest score, an independent confirmation of all data must be conducted annually
with external creditors and major domestic investors or creditors.

User and technical manuals that accompany a debt recording and management system are not
sufficient to meeting the minimum requirements.

The documented procedures must reflect the current practice and be followed. If that does not
occur, the indicators should be read as if the procedures manuals are not in place.




12
  It is also important to ensure that these backups include key documents that have been scanned and/or are maintained
on the servers related to processing of DeM operations (for example, payment advices from creditors).


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 58                           OF   75
Dimension 3: Availability and quality of documented procedures for controlling access to the
SNG’s debt data recording and management system and audit trail

The rationale for DPI-11, dimension 3 is to ensure that there are documented procedures for
controlling access to the debt recording and management system.

The debt data in the debt recording and management system or database must be secure, the
system should be located in a locked area, and access to the system by users and information
technology specialists should be tightly controlled through access permissions and password
controls. Access permissions for individuals should be updated on the day that their
responsibilities change. To receive the highest score, the system must produce audit trails that
show who has accessed the system, the time they accessed it, the level accessed, and the
activities of each user. The audit trails should be monitored for exceptions at least monthly.

User and technical manuals that accompany the debt recording and management system are not
sufficient for meeting the minimum requirements.

The documented procedures must reflect the current practice and be followed. If that does not
occur, the indicators should be read as if the procedures manuals are not in place.

Dimension 4: Frequency and off-site, secure storage of debt recording and management system
backups

The rationale for DPI-11, dimension 4 is to ensure that debt recording and management system
backups are made frequently and that the backups are stored in a separate and secure location.

A copy of the debt data (backups) should be made frequently and stored in a secure location
outside the building in which the debt database is located. While locations such as another
government building are acceptable, the house of the head of the debt management office or of
the IT person is not acceptable. The storage location of the backups should be protected from
incidents such as theft, fire, flood, or other incidents that may damage or destroy any of these
backups. Debt data backups should be tested regularly, at least quarterly, to make sure that they
can effectively be used if needed.

Dimensions to be assessed

The following dimensions should be assessed according to the requirements laid out in table 13:

       1. Availability and quality of documented procedures for the processing of debt-related
          payments and receivables
       2. Availability and quality of documented procedures for debt and transaction data
          recording and validation, as well as storage of agreements and debt administration
          records
       3. Availability and quality of documented procedures for controlling access to the SNG’s
          debt data recording and management system and audit trail
       4. Frequency and off-site, secure storage of debt recording and management system

The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 59          OF   75
          backups

   Table 13 Assessment and Scoring of Debt Administration and Data Security
     Score          Requirements
     A              1. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, internal payment
                        orders are prepared and issued electronically by straight-through
                        processing, and the procedures manual is formally reviewed at least
                        every year.
                    2. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, an independent
                        confirmation of data is annually conducted with external creditors,
                        and the major domestic investors and creditors and the procedures
                        are formally reviewed at least every year.
                    3. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, the systems
                        produce audit trails that show the user’s activities, and the
                        documented procedures are formally reviewed at least every year.
                    4. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, debt recording and
                        management system backups are made daily and stored in a secure
                        filing system before they are moved to the separate, secure location
                        weekly.
     B              1. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, internal
                        payment orders are prepared electronically, and the procedures
                        manual is formally reviewed at least every second year.
                    2. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, the
                        procedures manuals are formally reviewed at least every second
                        year.
                    3. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, the
                        documented procedures are formally reviewed at least every second
                        year.
                    4. The minimum requirement for score C is met. Debt recording and
                        management system backups are made at least once per week and
                        are stored in a separate, secure location.
     C              1. There is an adequate and readily accessible procedures manual for the
                        processing of debt service payments.
                    2. There are adequate and readily accessible procedures manuals for
                        debt data recording and validation, as well as for storage of
                        agreements and debt administration records.
                    3. There are adequate and readily accessible documented procedures
                        for controlling access to the SNG’s debt recording and management
                        system.
                    4. Debt recording and management system backups are made at least
                        once per month, and the backups are stored in a separate, secure
                        location.
     D              1. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
                    2. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.

The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 60        OF   75
                     3. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
                     4. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.

Supporting documentation

      A copy of the procedures manual for processing of debt-related payments and
       receivables, for debt data recording and validation, and for storage of agreements and
       debt administration records
      Evidence of the physical storage of original, signed copies of loan and derivative
       agreements in a secure location, of the scanning and maintenance of such agreements in
       electronic form in a secure location, or of both
      Evidence of validation procedures against payment notifications
      Evidence of an independent confirmation of all data with external creditors and major
       domestic investors
      Evidence of a two-person authorization process
      A copy of the system access permissions and evidence of system security and access
       controls
      Evidence that audit trails are monitored
      Evidence of the storage location of debt recording and management system backups (the
       location verified by the assessors)

Indicative questions to ask

      Does the principal DeM entity (or DeM entities) have a procedures manual for processing
       of debt-related payments and receivables? If so, where is it located, what is the content
       of the manual, and how is it updated and maintained?
      Who is involved in arranging debt service payments, and what is the authorization
       process? What are the procedures for debt on-lent from central government?
      Has the government met all debt service payment obligations by the due date? If not,
       o How often have payments been late, and how late have they been?

       o What were the reasons for, or sources of, the delay?

       o Were penalty charges imposed for late payment? If so, how significant were these
         penalty charges?

      Is there a procedures manual for the debt data recording and validation and for storage
       of agreements and debt administration records? If so, where is it located, what is the
       content of the manual, and how is it updated and maintained?
      Are debt data entries checked for accuracy before the entries are deemed to be
       completed?
      How often does the principal DeM entity (or DeM entities) reconcile loan data with
       creditors?
      Where are the original, signed loan and derivative agreements stored? Is this location


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 61         OF   75
       considered to be a secure location to protect these records from incidents such as theft,
       fire, flood, or other incidents that may damage or destroy any of these records?
      Where are debt administration records stored and filed? Is this location considered to be
       a secure and fireproof location?
      Are the loan agreements and debt administration records scanned? If so, where are the
       scanned copies stored? Do these include key documents that have been scanned or are
       maintained on the servers related to processing of DeM operations?
      Are there documented procedures for controlling access to the SNG debt recording and
       management system and payment system? If so, where are these located, what are the
       controls, and how frequently are they updated?
      Who sets the access levels and functions for those staff members or persons who access
       the debt recording and management system? Do these persons also enter data into the
       system?
      Are audit trails produced for the debt recording and management system and payment
       system? If so, who is responsible for monitoring these audit trails and the users who have
       accessed the system?
      Which entity is responsible for backing up the debt recording and management system?
       What is the process for making the backups? How often the backups are made, and where
       are the backups stored?




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 62          OF   75
DPI-12         SEGREGATION OF DUTIES, STAFF CAPACITY, AND BUSINESS CONTINUITY

Rationale and background

Dimension 1: Segregation of duties for some key functions, as well as the presence of a risk
monitoring and compliance function

The rationale for DPI-12, dimension 1 is to ensure that the internal organization of the principal
DeM entity (or DeM entities) is based on the segregation of duties between debt managers with
the authority to negotiate or contract the loan agreement and enter the contract information in
the debt management system, and those responsible for (a) confirmation of contract
information, and (b) initiating and processing payments. It is also to ensure that there is a
separate risk monitoring and compliance function.

An efficient organizational structure should be in place across the principal DeM entity (or the
DeM entities) to maintain security and control over SNG borrowing and debt-related
transactions. Segregation of duties is one of the most important parts of an effective internal
control system for any financial activity. Strong operational controls and well-articulated
responsibilities for staff will reduce the risk of errors, policy breaches, and fraudulent behavior,
which can potentially lead to significant losses to the SNG that can tarnish the reputation of not
only the principal DeM entity (or relevant DeM entities) but also the whole government.

The negotiation of loans or decisions around the issuance of debt securities, whether in the
domestic market or in international markets, will normally rest with the head of the principal
DeM entity or higher (for example, the local government minister of finance, and Governor or
mayor). These officials can formally sign the resulting agreements and other documentation and
may enter contract information in the debt management system on a preliminary basis.

However, confirmation and finalization of the contract information in the system should be
undertaken by other staff in the back office (by checking it against documentation provided by
the creditor). Different individuals should be responsible for entering data in the debt recording
system on the one hand, and checking data entries on the other. In addition, the functions of
contract negotiation and contract data entry should be organizationally separated from the
functions of transaction settlement (that is, initiating and processing the payment).

There should be a risk monitoring and compliance function within the principal DeM entity (or
the DeM entities), often in the middle office. Its primary function is to monitor whether all DeM
operations are (a) within the authorities and limits set by government policies; (b) in compliance
with statutory and contractual obligations; and (c) within the risk parameters included in the
approved DeM strategy and in accordance with the operational risk management plan. This
function could be overseen by an individual staff member or, ideally, a specialized unit with this
role and associated responsibilities.

Dimension 2: Staff capacity and human resource management



The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 63            OF   75
The rationale for DPI-2, dimension 2 is to ensure that a sufficient number of DeM staff are
employed and are adequately trained, and that individual job descriptions have been prepared.
To receive higher scores, there are code-of-conduct and conflict-of-interest guidelines, individual
training and development plans, and an annual performance assessment for DeM staff.

The organizational structure and management policies should support sound human resource
management practices, sufficient and adequately trained staff, and formal job descriptions
reflecting current assignments. To assess whether there are sufficient DeM staff, assessors must
have information on the number of outstanding loans, weekly front-office operations, daily back-
office activities, and other activities DeM staff is engaged in. In some SNGs, the number of staff
is likely to be small. In this case, assessing whether there are sufficient staff will come down to
whether the segregation of duties criteria explained in Dimension 1 can be met.13 The capacity
to perform the tasks will, of course, be an important factor.

Furthermore, the debt managers should be subject to code-of-conduct and conflict-of-interest
guidelines, which set out rules that staff members are required to follow, the activities that they
are or are not permitted to undertake, and the requirements to disclose personal investments
and financial activities.14 For example, if staff members buy or sell SNG securities, this activity
could be perceived as equivalent to insider trading because they may have privileged access to
budgetary and other government information. These guidelines will help allay concerns that staff
members’ personal financial interests could undermine sound DeM practices. Preferably, these
guidelines should be reviewed and updated at least annually.

Training plans should ensure that each staff member receives the training that he or she needs
to perform the duties assigned.

Dimension 3: Presence of an operational risk management plan, including business continuity
and disaster recovery arrangements

The rationale for DPI-12, dimension 3 is to ensure that there is a business continuity and disaster
recovery plan as well as, for the higher scores, documented guidelines for operational risk
management (an operational risk management plan).




13
  It can be efficient to combine certain DeM functions, such as back-office and risk-control functions, with similar
functions not directly related to debt management, particularly when financing transactions are few and infrequent.
This practice would provide the scale to facilitate the segregation of responsibilities; for example, a treasury back
office would also process other transactions such as payables and receivables, or a risk monitoring and compliance
function could cover all risks and procedures in a finance department, not just those relating to debt.

14
     A general code-of-conduct for civil servants does not qualify if such provisions are not included.



The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 64                              OF   75
Business continuity planning allows an organization to prepare for future incidents that could
jeopardize the performance of its duties, the ability to meet business objectives, and its long-
term health. Such incidents include local incidents such as building fires, regional incidents such
as earthquakes, or national incidents such as pandemic illnesses.

Disaster recovery is the process of regaining access to the data, hardware, and software and
having the minimum number of staff necessary to recover and resume critical business
operations after a natural or human-induced disaster. A disaster recovery plan (DRP) should also
include plans for coping with the unexpected or sudden loss of key personnel. A DRP is part of
the business continuity planning process.

If the SNG has a DRP, it is important to check that the DRP incorporates DeM operations, that
staff in the principal DeM entity (or the DeM entities) are aware of the DRP and what it covers,
and that the DRP has been tested to cover all relevant DeM operations.

Many different risks can negatively affect the normal operations of an organization. An
operational risk assessment would determine what constitutes a disaster, which risks the
organization is most susceptible to, which systems and activities are critical, and what the
potential impact (financial and reputational) might be. The assessment covers incidents such as
natural disasters, fire, power failure, terrorist attacks, organized or deliberate disruptions, theft,
fraud, system or equipment failures (or both), human error, computer viruses, legal issues,
worker strikes or disruptions, and loss of key personnel. Actions to mitigate those risks are
included in an operational risk management plan.

Dimensions to be assessed

The following dimensions should be assessed according to the requirements laid out in in table
14:

       1. Segregation of duties for some key functions, as well as the presence of an operational
          risk monitoring and compliance function
       2. Staff capacity and human resource management
       3. Presence of an operational risk management plan, including business continuity and
          disaster recovery arrangements


   Table 14 Assessment and Scoring of Segregation of Duties, Staff Capacity, and Business
       Continuity
     Score         Requirements
     A             1. The minimum requirements for score B are met. In addition, there is
                       a separate unit responsible for risk monitoring and compliance that
                       reports directly to the head of the relevant DeM entity.
                   2. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, there are individual
                       training and development plans and annual performance
                       assessments for debt management staff.


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 65              OF   75
                         3. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, there is an
                             operational recovery site that is tested at least annually.
       B                 1. The minimum requirements for score C are met. In addition, there is
                             clear organizational separation between staff responsible for loan
                             negotiation and preliminary contract data entry and those
                             responsible for (a) confirmation of contract information and
                             finalization of records in the system, and (b) initiating and processing
                             payments. There is at least one staff member responsible for risk
                             monitoring and compliance.
                         2. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition, there are
                             code-of-conduct and conflict-of-interest guidelines in place that are
                             reviewed and updated as needed. Staff has been trained on the
                             provisions of the above guidelines upon joining the DeM entity (or
                             entities) and at least every two years thereafter.
                         3. The minimum requirement for score C is met. In addition,
                             documented guidelines exist for operational risk management.
       C                 1. There is clear separation between staff responsible for loan
                             negotiation and preliminary contract data entry and those
                             responsible for (a) confirmation of contract information and
                             finalization of records in the system, and (b) initiating and processing
                             payments.
                         2. There is sufficient and adequately trained staff with formal job
                             descriptions reflecting their current tasks.
                         3. There is a written business continuity and disaster recovery plan,
                             which has been tested in the past three years.
       D                 1. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
                         2. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
                         3. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.

Supporting documentation

          An organizational chart setting out all the entities involved in DeM and their respective
           roles and staff responsibilities
          A sample of job descriptions for staff involved in DeM activities
          A sample of individual training and development plans
          A sample of performance assessments
          A copy of the code-of-conduct and conflict-of-interest guidelines
          A copy of the business continuity plan and DRP
          A copy of an operational risk management plan or guidelines
          Terms of reference or job descriptions for the risk monitoring and compliance function
Indicative questions to ask

          What are the roles and responsibilities of the staff members in the principal DeM entity


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 66               OF   75
       (or DeM entities)?
      Who has the authority to negotiate and transact on behalf of the SNG? Who is responsible
       for settling the transactions, arranging payments, and recording debt data? Are these
       functions performed by different staff members, by separate divisions, or both?
      Are there staff members responsible for monitoring government DeM operations to
       ensure that such operations are within the authorities and limits set by government
       policies and comply with statutory and contractual obligations? Is this work reinforced by
       the organizational structure and by job descriptions for the staff members responsible for
       risk monitoring and compliance?
      Does the principal DeM entity (or DeM entities) have a separate unit for risk monitoring
       and compliance? If so, where is it located, how many staff members are involved, and
       how actively do they monitor the risks?
      How many professional staff members are in the principal DeM entity (or DeM entities)?
       How long have the staff members been employed in their current DeM activities? What
       are the qualifications of staff members?
      What is the situation regarding staff recruitment and retention? What is the level of staff
       turnover?
      Do all staff members have clear job descriptions or terms of reference? If so, how
       frequently are these job descriptions reviewed and updated?
      Do staff members have individual training and development plans? If so, how are these
       plans formulated, and what are the policies and budget for training?
      What training have staff members received? When and where was this training
       conducted or provided?
      Is staff members’ performance assessed? If so, how frequently? What is the process?
      Do staff members have code-of-conduct guidelines, conflict-of-interest guidelines, or
       both? If so, who is responsible for preparing and monitoring the guidelines? Are staff
       members trained on these guidelines?
      Is there a business continuity plan and DRP? If so, is there an alternative recovery site for
       relocating the business, and where is it located? When was the plan last tested? How was
       the test conducted?
      Are there documented guidelines for operational risk management? What risks are
       covered in these guidelines?




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 67            OF   75
DPI-13         DEBT AND DEBT-RELATED RECORDS

Rationale and background

Dimension 1: Completeness and timeliness of SNG records on its debt, loan guarantees, and
debt-related transactions

The rationale for DPI-13, dimension 1 is to ensure that the SNG has complete records of its debt,
loan guarantees, and debt-related transactions, such as currency and interest rate swaps.

Sound practice requires a comprehensive debt management system that records, monitors,
settles, and accounts effectively for all SNG debt and debt-related transactions. This system
should provide for an accurate, consistent, and complete database of domestic, external, and
guaranteed debt. It forms the base for all DeM activities, including the cost-risk analysis of the
debt portfolio, DeM strategy development, borrowing plans, and debt service.

For disbursing loans, which are commonly used for project financing, it is important that the
actual disbursement be recorded without delay. Recording disbursements in a timely manner will
allow for the accurate calculation and planning of interest payments

Dimension 2: Complete and up-to-date records of all holders of SNG securities in a secure
registry system, if applicable

The rationale for DPI-13, dimension 2 is to ensure that there is an accurate and secure registry
system for SNG debt securities issued in electronic form.

A secure registry system is essential for any debt securities issued in electronic form (often
referred to as “dematerialized,” “book-entry,” or “scriptless” securities). Instead of keeping debt
securities in paper or physical form in a secure location, the investors in these securities now rely
completely on an electronic registry system to keep track of their legal title to these instruments
and for the payment of interest and principal on due dates. Thus, the registry system must be
very secure. Because the ownership of SNG debt securities may change daily through
transactions in the secondary market, there must be robust processes in place for the timely,
accurate, and secure updating of the registry. In many countries, the registry system will be
developed, maintained, and managed by the central bank. In some countries, the registry system
is provided by an external party such as commercial banks or Computershare (a private
company).

To assess the completeness and security of the registry system, the following should be
considered:

      Identification of the entity responsible for managing and maintaining the registry system
       and its location
      Assessment of registry system management, the resources available, and the
       management procedures, including controls for maintaining the system


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 68             OF   75
          Assessment of the settlement process for government securities
          Frequency and nature of the audit of the registry and registry system


A nominee account (that is, accounts in the name of local custodian bank on behalf of its clients)
is acceptable. Also, the registry should ensure that holders of government securities are regularly
provided with statements of their holdings. Internal or external performance audits of the
registry system should be undertaken, which examines internal controls and management of
operational risks. (See description of audits in DPI-5.)

Dimensions to be assessed

The following dimensions should be assessed according to the requirements laid out in table 15:

           1. Completeness and timeliness of SNG records on its debt, loan guarantees, and debt-
              related transactions
           2. Complete and up-to-date records of all holders of SNG securities in a secure registry
              system, if applicable

   Table 15 Assessment and Scoring of Debt and Loan Guarantee Records
     Score          Requirements
     A              1. The requirements for score B are met. There are complete debt
                        records within a one-month lag.
                    2. The requirements for score B are met. In addition, settlement for SNG
                        debt securities is made on a delivery versus payment (DVP) basis.

       B                 1. The minimum requirement for score C is met. There are complete
                             debt records within a two-month lag.
                         2. The minimum requirement for score C is met. The audit is conducted
                             annually.
       C                 1. There are complete records within a three-month lag for SNG
                             domestic, external, and guaranteed debt, as well as all debt-related
                             transactions.
                         2. SNG debt securities are dematerialized and kept in a central registry
                             that has up-to-date and secure records of all holders of SNG
                             securities. It is subject to an audit of internal controls and
                             management of operation risk every two years.
       D                 1. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.
                         2. The minimum requirement for score C is not met.

Supporting documentation

          A copy of a sample of reports that have been generated from the debt recording or
           management system to ascertain how up to date the debt records are

The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 69                OF   75
      Copies of the recent disbursement and payment notices
      Evidence that records in the registry system have been reconciled and audited
Indicative questions to ask

      What debt recording and management system is used?
      Does the debt recording and management system capture all debt transactions and loan
       guarantees?
      What is the time period or lag from the time a loan is disbursed to the time the
       disbursement is entered into the debt recording and management system?
      How does the registry system operate?
      How frequently are registry records reconciled and audited?
      Does the registry system allow nominee accounts?
      What physical security is in place for the registry system and registry operations?
      Has the registry system been audited to assess the effectiveness of the internal control
       system and security of the data?
      Does the registry regularly provide statements of holdings to investors (or allow electronic
       access to the same)?
      Have major holders of SNG securities experienced any problems with the accuracy or
       timeliness of registry services?




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 70           OF   75
ANNEX 1: DIFFERENCES                      BETWEEN THE            SOVEREIGN             AND THE          SUBNATIONAL
DEMPA TOOL15


 Dimension (dim)          Rationale                           Sovereign DeMPA           Subnational DeMPA

 DPI-1 Legal

 DPI-1     dim     1:     Authorization to borrow and to      Clearly specified that    The same existence, coverage
 Existence, coverage      issue loan guarantees, purposes     certain key provisions    and content of legal framework
 and content of legal     for       borrowing,       debt     should be included in     for DeM are required. However,
 framework.               management objectives, and          the           primary     the specification that certain key
                          reporting requirement to the        legislation.              provisions should be included in
                          local assembly.                                               primary legislation has been
                                                                                        removed. This can be either in
                                                                                        the primary or the secondary
                                                                                        legislation.




 DPI-1 dim 2:             Whenever       possible,    the     Covered under DPI-7       As the indicator assessing
                          subnational        government       on Coordination with      “Coordination with Monetary
 Extent of a legal        (SNG) should avoid direct           Monetary Policy, dim      Policy” is not relevant for SNGs,
 limit to direct access   borrowing from the central          3.                        it has been dropped from the
 of resources from the    bank. Monetary financing of                                   subnational      DeMPA       tool.
 central bank             government deficits, whether                                  However, in case SNG has
                          at the level of central or                                    access to central bank funds, the
                          subnational       government,                                 issue is assessed in this
                          imposes             undesirable                               dimension.
                          constraints on monetary policy
                          operations by increasing the
                          money supply.

 DPI-2 Managerial Structure

 DPI-2    dim     1:      Clear division of political level   Included                  Included
 Borrowing and debt-      and the entities implementing
                          the debt management strategy;




15
     The sovereign DeMPA methodology refers to the one revised in June 2015.


The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 71                                OF   75
 Dimension (dim)         Rationale                           Sovereign DeMPA         Subnational DeMPA

 Related transactions    carry out debt management
                         (DeM) without undue political
                         interference; coordination of
                         DeM

 DPI-2 dim 2: Loan       Coordination      and       risk    Included                Included
 guarantees              assessment of issuance of loan
                         guarantee by technical staff.

 DPI-3 Debt Management Strategy

                                                                                     Included. For SNGs there are no
                                                                                     requirements     to   describe
 DPI-3     dim      1:
                         Quality                             Included                measures aimed at supporting
 Content
                                                                                     domestic       debt     market
                                                                                     development.

                         Process                             Included                Included.      There   is    no
 DPI-3     dim   2:
                                                                                     requirement to obtain the views
 Decision-making
                                                                                     of the central bank.

 DPI-4 Evaluation of Debt Management Operations

 DPI-4 dim 1: Quality    Publish debt data regularly         Included                Included         with         some
 and timeliness of the   with international standard to                              modifications        (e.g.      no
 publication of a debt   enhance transparency.                                       requirement      for     residency
 statistical bulletin.                                                               classification).

 DPI-4      dim    2:    Accountability process should       Submit annual report    This is similar with the need to
 Evaluation of debt      be there.                           to Parliament on debt   submit to the local legislature or
 management                                                  data and activities.    council. Reporting to the central
 operations      and                                                                 government is assessed if
 reporting to the                                                                    required.
 central government

 DPI-5 Audit

 DPI-5     dim      1:   Accountability strengthened         Included                Included
 Frequency               by    regular     audits  and
                         transparency enhanced if audit
                         reports are disclosed.

 DPI-5     dim      2:   Adopt corrective measures to        Included                Included
 Appropriate             strengthen the accountability.
 response

 DPI-6 Coordination with Fiscal and Budgetary Policy

 DPI-6      dim     1:   For effective fiscal policy there   Included                Included
 Provision and quality   should be reliable debt service
 of      debt-service    forecasts.




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 72                             OF   75
 Dimension (dim)          Rationale                        Sovereign DeMPA          Subnational DeMPA

 forecasts

 DPI-6      dim      2:   Share information and conduct    Included                 Included
 Availability        of   debt sustainability analysis.
 information on     key
 macro variables,   and
 DSA

 DPI-7 Domestic Borrowing

 DPI-7     dim      1:    Market based borrowing,          In the sovereign         Domestic borrowings are based
 Market-based             proper borrowing planning and    DeMPA tool, DPI-7        on the borrowing plan.
 mechanisms to issue      market predictability.           deals            with
 domestic debt; the                                        coordination     with
 preparation of annual                                     monetary       policy,
 borrowing plan and                                        which was considered
 the publication of a                                      not relevant for the
 borrowing calendar                                        subnational DeMPA
                                                           tool, hence dropped.

 DPI-8      dim  2:       Sound practice. Reduce human     Included                 Stress   the  existence   of
 Availability    of       errors and makes the processes                            borrowing procedures for all
 documented               more robust.                                              domestic           borrowing
 procedures for all                                                                 instruments.
 domestic borrowing
 operations

 DPI-8 External Borrowing

 DPI-8     dim     1:     Ensure borrowing in a cost-      Included as DPI-9        Included
 Preparation      of      effective manner.
 borrowing plan and
 assessment of terms
 and conditions

 DPI-8      dim    2:     Sound practice. Reduce human     Included as DPI-9        Included
 Documented               errors and makes the processes
 procedures for all       more robust.
 external borrowings

 DPI-8 dim 3: Degree      Sound legal features.            Included as DPI-9        Included
 of involvement of
 legal advisers

 DPI-9 Loan Guarantees, On-lending and Derivatives

 DPI-9 dim 1: Loan        Control and risk monitoring of   Included as DPI-10       Included      and     additional
 guarantees,              loan guarantees.                                          attention given to the letter of
 availability   and                                                                 comfort.
 quality          of
 documented policies
 and procedures



The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 73                            OF   75
 Dimension (dim)         Rationale                         Sovereign DeMPA          Subnational DeMPA

 DPI-9 dim 2: On-        Control and risk-monitoring of    Included as DPI-10       Included. This focuses on the
 lending, availability   on-lending.                                                funds borrowed by the SNG to
 and     quality    of                                                              on-lend to its enterprises or local
 documented policies                                                                governments.
 and procedures

 DPI-9       dim  3:     Control and risk-monitoring of    Included as DPI-10       Included
 Derivatives,            derivatives if used.
 availability    and
 quality          of
 documented policies
 and procedures

 DPI-10 Cash Flow Forecasting and Cash Balance Management

                         Make         sure     financial   Included as DPI-11       Same requirements
                         obligations are     met when      on frequency and
 Effective cash flow
                         falling due.                      length of cash balance
 forecasting
                                                           forecast

                         Actively manage cash balance      Included as DPI-11       The requirement of integration
                         to maximize profit within         on frequency of          with     domestic     borrowing
 Effective cash
                         preset risk indicators.           investment and short-    program is moved to score B and
 Balance
                                                           term transaction         relax requirement of transaction
 management
                                                                                    frequency.

 DPI-11 Debt Administration and Data Security

 DPI-11      dim   1:    Control and procedure for         Included as DPI-12       Included
 Availability     and    processing   debt  service
 quality           of    transaction.
 documented
 procedures for the
 processing of debt-
 related payments and
 receivables

 DPI-11      dim  2:     Control and procedure for debt    Included as DPI-12       Included
 Availability    and     data recording and storage.
 quality          of
 documented
 procedures for data
 recording       and
 storage

 DPI-11      dim    3:   Ensure data security by           Included as DPI-12       Included
 Availability     and    controlling access to debt data
 quality            of   recording and management
 documented              system.
 procedures        for
 controlling access to
 data recording and



The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 74                            OF   75
 Dimension (dim)          Rationale                         Sovereign DeMPA      Subnational DeMPA

 management system

 DPI-11    dim   4:       Ensure data security by secure    Included as DPI-12   Included
 Frequency       of       backing-up procedures.
 backups and secure
 storage of these
 backups

 DPI-12 Segregation of Duties, Staff Capacity, and Business Continuity

 DPI-12     dim     1:    Reduce operational risk by        Included as DPI-13   Included and keeping in mind
 Segregation of duties    separation of key functions and                        that there may be fewer staff at
 and presence of a        effective risk monitoring.                             the subnational level and
 risk monitoring and                                                             combined functions.
 compliance function

 DPI-12 dim 2: Staff      Staff capacity and code-of-       Included as DPI-13   Included
 capacity and human       conduct.
 resource
 management

 DPI-12      dim     3:   Reduction of operational risk,    Included as DPI-13   Included
 Operational       risk   and to ensure business
 management plan,         continuity in event of serious
 including business       incidents.
 continuity,       and
 disaster     recovery
 arrangements.

 DPI-13 Debt and Loan Guarantee Records

 DPI-13     dim    1:     Accurate, complete and timely     Included as DPI-14   Included and reference to past
 Complete and timely      debt records.                                          debt relief is removed.
 records of all debt
 and loan guarantees.

 DPI-13     dim     2:    Secure registry system ensures    Included as DPI-14   Included and requirement to
 Complete and timely      accurate and up-to-date records                        access to residency of holders is
 records of holders of    of security holders.                                   removed.
 debt securities in a
 secure       registry
 system




The Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment Tool Page 75                         OF   75
