         Sudan
  The World Bank Group
Country Opinion Survey FY15

      Report of Findings
         June 2015
The World Bank Group                                   Sudan                              Country Opinion Survey 2015




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3

          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3

         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5

         IV. General Issues Facing Sudan......................................................11

          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group .......................18

         VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness ...................................32

        VII. How the World Bank Group Operates .......................................40

       VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments .......................51

         IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Sudan ..................57

          X. Communication and Openness..................................................63

         XI. Appendices ................................................................................70




                                                          2
The World Bank Group                           Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



I. Objectives
This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:
       Assist the World Bank Group in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in
        Sudan perceive the World Bank Group;
       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Sudan regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Sudan;
            Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank Group in Sudan;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness and results,
               project/program related issues, knowledge work and activities, and
               communication and information sharing in Sudan; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank Group’s future role in Sudan.
       Use data to help inform Sudan country team’s strategy.


II. Methodology
From February to April 2015, 439 stakeholders of the World Bank Group in Sudan were invited
to provide their opinions on the WBG’s assistance to the country by participating in a country
survey. Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President; the office
of a Minister; the office of a Parliamentarian; employees of a ministry, ministerial department, or
implementation agency; project management units (PMUs) overseeing implementation of a
project or consultants/contractors working on World Bank Group-supported projects/programs;
local government officials or staff; bilateral/multilateral agencies; private sector organizations;
private foundations; the financial sector/private banks; NGOs/community-based organizations
(CBOs); the media; independent government institutions; trade unions; faith-based groups; youth
groups; academia/research institutes/think tanks; and the judiciary branch. A total of 273
stakeholders participated in the survey (62% response rate).
In addition, when possible, responses from respondents completing this country survey were
compared to responses from the 152 respondents (51% response rate) who completed the country
survey in FY ’12. A full set of these comparisons can be found in Appendix F (see page 163).
Respondents completed questionnaires with a member of the research team. Respondents were
asked about: general issues facing Sudan; their overall attitudes toward the WBG; the WBG’s
effectiveness and results; the WBG’s knowledge work and activities; working with the WBG;
the WBG’s future role in Sudan; and the WBG’s communication and information sharing. In
addition, every country that engages in the Country Survey must include specific indicator
questions that will be aggregated for the WBG’s annual Corporate Scorecard. These questions
are identified throughout the survey report.
A. General Issues Facing Sudan: Respondents were asked to indicate whether Sudan is headed
   in the right direction, what they thought were the most important development priorities,
   which areas would contribute most to reducing poverty, and what would achieve “Shared
   Prosperity?.


                                                 3
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



II. Methodology (continued)
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group: Respondents were asked to rate their
   familiarity with the WBG, its effectiveness in Sudan, WBG staff preparedness, the
   importance and effectiveness of its capacity building work, their agreement with various
   statements regarding the WBG’s work, and the extent to which it is an effective development
   partner. Respondents were also asked to indicate the sectoral areas on which it would be most
   productive for the WBG to focus its resources, its greatest values and greatest weaknesses, its
   most effective instruments, with which stakeholder groups the WBG should collaborate
   more, to what extent its work helps the poorest in Sudan, if the WBG should have more or
   less of a local presence in Sudan, if they have seen more or less effective collaboration
   between the WBG and UN, and to what they attributed slowed or failed reform efforts.
C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to indicate where
   decisions regarding its program are made and to rate the extent to which the WBG’s work
   helps achieve development results in Sudan, the extent to which it helps build/strengthen
   existing country systems, the extent to which the WBG meets Sudan’s needs for knowledge
   services and financial instruments, the extent to which it measures and corrects its work in
   real time, and the importance of the WBG’s involvement and its effectiveness across thirty-
   six development areas.
D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities: Respondents were asked to
   indicate how frequently they consult WBG knowledge work and to rate the quality of the
   WBG’s knowledge work and activities, including how significant of a contribution it makes
   to development results and its technical quality.
E. Working with the World Bank Group: Respondents were asked to rate their agreement with
   a series of statements regarding working with the WBG, the extent to which the WBG’s work
   helps promote public private partnerships and the extent to which the WBG is adequately
   staffed in Sudan. Respondents were also asked to indicate their perceptions of the WBG’s
   operational risk taking and selectivity in its support to Sudan.
F. The Multi Partner/Donor Trust Fund in Sudan as Managed by the World Bank:
   Respondents were asked to indicate the greatest strengths and greatest weaknesses of the
   Multi Donor Trust Fund in Sudan.
G. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Sudan: Respondents were asked to indicate
   what the WBG should do to make itself of greater value and which of its services the WBG
   should offer more of in Sudan.
H. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate how they
   get information about economic and social development issues, how they prefer to receive
   information from the WBG, their Internet access, and their usage and evaluation of the
   WBG’s websites. Respondents were asked about their awareness of the WBG’s Access to
   Information policy and past information requests from the WBG. Respondents were also
   asked to evaluate the WBG’s information accessibility and social media.
I. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, level of interaction with the WBG, exposure to the WBG in Sudan, gender,
   and geographic location.



                                                4
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



III. Demographics of the Sample
Only select demographic differences are discussed in the body of this report, but full breakdowns
by stakeholder groups, level of collaboration, location, and gender, and select sector/
specialization comparisons can be found in the Appendix (see page 73).


Current Position
       For all further analyses, the few respondents from the office of a Minister, private
        foundations, independent government institutions, and youth groups were included in the
        “Other? category. A complete listing of comparisons across stakeholder groups can be
        found in Appendix B (see page 89).




                                                5
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization
       Key comparisons across respondents’ specializations can be found in Appendix G (see
        page 168). In addition, specific comparisons of respondents who identified themselves as
        Generalists or Macroeconomics and fiscal management were conducted to examine if
        respondents from these two sectors dominated overall responses to select multiple
        response questions regarding key development areas and ratings of the WBG’s
        effectiveness across development areas.




                                               6
The World Bank Group                            Sudan                         Country Opinion Survey 2015



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Geographic Location
       Because of the small number of respondents from areas other than Central Sudan, these
        areas were combined into one “Other Areas? category. Only significant geographic
        location differences in ratings of indicator questions will be discussed in the body of this
        report. All comparisons can be found in Appendix C (see page 112).




                                                  7
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

World Bank Group Collaboration and Exposure

       Differences in responding, based on collaboration with the World Bank Group in Sudan,
        can be found in the Appendix D (see page 129). Differences in responses to the indicator
        questions, based on collaboration and exposure to the World Bank Group in Sudan, can
        be found in Appendix H (see page 180). Please note that where these two factors appear
        to have a significant relationship with overall views of the WBG, it is highlighted in
        yellow in that Appendix.




                                                8
The World Bank Group                         Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Gender

       Differences in responding, based on respondents’ gender, can be found in the Appendix E
        (see page 146).




                                               9
The World Bank Group                           Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Familiarity with the World Bank Group
       Year Comparison: Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower
        ratings of familiarity with the WBG (mean familiarity = 6.0) compared to respondents
        from the FY ’12 country survey (mean familiarity = 6.7).
       Stakeholders: Respondents from bilateral/ multilateral agencies and PMUs/Consultants
        on WBG projects had significantly higher ratings of familiarity with the WBG whereas
        respondents from the financial sector/private banks, private sector, and other organization
        had significantly lower ratings.
       Collaboration: Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG had
        significantly higher ratings of familiarity with the WBG (mean familiarity = 7.1)
        compared to respondents who had previously collaborated (mean familiarity = 6.5) and
        those who never collaborated (mean familiarity = 5.0).
       Impact of Familiarity: Respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the World Bank Group
        were significantly, strongly correlated with their perceptions of the WBG’s overall
        effectiveness, significantly, moderately correlated with their perceptions of the WBG’s
        relevance to development in Sudan, and had a small, but significant correlation with their
        perceptions of WBG’s work achieving development results.




                                                10
The World Bank Group                           Sudan                         Country Opinion Survey 2015



IV. General Issues Facing Sudan

Sudan Heading in the Right Direction

       Year Comparison: The majority of respondents from the FY ’12 country survey
        indicated that Sudan is headed in the wrong direction (54%), with smaller numbers
        indicating that Sudan is headed in the right direction (18%) or that they were not sure
        (28%).
       Stakeholders: Employees of ministries were the most likely to indicate that Sudan is
        headed in the right direction whereas respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG
        projects, NGOs/CBOs, the media, academia, and other organizations were more likely to
        indicate that Sudan is headed in the wrong direction, and respondents from
        bilateral/multilateral agencies and the financial sector/private banks were the most likely
        to indicate that they were not sure. Respondents from local government and private sector
        were split between Sudan being heading in the right or wrong direction.
       Collaboration: Respondents who indicated that they currently collaborate with the WBG
        were split between Sudan being heading in the right or wrong direction whereas
        respondents who indicated that they had previously collaborated with the WBG were
        more likely to indicate that they were not sure and respondents who indicated that they
        had never collaborated with the WBG were more likely to indicate that Sudan is headed
        in the wrong direction.




                                                 11
The World Bank Group                        Sudan                      Country Opinion Survey 2015



IV. General Issues Facing Sudan (continued)
Development Priority
       Year Comparison: Respondents from the FY ’12 country survey indicated that education
        (48%) was the most important development priority facing Sudan, followed by
        agricultural development (32%) and security/stabilization/reconstruction (30%).




                                             12
The World Bank Group                           Sudan                         Country Opinion Survey 2015



IV. General Issues Facing Sudan (continued)

Development Priority (continued)
       Stakeholders: Although respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that
        security/stabilization/reconstruction, education, food security, and poverty reduction are
        the most important development priorities facing Sudan, respondents from the financial
        sector/private banks also indicated that trade/exports is an important priority and
        respondents from bilateral/ multilateral agencies indicated that debt relief and access to
        finance is one of the most important development priorities facing Sudan.

       Gender: Although female and male respondents both indicated that security/stabilization/
        reconstruction, education, food security, and poverty reduction are the most important
        development priorities facing Sudan, female respondents were significantly more likely
        to indicate that health, poverty reduction, and economic growth are important
        development priorities facing Sudan compared to male respondents, who were
        significantly more likely to indicate that job creation/employment, rural development,
        and transport are important development priorities.

       Specializations/Sectors:
             Generalist respondents were significantly more likely to indicate that poverty
              reduction, regional conflict and tensions, natural resource development, social
              cohesion, and regulatory framework are important development priorities facing
              Sudan, but significantly less likely to indicate that security/stabilization/
              reconstruction and debt relief and access to finance are important priorities
              compared to respondents from other specializations.
             Respondents from the macroeconomics and fiscal management sector were
              significantly more likely to indicate that private sector development, poverty
              reduction, and economic growth are important development priorities facing
              Sudan, but significantly less likely to indicate that education is an important
              priority facing Sudan compared to respondents from other sectors.




                                                 13
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



IV. General Issues Facing Sudan (continued)
Factors Contributing to Poverty Reduction
       Year Comparison: Respondents from the FY ’12 country survey indicated rural
        development (41%), public financial management (36%), agricultural development
        (32%), and security/stabilization/reconstruction (27%) would contribute most to reducing
        poverty in Sudan.




                                               14
The World Bank Group                           Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



IV. General Issues Facing Sudan (continued)

Factors Contributing to Poverty Reduction (continued)
       Stakeholders: Although respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that rural
        development, security/stabilization/reconstruction, and economic growth are the key
        contributors to reducing poverty in Sudan, respondents from bilateral/multilateral
        agencies indicated that transport is also a key factor, respondents from NGOs/CBOs
        indicated that agricultural development is a key factor, and respondents from the media
        indicated that job creation is one of the key contributors to reducing poverty in Sudan.

       Gender: Although female and male respondents both indicated that rural development,
        security/stabilization/reconstruction, and economic growth are the key contributors to
        reducing poverty in Sudan, female respondents were significantly more likely to indicate
        that foreign direct investment and trade and exports are key contributors to poverty
        reduction compared to male respondents, who were significantly more likely to indicate
        that rural development and transport are key contributors to poverty reduction in Sudan.

       Specializations/Sectors:
             In addition to rural development and economic growth, generalist respondents
              indicated that agricultural development is a key contributor and were significantly
              more likely to indicate that health, trade and exports, private sector development,
              crime and violence, energy, and social cohesion are key contributors to poverty
              reduction, but significantly less likely to indicate that security/stabilization/
              reconstruction, food security, and equality of opportunity are key contributors
              compared to respondents from other specializations.
             Respondents from the macroeconomics and fiscal management sector were
              significantly more likely to indicate that water and sanitation, social protection,
              gender equity, and regulatory framework are key contributors to poverty
              reduction, but significantly less likely to indicate that agricultural development
              and anti-corruption are key contributors to poverty reduction in Sudan compared
              to respondents from other sectors.




                                                15
The World Bank Group            Sudan         Country Opinion Survey 2015



IV. General Issues Facing Sudan (continued)

Achieving “Shared Prosperity?




                                 16
The World Bank Group                             Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



IV. General Issues Facing Sudan (continued)

Achieving “Shared Prosperity? (continued)

       Stakeholders: Although respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that greater
        access to micro-finance for the poor, better employment for young people, better security
        and peace building, and education and training that better ensure job opportunity are the
        key contributors to achieving “Shared Prosperity? in Sudan, employees of ministries and
        respondents from the private sector indicated that consistent economic growth is a key
        contributor, respondents from NGOs/CBOs indicated that better natural resource
        management is also a key contributor, and respondents from local government indicated
        that debt relief and access to finance is a key contributor to achieving “Shared Prosperity?
        in Sudan.

       Collaboration: Respondents who had previously collaborated with the WBG were
        significantly more likely to indicate that greater access to micro-finance for the poor is a
        key contributor to achieving “Shared Prosperity? compared to respondents who are
        currently collaborating or had never collaborated with the WBG.




                        As noted in the “Methodology? section, the indicator
                        questions referred to throughout the survey report are
                       questions that are asked in every country that engages in
                        the Country Survey. These will be aggregated for the
                         World Bank Group’s annual Corporate Scorecard.




                                                  17
The World Bank Group                       Sudan                      Country Opinion Survey 2015



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
Focusing World Bank Group Resources
       Year Comparison: Respondents from the FY ’12 country survey indicated that the WBG
        should focus most of its resources on basic infrastructure (45%), agricultural
        development (41%), rural development (33%), and education (29%) in Sudan.




                                             18
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Focusing World Bank Group Resources (continued)

       Stakeholders: Although respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that the
        WBG should focus on security/stabilization/reconstruction and agricultural development,
        respondents from local government indicated that the WBG should focus on rural
        development, respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies indicated that the WBG
        should focus on transport and natural resource management, respondents from the private
        sector and the media indicated that the WBG should focus on debt relief and access to
        finance, and respondents from other organizations indicated that the WBG should focus
        on poverty reduction in Sudan.

       Collaboration: Although respondents across all levels of collaboration indicated that the
        WBG should focus on security/stabilization/reconstruction and agricultural development,
        respondents who had previously collaborated with the WBG were significantly more
        likely to indicate that the WBG should focus on poverty reduction in Sudan compared to
        respondents who are currently collaborating or had never collaborated with the WBG.

       Gender: Although female and male respondents indicated that the WBG should focus on
        security/stabilization/reconstruction and agricultural development, female respondents
        were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should focus on equality of
        opportunity and information and communications technology compared to male
        respondents, who were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should focus
        on transport in Sudan.

       Specializations/Sectors:
             Generalist respondents were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG
              should focus on poverty reduction, food security, and trade and exports, but
              significantly less likely to indicate that the WBG should focus on public sector
              governance/reform and natural resource management compared to respondents
              from other specializations.
             Respondents from the macroeconomics and fiscal management sector were
              significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should focus on private sector
              development, trade and exports, local governance and institutions, and disaster
              management, but significantly less likely to indicate that the WBG should focus
              on education compared to respondents from other sectors.




                                                19
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
The World Bank Group’s Overall Effectiveness (Indicator Question)
       Year Comparison: Respondents in this year’s country survey had statistically similar
        ratings for the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Sudan (mean effectiveness = 6.0)
        compared to respondents from the FY ’12 country survey (mean effectiveness = 6.1).
       Stakeholders: Employees of ministries and respondents from local governments had the
        highest ratings for the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Sudan whereas respondents from
        the private sector had significantly lower ratings.
       Collaboration: Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG had
        significantly higher ratings for the WBG’s overall effectiveness (mean effectiveness =
        6.9) compared to respondents who had previously collaborated (mean effectiveness =
        6.2) and those who never collaborated (mean effectiveness = 5.2).
       Gender: Female respondents had significantly higher ratings for the WBG’s overall
        effectiveness (mean effectiveness = 7.5) compared to male respondents (mean
        effectiveness = 5.7).




Achieving Development Results (Indicator Question)
       Year Comparison: Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher
        ratings for the extent to which the WBG achieves development results in Sudan (mean
        rating = 6.5) compared to FY ’12 respondents (mean rating = 5.5).
       Stakeholders: Employees of ministries and respondents from the financial sector/private
        banks had the highest ratings for the extent to which the WBG achieves development
        results in Sudan whereas respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies, local
        government, and academia had significantly lower ratings.




                                                20
The World Bank Group                           Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Staff Preparedness (Indicator Question)

       Year Comparison: Respondents in this year’s country survey had statistically similar
        ratings for the extent to which the WBG’s staff is well prepared to help Sudan solve its
        development challenges (mean rating = 7.1) compared to FY ’12 respondents (mean
        rating = 7.5).

       Stakeholders: Employees of ministries and respondents from local government and the
        financial sector/private banks had the highest ratings for the extent to which the WBG’s
        staff is well prepared to help Sudan solve its development challenges whereas
        respondents from the private sector had significantly lower ratings.

       Collaboration: Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those
        who had previously collaborated had significantly higher ratings for the extent to which
        the WBG’s staff is well prepared to help Sudan solve its development challenges (mean
        rating = 7.8 and 7.5, respectively) compared to those who had never collaborated (mean
        rating = 6.3).




                                                21
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Overall Ratings for Indicator Questions

       Stakeholders: Respondents from local government gave the highest ratings across all of
        the country survey indicator questions whereas respondents from bilateral/multilateral
        agencies, academia, and other organizations had significantly lower ratings. Responses
        for individual indicator questions by stakeholder groups can be found in Appendix I (see
        page 181).

       Collaboration: Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG or who had
        previously collaborated had significantly higher ratings across all of the country survey
        indicator questions (mean rating = 6.9 and 6.6, respectively) compared to respondents
        who never collaborated (mean rating = 5.8). Responses for individual indicator questions
        by levels of collaboration can be found in Appendix H (see page 180).




                                                22
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

WBG Activities: Greatest Value

       Year Comparison: Respondents from the FY ’12 country survey indicated that the
        WBG’s greatest value to Sudan was its training/capacity building (46%), technical
        assistance (39%), mobilizing third party financial resources (36%), and financial
        resources (27%).
       Stakeholders: Although respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that the
        WBG’s greatest value is capacity development, respondents from the private sector and
        NGOs/CBOs were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG’s financial
        resources were its greatest value compared to respondents from stakeholder groups.




                                               23
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Capacity Building: WBG Effectiveness

       Stakeholders: Employees of ministries and respondents from PMUs/Consultants on
        WBG projects, local government, and the media had the highest ratings for the WBG’s
        effectiveness in project implementation whereas respondents from the private sector had
        significantly lower ratings. Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG projects,
        local government, and other organizations had the highest ratings for the WBG’s
        effectiveness in citizen engagement whereas respondents from the private sector and
        NGOs/CBOs had significantly lower ratings.

       Collaboration: Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG had
        significantly higher ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness at project implementation (mean
        effectiveness = 8.0) compared to respondents who had previously collaborated (mean
        effectiveness = 7.3) and those who never collaborated (mean effectiveness = 6.3).
        Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG had significantly higher
        ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness at citizen engagement (mean effectiveness = 6.7)
        compared to respondents who had previously collaborated (mean effectiveness = 5.8) and
        those who never collaborated (mean effectiveness = 5.2).

       Gender: Female respondents had significantly higher ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness
        in project implementation, citizen engagement, and policy design (mean effectiveness =
        8.5, 6.9, and 8.5, respectively) compared to male respondents (mean effectiveness = 7.0,
        5.8, and 6.4, respectively).




                                               24
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Capacity Building: Importance of WBG Involvement

       Collaboration: Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG had
        significantly higher ratings for the importance of the WBG’s involvement in project
        implementation (mean rating = 9.0) compared to respondents who had previously
        collaborated (mean rating = 8.5) and those who never collaborated (mean rating = 8.1).

       Gender: Female respondents had significantly higher ratings for the importance of the
        WBG’s involvement in project implementation (mean rating = 9.2) compared to male
        respondents (mean rating = 8.5).




                                               25
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Greatest Weakness
       Year Comparison: Respondents from the FY ’12 country survey indicated that the
        WBG’s greatest weaknesses were being too influenced by developed countries (39%),
        followed by being too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures (26%) and
        not being adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Sudan (24%).




                                               26
The World Bank Group                           Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Greatest Weakness (continued)

       Stakeholders: Although respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that they
        didn’t know what the WBG’s greatest weakness is or they indicated not enough public
        disclosure of its work or not being adequately sensitive to political/social realities in
        Sudan, respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG projects indicated that the WBG’s
        processes are too complex and too slow, respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies
        indicated that the WBG’s advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical
        problem solving and that the WBG is too influenced by developed countries, respondents
        from the private sector and other organizations indicated that WBG staff are too
        inaccessible, respondents from NGOs/CBOS indicated that the WBG’s processes are too
        slow, respondents from academia indicated that the WBG’s advice and strategies do not
        lend themselves to practical problem solving and that the WBG is not focused enough on
        issues that are unique to post-conflict countries.

       Collaboration: A plurality of respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG
        indicated that its greatest weakness is that its processes are too slow whereas respondents
        who had previously collaborated with the WBG were more likely to indicate that the
        WBG does not collaborate enough with stakeholders outside the Government and those
        who never collaborated with the WBG were more likely to indicate that the WBG is not
        being adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Sudan.

       Gender: Female respondents were significantly more likely to indicate that they don’t
        know what the WBG’s greatest weakness is compared to male respondents, who were
        significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG’s greatest weaknesses were its advice
        and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving and there being an
        inadequate number of WBG staff members in Sudan.




                                                 27
The World Bank Group                           Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Attributing Failed/Slow Reform Efforts

       Year Comparison: Respondents from the FY ’12 country survey indicated that they most
        often attributed failed or slow reform efforts to political pressures and obstacles (46%).




                                                28
The World Bank Group                            Sudan                         Country Opinion Survey 2015



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Attributing Failed/Slow Reform Efforts (continued)
       Stakeholders: Although respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that they
        attributed failed or slow reform efforts to an inadequate level of civil society
        participation, employees of ministries were more likely to indicate ongoing conflict and
        stability, respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG projects were more likely to
        indicate a lack of/inadequate level of capacity in government, respondents from local
        government were more likely to indicate that reforms are not well thought out in light of
        country challenges, respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies, the financial
        sector/private banks, and other organizations indicated political pressures and obstacles,
        and respondents from other organizations also indicated poor donor coordination.
       Collaboration: Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG were
        significantly more likely to indicate that they attributed failed or slow reform efforts to a
        lack of/inadequate level of capacity in government compared to respondents who had
        previously collaborated with the WBG and those who never collaborated with the WBG.
        Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who had
        previously collaborated with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate that they
        attributed failed or slow reform efforts to political pressures and obstacles compared to
        those who never collaborated with the WBG. Respondents who had never collaborated
        with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate that they attributed failed or
        slow reform efforts to ongoing conflict and instability compared to those who are
        currently collaborating and those who had previously collaborated with the WBG.


Build/Strengthen Existing Country Systems
       Stakeholders: Employees of ministries and respondents from PMUs/Consultants on
        WBG projects, the financial sector/private banks, and local government had the highest
        ratings for the extent to which the WBG helps to build/strengthen existing country
        systems in Sudan whereas respondents from academia, the media, the private sector, and
        bilateral/multilateral agencies had significantly lower ratings.
       Collaboration: Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG had the
        highest ratings for the extent to which the WBG helps to build/strengthen existing
        country systems (mean rating = 7.7) whereas respondents who never collaborated had
        significantly lower ratings (mean rating = 5.8) and those who had previously collaborated
        were in between (mean rating = 6.4).




                                                 29
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

The WBG’s Work Supporting the Poorest in Sudan

       Stakeholders: Respondents from local government were the most likely to indicate that
        the WBG’s work and support helps the poorest in Sudan to a fully sufficient degree
        (43%) whereas respondents from the financial sector/private banks were the most likely
        to indicate that the WBG’s work and support helps the poorest in Sudan to a very
        insufficient degree (40%).




                                               30
The World Bank Group                         Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

UN and WBG Collaboration

       Stakeholders: Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies were the most likely to
        indicate that they perceived more effective collaboration between the WBG and the UN
        in Sudan over the past year (60%) whereas respondents from the financial sector/private
        banks, NGOs/CBOs, and academia were the most likely to indicate that they didn’t know
        about the collaboration between the UN and WBG (71%, 71%, and 61%, respectively).




                                               31
The World Bank Group           Sudan        Country Opinion Survey 2015



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness
Importance of Specific Areas




                                32
The World Bank Group                           Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Importance of Specific Areas (continued)

   Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across several of these
    development areas. For the most part, respondents from local government and other
    organizations tended to have the highest ratings for the importance of the WBG’s
    involvement in these areas whereas respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies, the
    financial sector/private banks, and academia tended to have significantly lower ratings. A full
    breakdown of importance ratings by stakeholder groups can be found in Appendix B (see
    page 89).

   Collaboration: A full breakdown of ratings by level of collaboration can be found in
    Appendix D (see page 129).
         Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG had significantly higher
          ratings for the importance of the WBG’s involvement in climate change compared to
          respondents who had previously collaborated and those who never collaborated.
         Respondents who never collaborated with the WBG had significantly higher ratings
          for the importance of the WBG’s involvement in crime and violence and trade and
          exports compared to respondents who had previously collaborated and those who are
          currently collaborating.

   Gender: A full breakdown of ratings by gender can be found in Appendix E (see page 146).
    Female respondents had significantly higher ratings for the importance of the WBG’s
    involvement in crime and violence, financial markets, and gender equity compared to male
    respondents.

   Specializations/Sectors: A full breakdown of ratings by respondents’ specializations/sectors
    in Appendix G (see page 168).
         Generalist respondents had significantly higher ratings for the importance of the
          WBG’s involvement in crime and violence, private sector development, foreign direct
          investment, local governance and institutions, trade and exports, economic growth,
          social cohesion, social protection, agricultural development, and education compared
          to respondents from other specializations.




                                                33
The World Bank Group              Sudan            Country Opinion Survey 2015



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of Specific Areas




                                   34
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of Specific Areas (continued)

       Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across several of
        these development areas. For the most part, employees of ministries and respondents
        from local government tended to give the highest ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness in
        these areas whereas respondents from academia tended to give significantly lower
        ratings. A full breakdown of effectiveness ratings by stakeholder groups can be found in
        Appendix B (see page 89).

       Gender: Female respondents had significantly higher ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness
        across nearly all of these development areas compared to male respondents. A full
        breakdown of ratings by gender can be found in Appendix E (see page 146).

       Specializations/Sectors: A full breakdown of importance ratings by respondents’
        specializations/sectors in Appendix G (see page 168).
             Generalist respondents had significantly higher ratings for the WBG’s
              effectiveness in foreign direct investment, water and sanitation, equality of
              opportunity, and natural resource management compared to respondents from
              other specializations.
             Respondents from the macroeconomics and fiscal management sector had
              significantly lower ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness in poverty reduction,
              water and sanitation, and rural development compared to respondents from other
              sectors.

       Additional Comparisons: Please note that a complete breakdown of respondents’
        effectiveness ratings for the WBG’s work across all development areas can be found in
        the Appendix. In addition to the aggregate mean ratings for each area, respondents who
        indicated that they “Don’t Know? are reported in Appendix A (see page 74), suggesting
        that primarily informed stakeholders responded to these questions. Additional
        breakdowns by geographic locations can be found in Appendix C (see page 112).




                                                35
The World Bank Group                         Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of Specific Areas: Year Comparison
       Year Comparison: Respondents in this year’s country survey gave higher ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness across all areas compared to FY ’12 respondents. Those differences
        that reached statistical significance are indicated in the chart. A full breakdown of
        effectiveness ratings across country surveys can be found in Appendix F (see page 163).




                                               36
The World Bank Group                   Sudan       Country Opinion Survey 2015



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of Specific Areas: Collaboration




                                        37
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of Specific Areas: Collaboration (continued)

       Collaboration:
             Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG had the highest
              ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness in information and communications
              technology, law and justice, urban development, environmental sustainability,
              regulatory framework, economic growth, health, and climate change whereas
              respondents who never collaborated with the WBG had significantly lower ratings
              and respondents who had previously collaborated with the WBG fell in between.
             Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG had significantly
              higher ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness in communicable/non-communicable
              diseases, gender equity, and social protection compared to respondents who never
              collaborated and those who had previously collaborated with the WBG.
             Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who had
              previously collaborated with the WBG had significantly higher ratings for the
              WBG’s effectiveness in poverty reduction, water and sanitation, public sector
              governance/reform, rural development, global/regional integration, education, and
              security/stabilization/reconstruction compared to respondents who never
              collaborated with the WBG.
             Respondents who had previously collaborated with the WBG had the highest
              ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness in food security and agricultural development
              whereas respondents who never collaborated with the WBG had significantly
              lower ratings and respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG fell
              in between.
             A full breakdown of effectiveness ratings across levels of collaboration can be
              found in Appendix D (see page 129).




                                                38
The World Bank Group                            Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness
To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the World Bank Group’s overall
effectiveness and ratings of its ability to help achieve development results in Sudan, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the thirty-six specific areas
of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve development
results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area increase,
respondents’ ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of effectiveness in
one area increase, ratings of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results increase.
Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of effectiveness in one specific area are
related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness or perceptions
of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results.

       Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
        correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the WBG’s
        overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
        drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Sudan. The areas
        determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
                The WBG’s effectiveness at environmental sustainability;
                The WBG’s effectiveness at job creation/employment;
                The WBG’s effectiveness at education; and
                The WBG’s effectiveness at security/stabilization/reconstruction.


       Achieving Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-
        Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the
        WBG’s ability to help achieve development results in Sudan, suggesting that ratings of
        effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s ability to
        help achieve development results. The areas determined to be key drivers from these
        analyses were:
                The WBG’s effectiveness at job creation/employment;
                The WBG’s effectiveness at debt relief and access to finance;
                The WBG’s effectiveness at equality of opportunity; and
                The WBG’s effectiveness at food security.




                                                 39
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates

The World Bank Group’s Work in Sudan

       Year Comparison: Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher
        levels of agreement for the WBG’s strategies being realistic for Sudan and the WBG’s
        alignment with development priorities in Sudan compared to respondents from the FY
        ’12 country survey. Respondents in this year’s country survey and the FY ’12 country
        survey had statistically similar levels of agreement regarding the WBG’s relevance to
        development.

       Stakeholders:
             Employees of ministries and respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG
              projects and local government had the highest levels of agreement for the WBG’s
              alignment with development priorities whereas respondents from bilateral/
              multilateral agencies and academia had significantly lower levels of agreement.
             Employees of ministries and respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG
              projects had the highest levels of agreement for the WBG’s strategies being
              realistic for Sudan whereas respondents from bilateral/ multilateral agencies and
              the private sector had significantly lower levels of agreement.

       Gender: Female respondents had significantly higher levels of agreement for the WBG’s
        strategies being realistic, the WBG’s alignment with development priorities, and the
        WBG’s relevance to development in Sudan compared to male respondents.




                                                40
The World Bank Group                         Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015




VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

The World Bank Group’s Work in Sudan: Collaboration

       Collaboration: Respondents who had never collaborated with the WBG had significantly
        lower levels of agreement for the WBG’s alignment with development priorities, the
        WBG’s strategies being realistic for Sudan, and the WBG’s relevance to development in
        Sudan compared to respondents who currently collaborate or had previously collaborated
        with the WBG.




                                              41
The World Bank Group                           Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions

       Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across most of these
        aspects of how the WBG operates. For the most part, employees of ministries and
        respondents from local government tended to have the highest levels of agreement for
        these aspects whereas respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies, private sector, and
        academia tended to have significantly lower levels of agreement. A full breakdown of
        these ratings by stakeholder groups can be found in Appendix B (see page 89).

       Gender: Female respondents tended to have significantly higher levels of agreement
        across most of these aspects compared to male respondents. A full breakdown of these
        ratings by gender can be found in Appendix E (see page 146).




                                                42
The World Bank Group                        Sudan                      Country Opinion Survey 2015



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions: Year Comparison

       Year Comparison: Respondents in this year’s country survey had higher levels of
        agreement for these aspects of how the WBG operates compared to FY ’12 respondents.
        Those differences that reached statistical significance are indicated in the chart.




                                             43
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions: Collaboration
       Collaboration: Respondents who currently collaborate with the WBG tended to have
        higher levels of agreement for these aspects of how the WBG operates in Sudan
        compared to respondents who previously collaborated or never collaborated with the
        WBG. Those comparisons that reached statistical significance are indicated in the chart.




                                                44
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

WBG Promoting Private Public Partnerships




Measuring and Correcting in Real Time

       Collaboration: Respondents who currently collaborate with the WBG had the highest
        ratings that the WBG measures and corrects its work in real time in Sudan (mean rating =
        6.7) whereas respondents who had never collaborated with the WBG had significantly
        lower ratings (mean rating = 5.2) and those who had previously collaborated were in
        between (mean rating = 6.3).

       Gender: Female respondents had significantly higher ratings that the WBG measures and
        corrects its work in real time in Sudan (mean rating = 8.1) compared to male respondents
        (mean rating = 5.6).




                                               45
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
The World Bank Group as an Effective Development Partner
   Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across several of these
    aspects of the WBG being an effective development partner in Sudan. For the most part,
    employees of ministries and respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG projects and local
    government tended to have the highest ratings for these aspects whereas respondents from
    bilateral/multilateral agencies, the financial sector/private banks, and academia tended to
    have significantly lower ratings. A full breakdown of these ratings by stakeholder groups can
    be found in Appendix B (see page 89).
   Locations: Respondents from other areas had significantly higher ratings for the WBG’s
    collaboration with the Government (mean rating = 7.8) compared to respondents from
    Central Sudan (mean rating = 6.9). A full breakdown of these ratings by locations can be
    found in Appendix C (see page 112).
   Gender: Female respondents tended to have significantly higher ratings across most of these
    aspects compared to male respondents. A full breakdown of these ratings by gender can be
    found in Appendix E (see page 146).




                                               46
The World Bank Group                           Sudan                         Country Opinion Survey 2015



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

The World Bank Group as an Effective Development Partner: Year Comparison

       Year Comparison: Compared to respondents from the FY ’12 country survey,
        respondents in this year’s country survey gave higher ratings for nearly all aspects of the
        WBG as an effective development partner. Those differences that reached statistical
        significance are indicated in the chart.




                                                 47
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

The World Bank Group as an Effective Development Partner: Collaboration

       Collaboration: Respondents who currently collaborate with the WBG or who had
        previously collaborated tended to have higher ratings for these aspects of the WBG as an
        effective development partner in Sudan compared to respondents who had never
        collaborated with the WBG. Those comparisons that reached statistical significance are
        indicated in the chart below.




                                               48
The World Bank Group                         Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Risk-Taking




Where Decisions are Made

       Gender: Male respondents were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG’s
        decisions are made primarily at Headquarters (50%) compared to female respondents
        (30%).




                                              49
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Selectivity of the WBG’s Support

       Stakeholders: A plurality of respondents across most stakeholder groups indicated that
        the WBG is sufficiently selective, except pluralities of respondents from the private
        sector, NGOs/CBOs, academia, and other organizations who were more likely to say that
        they don’t know.

       Collaboration: A majority of respondents who currently collaborate with the WBG
        indicated that the WBG is sufficiently selective whereas pluralities of respondents who
        had previously collaborated with the WBG and who had never collaborated were more
        likely to say that they don’t know.




                                                50
The World Bank Group                         Sudan                      Country Opinion Survey 2015



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments

Frequency of Consulting World Bank Group Knowledge Work and Activities

       Year Comparison: Respondents from the FY ’12 country survey indicated significantly
        more frequent usage of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities (20% indicated weekly
        or monthly usage; 10% never) compared to respondents in this year’s country survey
        (17% indicated weekly or monthly usage; 30% never).

       Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG projects indicated the most
        frequent usage of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities (46% indicated weekly or
        monthly usage) whereas respondents from the financial sector/private banks indicated
        significantly less frequent usage (86% indicated never).

       Collaboration: Respondents who currently collaborate with the WBG or had previously
        collaborated with the WBG indicated the most frequent usage of the WBG’s knowledge
        work and activities (30% indicated weekly or monthly usage) whereas respondents who
        had never collaborated with the WBG indicated significantly less frequent usage (48%
        indicated never).




                                              51
The World Bank Group                         Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Sudan’s Knowledge Needs (Indicator Question)

       Year Comparison: Respondents in this year’s country survey had statistically similar
        levels of agreement for the WBG meeting Sudan’s needs for knowledge services (mean
        level of agreement = 5.5) compared to respondents from the FY ’12 country survey
        (mean level of agreement = 5.0).

       Stakeholders: Respondents from local government had the highest levels of agreement
        for the WBG meeting Sudan’s needs for knowledge services whereas respondents from
        the financial sector/private banks, NGOs/CBOs, academia, and other organizations had
        significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                              52
The World Bank Group                           Sudan                         Country Opinion Survey 2015



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Qualities of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities
   Year Comparison: Compared to FY ’12 respondents, respondents in this year’s country
    survey gave significantly higher ratings for some aspects of the WBG’s knowledge work and
    activities, but significantly lower ratings for some of these aspects as well. Those differences
    that reached statistical significance are indicated in the chart.
   Stakeholders: Employees of ministries and respondents from local government had the
    highest ratings for stakeholder involvement and leading to practical solutions whereas
    respondents from academia had significantly lower levels of agreement. Respondents from
    local government and the media had the highest ratings for being a source for global good
    practices whereas respondents from other organizations had significantly lower levels of
    agreement. A full breakdown of these ratings can be found in Appendix B (see page 89).
   Collaboration: Respondents who currently collaborate with the WBG or who had previously
    collaborated had significantly higher ratings for the WBG’s knowledge work and activities
    being accessible compared to respondents who had never collaborated with the WBG. A full
    breakdown of these ratings can be found in Appendix D (see page 129).
   Gender: Female respondents had significantly higher ratings for all of these aspects of the
    WBG’s knowledge work and activities compared to male respondents. A full breakdown of
    these ratings by gender can be found in Appendix E (see page 146).




                                                 53
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Contribution of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)

       Year Comparison: Respondents in this year’s country survey gave significantly higher
        ratings for the contribution of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities (mean rating =
        8.1) compared to respondents from the FY ’12 country survey (mean rating = 7.0).

       Stakeholders: Respondents from the financial sector/private banks gave the highest
        ratings for the contribution of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities whereas
        respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and academia gave significantly lower
        ratings.




Technical Quality of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)

       Year Comparison: Respondents in this year’s country survey gave statistically similar
        ratings for the technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities (mean
        rating = 7.6) compared to respondents from the FY ’12 country survey (mean
        rating = 7.8).




                                               54
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Most Effective Instruments in Reducing Poverty

       Year Comparison: Respondents from the FY ’12 country survey indicated that capacity
        development (43%) and technical assistance (40%) were the WBG’s most effective
        instrument in helping reduce poverty, followed by co-financing arrangements (31%).

       Stakeholders: Although respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that
        capacity development was the WBG’s most effective instrument in helping reduce
        poverty in Sudan, respondents from local government also indicated that the WBG’s
        technical assistance was one of its most effective instruments and respondents from
        bilateral/multilateral agencies indicated that Trust Fund management and sector-wide
        approaches were the WBG’s most effective instruments.

       Collaboration: Respondents who indicated that they currently collaborate with the WBG
        were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG’s technical assistance was one of
        its most effective instruments (40%) compared to respondents who had previously
        collaborated (22%) and those who had never collaborated with the WBG (21%).




                                                55
The World Bank Group                         Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Sudan’s Needs for Managing Trust Funds and Partnerships
(Indicator Question)

       Year Comparison: Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher
        levels of agreement for the WBG program of managing trust funds and partnerships
        meeting Sudan’s needs (mean level of agreement = 4.7) compared to respondents from
        the FY ’12 country survey (mean level of agreement = 3.9).

       Stakeholders: Respondents from the financial sector/private banks and local government
        had the highest levels of agreement for the WBG program of managing trust funds and
        partnerships meeting Sudan’s needs whereas respondents from academia had
        significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                              56
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Sudan
Making the World Bank Group of Greater Value
   Year Comparison: Respondents from the FY ’12 country survey indicated that the WBG
    should reduce the complexity of obtaining Bank financing (55%), improve the quality of its
    experts as related to Sudan’s specific challenges (41%), and provide more adequate
    data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Sudan’s economy (25%) to make itself of greater value.
   Stakeholders: Although respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that the WBG
    should increase the level of capacity development and provide more adequate
    data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Sudan’s economy to make itself of greater value,
    respondents from NGOs/CBOs indicated that the WBG should reach out more to groups
    outside of government and respondents from the media and academia indicated that the
    WBG should reduce the complexity of obtaining WBG financing.
   Collaboration: Respondents who indicated that they currently collaborate with the WBG
    were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should increase the level of capacity
    development (54%) compared to respondents who had previously collaborated (31%) and
    those who had never collaborated with the WBG (17%), both of whom were more likely to
    indicate that the WBG should reduce the complexity of obtaining WBG financing (31% and
    26%, respectively) compared to those who currently collaborate (13%).




                                                57
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Sudan (continued)
Local Presence in Sudan




Focusing Services
       Stakeholders: Although a plurality of respondents from most stakeholder groups
        indicated that the WBG should leverage more resources from trust funds in Sudan,
        respondents from academia were significantly less likely to indicate this compared to
        other stakeholder groups.




                                                58
The World Bank Group                           Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Sudan (continued)

Collaborating with Stakeholders in Sudan

       Year Comparison: Respondents from the FY ’12 country survey indicated that the WBG
        should work more closely with CBOs (31%), beneficiaries (29%), academia/think tanks/
        research institutes (25%), local government (24%), and the private sector (23%) to ensure
        better development results in Sudan.

       Stakeholders: Although respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that the
        WBG should work more with NGOs/CBOs, academia, and beneficiaries in Sudan,
        respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and the private sector were more likely to
        indicate that the WBG should work more with the private sector and respondents from
        the media were more likely to indicate that the WBG should work more with the media.




                                                59
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Sudan (continued)

The Multi Partner/Donor Trust Fund in Sudan: Strengths

       Year Comparison: Respondents from the FY ’12 country survey indicated that they
        either didn’t know what the greatest strength was of the Multi Donor Trust Fund (37%)
        or that the greatest strengths were that the donors worked collaboratively with the
        government (30%) and that there was an adequate level of communication amongst
        players (30%).

       Stakeholders: Although respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that they
        either didn’t know what the greatest strength was of the Multi Donor Trust Fund or they
        indicated that there was an adequate level of communication amongst players,
        respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies were more likely to indicate that the
        donors were well coordinated and that the Trust Fund’s development priorities were
        aligned with country developmental priorities and respondents from local government
        were more likely to indicate that the donors worked collaboratively with the government
        and that the donors were well coordinated.




                                               60
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Sudan (continued)

The Multi Partner/Donor Trust Fund in Sudan: Weaknesses

       Year Comparison: Respondents from the FY ’12 country survey indicated that the
        greatest weakness of the Multi Donor Trust Fund was that the level of resources was too
        low (43%) or that they didn’t know (35%).

       Stakeholders: Although respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that they
        either didn’t know what the greatest weakness was of the Multi Donor Trust Fund or they
        indicated that the level of resources was too low, respondents from local government
        were more likely to indicate that the donors were not well coordinated.




                                               61
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Sudan (continued)

WBG Staffing in Sudan
       Year Comparison: Respondents from the FY ’12 country survey had significantly higher
        ratings for the extent to which the WBG is adequately staffed in Sudan (mean rating =
        6.4) compared to respondents in this year’s country survey (mean rating = 5.2).

       Gender: Female respondents had significantly higher ratings for the extent to which the
        WBG is adequately staffed in Sudan (mean rating = 6.5) compared to male respondents
        (mean rating = 4.7).




                                               62
The World Bank Group                           Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



X. Communication and Openness

Information Sources

       Year Comparison: Respondents from the FY ’12 country survey indicated that they got
        most of their information about economic and social development issues in Sudan from
        the Internet (52%), local newspapers (45%), and periodicals (32%).

       Stakeholders: Although respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that they
        got most of their information about economic and social development issues in Sudan
        from the Internet, respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies indicated that they are
        more likely to utilize local and international newspapers and respondents from academia
        were significantly more likely to utilize periodicals compared to respondents from other
        stakeholder groups. Employees of ministries and respondents from PMUs/Consultants on
        WBG projects, local government, private sector, NGOs/CBOs, and other organizations
        were significantly more likely to utilize social media compared to respondents from other
        stakeholder groups.




                                                63
The World Bank Group                            Sudan                         Country Opinion Survey 2015



X. Communication and Openness (continued)
Preferred Information Sources
       Year Comparison: When asked how they would prefer to receive information from the
        World Bank Group, respondents from the FY ’12 country survey indicated that they
        would be prefer the WBG website (57%), WBG seminars/workshops/conferences (46%),
        WBG publications and other written materials (37%), and direct contact (27%).
       Stakeholders: Although respondents across all stakeholder groups indicated that they
        preferred to get their information from the WBG website, WBG publications, direct
        contact, seminars, and e-Newsletters, respondents from the private sector and the
        financial sector/private banks were significantly more likely to indicate that they
        preferred social media compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Collaboration: Respondents who currently collaborate with the WBG were the most
        likely to indicate that they preferred to get their information from direct contact with the
        WBG (45%) whereas respondents who had never collaborated with the WBG were
        significantly less likely to prefer this method (22%) and respondents who had previously
        collaborated with the WBG were in between (34%). Respondents who had never
        collaborated with the WBG were significantly more likely to prefer social media and
        mobile phones (17% and 14%, respectively) compared to respondents who currently
        collaborate (5% and 2%, respectively) and respondents who had previously collaborated
        (5% and 3%, respectively).




                                                 64
The World Bank Group                         Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information

       Year Comparison: Respondents in this year’s country survey were significantly more
        likely to indicate that they were aware of the WBG’s access to information policy
        compared to respondents from the FY ’12 country survey.




       Year Comparison: Respondents from this year’s country survey were just as likely to
        indicate that they had requested information from the WBG as respondents from the
        FY ’12 country survey.




                                               65
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)

       Year Comparison: Respondents from this year’s country survey were significantly less
        likely to indicate that they obtained the information requested from the WBG compared
        to respondents from the FY ’12 country survey.




Internet Access

       Year Comparison: Respondents from this year’s country survey were significantly less
        likely to have Internet access compared to respondents from the FY ’12 country survey.




                                               66
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Usage

       Year Comparison: Respondents from this year’s country survey had statistically similar
        usage for the WBG’s website compared to respondents from the FY ’12 country survey.
       Collaboration: Respondents who currently collaborate with the WBG and respondents
        who had previously collaborated were significantly more likely to indicate having used
        the WBG’s website (67% and 64%, respectively) compared to respondents who had
        never collaborated with the WBG (48%).
       Gender: Male respondents were significantly more likely to indicate having used the
        WBG’s website (63%) compared to female respondents (47%).




       Stakeholders: Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and the private sector
        were significantly more likely to access the WBG website using high speed or WiFi
        connections compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                                67
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

WBG Website Evaluation

       Year Comparison: Respondents in this year’s country survey had statistically similar
        levels of agreement regarding the WBG’s websites compared to respondents from the
        FY ’12 country survey.




WBG Social Media Evaluation

       Gender: Female respondents had significantly higher levels of agreement that the WBG’s
        social media channels are a valuable source of information (mean level of agreement =
        8.0) compared to male respondents (mean level of agreement = 6.8).




                                               68
The World Bank Group                          Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sharing

       Year Comparison: Respondents in this year’s country survey had statistically similar
        levels of agreement regarding the WBG’s information sharing compared to respondents
        from the FY ’12 country survey.

       Collaboration: Respondents who currently collaborate with the WBG had the highest
        levels of agreement that the WBG is responsive to their information requests (mean level
        of agreement = 7.7) compared to respondents who had previously collaborated with the
        WBG (mean level of agreement = 6.9) and who had never collaborated with the WBG
        (mean level of agreement = 6.2).

       Gender: Female respondents had significantly higher levels of agreement that when they
        need information from the WBG they know how to find it and that the WBG is
        responsive to their information requests (mean level of agreement = 7.9 and 7.9,
        respectively) compared to male respondents (mean level of agreement = 6.8 and 6.6,
        respectively).




                                               69
The World Bank Group                                Sudan                            Country Opinion Survey 2015



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 71

          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 86

          C. Responses to All Questions across Geographic Locations........... 109

          D. Responses to All Questions by Levels of Collaboration ............... 126

          E. Responses to All Questions by Gender ....................................... 143

          F. Responses to All Questions across Country Surveys ................... 160

          G. Responses to Key Questions by Respondents’
             Specializations/Sectors ............................................................... 165

          H. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the WBG ....... 177

          I. Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Groups .......... 178

          J. World Bank Group Country Survey
             2015 Sudan Questionnaire ........................................................ 179


                                                  SUDAN




                                                      70
The World Bank Group                                  Sudan                          Country Opinion Survey 2015


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=273)
All rating scale questions are presented with the total number of respondents that provided a rating (N), the
number of respondents who indicated that they “Don’t know? (DK), the mean rating across all respondents (Mean),
and the standard deviation of this mean (SD). Indicator questions are noted with an asterisk (*).

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
1. In general would you say that Sudan is headed in ...?                                    (N=261)
The right direction                                                                          33.0%
The wrong direction                                                                          42.1%
Not sure                                                                                     24.9%

2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Sudan.
Please identify which of the following you consider the most important            Percentage of Respondents
development priorities in Sudan? (Choose no more than THREE)                      (Responses Combined; N=270)
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                                        40.0%
Education                                                                                    28.1%
Food security                                                                                24.4%
Poverty reduction                                                                            22.2%
Agricultural development                                                                     18.1%
Anti-corruption                                                                              18.1%
Rural development                                                                            15.9%
Debt relief and access to finance                                                            14.4%
Public sector governance/reform                                                              13.3%
Health                                                                                       10.4%
Foreign direct investment                                                                    8.9%
Job creation/employment                                                                      8.1%
Economic growth                                                                              7.4%
Transport                                                                                    7.0%
Social protection                                                                            6.7%
Private sector development                                                                   6.3%
Water and sanitation                                                                         5.9%
Equality of opportunity                                                                      5.9%
Natural resource management                                                                  5.2%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                               4.8%
Global/regional integration                                                                  4.4%
Environmental sustainability                                                                 3.0%
Energy                                                                                       2.2%
Social cohesion                                                                              2.2%
Law and justice                                                                              2.2%
Local governance and institutions                                                            2.2%
Financial markets                                                                            1.9%
Trade and exports                                                                            1.9%
Disaster management                                                                          1.5%
Climate change                                                                               1.1%
Information and communications technology                                                    1.1%
Urban development                                                                            0.7%
Regulatory framework                                                                         0.4%
Gender equity                                                                                0.0%
Crime and violence                                                                           0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                       0.0%




                                                       71
The World Bank Group                                Sudan                         Country Opinion Survey 2015


A. General Issues Facing Sudan (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different
areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would      Percentage of Respondents
contribute most to reducing poverty in Sudan? (Choose no more than THREE)      (Responses Combined; N=268)
Rural development                                                                        32.1%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                                    32.1%
Economic growth                                                                          30.6%
Agricultural development                                                                 25.4%
Education                                                                                23.5%
Job creation/employment                                                                  19.0%
Debt relief and access to finance                                                        14.9%
Food security                                                                            12.7%
Equality of opportunity                                                                  11.6%
Health                                                                                   10.8%
Anti-corruption                                                                          10.4%
Public sector governance/reform                                                          10.4%
Water and sanitation                                                                     7.5%
Private sector development                                                               6.7%
Natural resource management                                                              6.0%
Trade and exports                                                                        5.6%
Transport                                                                                5.2%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                           4.1%
Global/regional integration                                                              4.1%
Social protection                                                                        4.1%
Foreign direct investment                                                                4.1%
Climate change                                                                           2.6%
Urban development                                                                        2.6%
Law and justice                                                                          2.2%
Local governance and institutions                                                        1.9%
Gender equity                                                                            1.5%
Environmental sustainability                                                             1.5%
Financial markets                                                                        1.5%
Crime and violence                                                                       1.1%
Information and communications technology                                                0.7%
Regulatory framework                                                                     0.4%
Energy                                                                                   0.4%
Social cohesion                                                                          0.4%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                   0.0%
Disaster management                                                                      0.0%




                                                     72
The World Bank Group                                     Sudan                               Country Opinion Survey 2015


A. General Issues Facing Sudan (continued)

4. The World Bank Group’s “Shared Prosperity? goal captures two key elements,
economic growth and equity. It will seek to foster income growth among the
bottom 40 percent of a country’s population. Improvement in the Shared
Prosperity Indicator requires growth and well-being of the less well-off. When
thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the
following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Sudan?                         Percentage of Respondents
(Choose no more than TWO)                                                                  (Responses Combined; N=264)
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                                         29.5%
Better employment opportunities for young people                                                     21.6%
Better security and peace building                                                                   21.2%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                                            20.5%
Better natural resource management                                                                   18.9%
Consistent economic growth                                                                           18.6%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities                                                                 14.4%
Debt relief and access to finance                                                                    13.6%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                                              8.7%
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                                  6.4%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                                      6.4%
A growing middle class                                                                               6.1%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability                   3.0%
Other                                                                                                3.0%
More reliable social safety net                                                                      2.3%
Better quality public services                                                                       1.5%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                              1.1%
Better employment opportunities for women                                                            0.4%



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

Familiarity                                                                          N         DK     Mean       SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Sudan?
                                                                                     268        0      5.99     2.95
    (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)

Effectiveness*                                                                       N         DK     Mean       SD
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                     221       48      6.03     2.92
    effectiveness in Sudan? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

Staff Preparedness*                                                                  N         DK     Mean       SD
3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well
     prepared to help Sudan solve its most complicated development                   219       53      7.12     2.86
     challenges? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                           73
The World Bank Group                               Sudan                          Country Opinion Survey 2015


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact
on development results in Sudan, in which sectoral areas do you believe the
World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge   Percentage of Respondents
services) in Sudan? (Choose no more than THREE)                                (Responses Combined; N=273)
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                                    35.9%
Agricultural development                                                                 35.2%
Education                                                                                22.3%
Rural development                                                                        20.9%
Debt relief and access to finance                                                        19.8%
Poverty reduction                                                                        18.3%
Health                                                                                   15.8%
Economic growth                                                                          14.3%
Public sector governance/reform                                                          12.5%
Food security                                                                            10.3%
Transport                                                                                9.5%
Foreign direct investment                                                                9.5%
Job creation/employment                                                                  9.5%
Natural resource management                                                              7.3%
Private sector development                                                               7.0%
Anti-corruption                                                                          6.6%
Social protection                                                                        5.5%
Water and sanitation                                                                     5.5%
Environmental sustainability                                                             4.4%
Global/regional integration                                                              3.3%
Equality of opportunity                                                                  3.3%
Financial markets                                                                        2.6%
Climate change                                                                           2.6%
Crime and violence                                                                       2.2%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                           2.2%
Law and justice                                                                          2.2%
Trade and exports                                                                        1.8%
Energy                                                                                   1.5%
Information and communications technology                                                1.5%
Urban development                                                                        1.1%
Local governance and institutions                                                        1.1%
Regulatory framework                                                                     0.4%
Disaster management                                                                      0.4%
Gender equity                                                                            0.0%
Social cohesion                                                                          0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                   0.0%




                                                     74
The World Bank Group                                    Sudan                           Country Opinion Survey 2015


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which                 Percentage of Respondents (N=255)
                                                                                      nd
activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is       Greatest    2 Greatest
of second greatest value in Sudan?                                        Value          Value      Combined
Capacity development                                                      25.1%          28.6%        53.7%
Financial resources                                                       21.2%          10.3%        31.5%
Donor coordination and policy dialogue                                    10.6%          15.1%        25.7%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                          16.5%          6.7%         23.2%
Strategy formulation                                                      9.4%           13.5%        22.9%
Data and statistics                                                       6.3%           5.2%         11.4%
Technical assistance                                                      3.5%           6.3%         9.9%
Convening/facilitating                                                    3.9%           5.6%         9.5%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                3.1%           6.0%         9.1%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                             0.4%           2.8%         3.2%
Other                                                                     0.0%           0.0%         0.0%

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the WBG is in terms of the capacity building work               Effectiveness
it does in each of the following areas in Sudan?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                            N     DK    Mean       SD
6.   Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                   178     84   7.25      2.67
7.   Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)             151    100   6.01      2.82
8.   Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)   160     88   6.84      2.55
When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Sudan to help ensure                 Importance
better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the
World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?
(1-Not important all, 10-Very important)                                               N     DK    Mean       SD
9. Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                     190    73    8.59      2.05
10. Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)              170    81    8.18      2.41
11. Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)    179    80    8.73      1.94
12. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest         Percentage of Respondents
   WEAKNESSES in its work in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)                         (Responses Combined; N=268)
Don’t know                                                                                      16.8%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                        15.7%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Sudan                                 15.7%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                           13.4%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow                                                           12.7%
Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the Government                               12.3%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                                        12.3%
Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving                   11.6%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                          10.8%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                           9.7%
Inadequate number of World Bank Group staff members located in the country                      8.6%
Not focused enough on issues that are unique to post-conflict countries                         8.2%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                        5.6%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                    5.6%
Other                                                                                           4.9%
Not client focused                                                                              4.5%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                             4.1%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                             3.0%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                        1.9%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                           1.9%


                                                         75
The World Bank Group                                 Sudan                             Country Opinion Survey 2015


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
13. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST                Percentage of Respondents
  effective in reducing poverty in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)                 (Responses Combined; N=272)
Capacity development                                                                           56.3%
Co-financing arrangements                                                                      34.6%
Technical assistance                                                                           27.2%
Knowledge products/services                                                                    20.2%
Trust Fund management                                                                          12.9%
Emergency Recovery lending                                                                     12.5%
Multi-sectoral approaches                                                                      7.7%
Don’t know                                                                                     7.7%
Sector-wide approaches                                                                         6.3%
Other                                                                                          2.6%

14. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group's work and              Percentage of Respondents
  support help the poorest in Sudan? (Choose only ONE response)                                (N=253)
To a fully sufficient degree                                                                   3.6%
To a somewhat sufficient degree                                                                26.5%
To a somewhat insufficient degree                                                              30.8%
To a very insufficient degree                                                                  22.9%
Don't know                                                                                     16.2%

15. In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which
TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with            Percentage of Respondents
more in your country? (Choose no more than TWO)                                     (Responses Combined; N=271)
NGOs/CBOs                                                                                      33.9%
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                       29.5%
Beneficiaries                                                                                  27.3%
Private sector                                                                                 19.9%
Local government                                                                               17.3%
Donor community                                                                                14.4%
Media                                                                                          13.7%
Youth/university groups                                                                        10.0%
UN agencies                                                                                    7.7%
Foundations                                                                                    7.4%
Don’t know                                                                                     4.1%
Emerging donors                                                                                2.2%
Regional organizations                                                                         2.2%
UN and regional peace keeping forces                                                           1.8%
Parliament                                                                                     1.5%
Other                                                                                          0.4%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World              Level of Agreement
Bank Group’s work in Sudan? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                 N    DK Mean        SD
16. Overall the WBG currently plays a relevant role in development in Sudan*        221 43       5.80   2.97
17. The WBG’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities for
                                                                                    215   46      6.14    2.96
    Sudan*
18. The WBG supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Sudan           211   47      6.18    2.80
19. The WBG treats clients and stakeholders in Sudan with respect                   205   52      7.94    2.64




                                                       76
The World Bank Group                                  Sudan                         Country Opinion Survey 2015


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the WBG an effective development partner in Sudan, in terms of               Degree
each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)      N    DK     Mean      SD
20. Responsiveness to needs*                                                        210   48      5.70    2.80
21. Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*              195   58      5.79    2.63
22. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                       191   56      5.68    2.84
23. Being inclusive*                                                                186   64      5.78    2.59
24. Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                  192   56      6.22    2.69
25. Staff accessibility*                                                            202   53      6.26    2.93
26. Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                184   72      7.84    2.47
27. Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making decisions
                                                                                    202   55      5.74    3.05
    important to my work*
28. Collaboration with civil society*                                               205   49      6.23    2.87
29.   Collaboration with the UN                                                     167   90      7.73    2.51
30.   Collaboration with the Government*                                            210   51      7.18    2.54
31.   Collaboration with other donors and development partners*                     174   73      7.16    2.32
32.   Collaboration with the private sector*                                        169   81      5.27    2.76
33.   The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                 203   54      6.13    2.75
34.   Being a long-term partner*                                                    193   65      7.14    2.99

35. To be a more effective development partner in Sudan, do you believe that the    Percentage of Respondents
World Bank Group should have…? (Select only ONE response)                                      (N=271)
More local presence                                                                            87.1%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                                6.6%
Less local presence                                                                            2.6%
Don't know                                                                                     3.7%

36. In the past year, have you seen more, less, or just about the same level of
effective collaboration between the UN and the World Bank Group in your             Percentage of Respondents
country? (Select only ONE response)                                                            (N=270)
More effective collaboration                                                                   14.8%
Less effective collaboration                                                                   20.4%
The same level of effective collaboration                                                      18.9%
Don't know                                                                                     45.9%

37. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place,   Percentage of Respondents
which of the following would you attribute to? (Choose no more than THREE)          (Responses Combined; N=264)
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                          49.6%
Ongoing conflict and instability                                                               36.7%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                              32.2%
Inadequate funding                                                                             28.8%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                            26.1%
The Government works inefficiently                                                             21.6%
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the
                                                                                               20.8%
ground
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                             18.6%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                18.6%
Poor donor coordination                                                                        17.4%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                                          9.8%
Other                                                                                          2.3%



                                                        77
The World Bank Group                               Sudan                       Country Opinion Survey 2015


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results
1. In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be          Importance
involved in the following areas of development in Sudan?
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                               N     DK      Mean       SD
1.    Crime and violence                                                 180    69      5.88      3.45
2.    Financial markets                                                  202    49      7.39      2.88
3.    Transport                                                          217    40      7.84      2.75
4.    Anti-corruption                                                    207    45      7.85      2.91
5.    Regional conflict and tensions                                     204    45      7.24      3.04
6.    Law and justice                                                    194    59      5.86      3.30
7.    Urban development                                                  220    36      7.70      2.60
8.    Environmental sustainability                                       216    39      8.10      2.48
9.    Regulatory framework                                               208    43      7.07      2.65
10.   Information and communications technology                          218    38      7.52      2.76
11.   Poverty reduction                                                  235    21      8.85      2.09
12.   Gender equity                                                      209    39      6.66      3.14
13.   Private sector development                                         217    43      7.47      2.90
14.   Foreign direct investment                                          210    42      7.77      2.83
15.   Local governance and institutions                                  207    43      6.68      2.83
16.   Water and sanitation                                               229    25      8.06      2.44
17.   Trade and exports                                                  197    49      7.48      2.90
18.   Economic growth                                                    218    36      8.50      2.22
19.   Energy                                                             211    43       7.76     2.73
20.   Disaster management                                                219    34       7.80     2.63
21.   Public sector governance/reform                                    218    38       7.62     2.89
22.   Job creation/employment                                            221    35       7.77     2.79
23.   Social cohesion                                                    213    41       6.23     3.38
24.   Communicable/non-communicable diseases                             212    37       7.17     2.94
25.   Equality of opportunity                                            208    44       7.50     2.80
26.   Health                                                             237    22       8.15     2.43
27.   Rural development                                                  229    24       8.62     2.22
28.   Global/regional integration                                        207    44       7.87     2.42
29.   Food security                                                      221    22       8.52     2.25
30.   Natural resource management                                        206    47       7.50     3.01
31.   Security/stabilization/reconstruction                              230    30       8.12     2.63
32.   Social protection                                                  212    45       6.66     2.95
33.   Climate change                                                     211    43       7.33     3.00
34.   Agricultural development                                           228    28       8.62     2.23
35. Education                                                            234    25       8.42     2.46
36. Debt relief and access to finance                                    225    40       8.68     2.48




                                                     78
The World Bank Group                               Sudan                           Country Opinion Survey 2015


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)
2. How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the             Effectiveness
work it does in the following areas of development in Sudan?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                 N       DK         Mean      SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                      114      139        4.52     3.01
2.    Information and communications technology                            132      118        5.23     3.10
3.    Transport                                                            130      121        4.75     2.93
4.    Crime and violence                                                   112      142        3.95     2.76
5.    Regional conflict and tensions                                       128      125        5.03     3.20
6.    Law and justice                                                      112      139        3.91     2.71
7.    Urban development                                                    143      109        5.61     3.08
8.    Environmental sustainability                                         155       93        6.05     2.90
9.    Regulatory framework                                                 128      121        5.61     2.98
10.   Communicable/non-communicable diseases                               135      109        5.37     2.89
11.   Poverty reduction                                                    180       71        6.52     2.82
12.   Gender equity                                                        143      105        5.99     2.81
13.   Private sector development                                           137      111        5.34     2.91
14.   Foreign direct investment                                            136      115        5.15     3.25
15.   Local governance and institutions                                    127      121        4.84     2.67
16.   Water and sanitation                                                 168       81        6.07     2.73
17.   Trade and exports                                                    133      118        4.95     2.87
18.   Economic growth                                                      158       90        5.94     2.67
19.   Energy                                                               122      118        4.76     2.79
20.   Disaster management                                                  134      113        5.57     2.96
21.   Public sector governance/reform                                      131      118        5.55     2.87
22.   Job creation/employment                                              155       94        4.57     2.96
23.   Social cohesion                                                      140      108        4.11     2.79
24.   Financial markets                                                    117      124        4.72     2.89
25.   Equality of opportunity                                              148      102        5.30     3.12
26.   Health                                                               169       80        5.99     2.77
27.   Rural development                                                    181       70        6.41     2.86
28.   Global/regional integration                                          135      114        5.24     2.88
29.   Food security                                                        158       93        5.74     2.90
30.   Education                                                            174       76        5.90     2.81
31.   Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                163       86        5.55     3.00
32.   Social protection                                                    121      132        4.21     2.74
33.   Climate change                                                       141      110        5.39     2.90
34.   Agricultural development                                             160       87        5.71     2.92
35.   Natural resource management                                          131      116        4.66     3.02
36.   Debt relief and access to finance                                    153      103        4.97     3.30

3. Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the    Percentage of Respondents
program in Sudan? (Select only ONE response)                                               (N=268)
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                                   45.1%
In the country                                                                             13.1%
Don't know                                                                                 41.8%

Achieving Development Results*                                                     N      DK    Mean     SD
4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development
                                                                                  225     40     6.52    2.84
    results in Sudan? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                     79
The World Bank Group                                        Sudan                            Country Opinion Survey 2015


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

Existing Country Systems                                                                       N   DK      Mean    SD
5. To what extent does the World Bank Group help to build/strengthen existing
                                                                                            190    79      6.76   2.95
     country systems in Sudan? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank
Group in Sudan? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                     N     DK      Mean    SD
6. The World Bank Group’s program of managing trust funds and partnerships
                                                                                            187    70      4.70   3.00
    meets the needs of Sudan*
7. The World Bank Group meets Sudan’s needs for knowledge services *                        181    78      5.51   3.03

Measuring and Correcting Work                                                                  N   DK      Mean    SD
8. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its
                                                                                            172    97      6.04   2.81
   work in real time in Sudan? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and                     Percentage of Respondents
activities in the work you do?                                                                      (N=263)
Weekly                                                                                                  5.3%
Monthly                                                                                                 11.8%
A few times a year                                                                                      28.1%
Rarely                                                                                                  24.7%
Never                                                                                                   30.0%

In Sudan, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge                        Degree
work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)               N      DK    Mean      SD
2. Are timely                                                                              182     77    5.98     2.72
3. Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation                 188     68    6.31     2.68
4. Lead to practical solutions                                                             205     48    6.49     2.47
5. Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                    197     56    6.87     2.60
6. Are source of relevant information on global good practices                             195     64    7.49     2.35
7. Are adequately disseminated                                                             199     60    6.14     2.65
8. Are translated enough into local language                                               196     62    6.16     2.83
9. Are adaptable to Sudan’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                           192     69      7.24   2.62
     circumstances*

Overall Evaluations                                                                        N       DK      Mean    SD
10. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group’s
    knowledge work and activities make to development results in your country?*            230     35      8.07   2.23
    (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
11. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge
                                                                                           215     53      7.58   2.38
    work and activities?* (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




                                                              80
The World Bank Group                                            Sudan                    Country Opinion Survey 2015


E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?                            Level of Agreement
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                                  N       DK Mean        SD
1.   The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                       177      85     5.06   3.10
2.   The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                         219     47       7.77   2.28
     programs it supports
3.   The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion           199     64       6.36   2.61
4.   The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable               166     98       6.46   2.53
5.   The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Sudan                               176     88       4.99   2.77
6.   Working with the World Bank Group increases Sudan’s institutional capacity          222     44       8.19   2.22
7.   Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                                         178     84       7.63   2.55
     appropriate use of them*
8.   The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support                      207     56       7.48   2.36

WBG Promoting PPP in Sudan                                                                N      DK      Mean     SD
9. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find
   solutions that promote private public partnerships in Sudan?                          187      77      6.89   2.64
     (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

10. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates          Percentage of Respondents
  in Sudan? (Select only one response)                                                                 (N=265)
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                                                 4.9%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Sudan                                                16.2%
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Sudan                                                      35.1%
Don't know                                                                                             43.8%

11. Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in              Percentage of Respondents
  Sudan? (Select only one response)                                                                    (N=265)
The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses on the most important
                                                                                                       40.0%
development challenges in Sudan
The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in Sudan, and it is involved in too
                                                                                                       23.8%
many areas of development
Don’t know                                                                                             36.2%

WBG Staffing in Sudan                                                                     N      DK      Mean     SD
12. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group is adequately staffed in
                                                                                         164     103      5.17   2.77
    Sudan? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                 81
The World Bank Group                                  Sudan                           Country Opinion Survey 2015


F. The Multi Partner/Donor Trust Fund in Sudan as Managed by the World Bank
1. Which of the following best describe what you consider the greatest
   STRENGTHS of the Multi Donor Trust Fund in Sudan?                               Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than TWO)                                                       (Responses Combined; N=265)
Don’t know                                                                                   41.9%
There was an adequate level of communication and sharing of results amongst all
                                                                                             29.4%
players
The donors worked collaboratively with the government                                        23.4%
The Trust Fund's development priorities were aligned with country development
                                                                                             19.6%
priorities
The donors were well coordinated                                                             16.6%
The Trust Fund adequately took into consideration voices from outside of
                                                                                              8.7%
government
The level of resources distributed was sufficient                                             6.0%
The Trust Fund was adequately staffed                                                         4.5%
Other                                                                                         1.9%

2. Which of the following best describe what you consider the greatest
   WEAKNESSES of the Multi Donor Trust Fund in Sudan?                              Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than TWO)                                                       (Responses Combined; N=268)
Don’t know                                                                                   44.8%
The level of resources distributed was too low                                               25.7%
The Trust Fund did not adequately take into consideration voices from outside of
                                                                                             10.4%
government
The Trust Fund's development priorities were not aligned with country
                                                                                              9.3%
development priorities
The donors were not well coordinated                                                          7.1%
The Trust Fund was not adequately staffed                                                     6.3%
The donors did not work collaboratively with the government                                   6.3%
There was an inadequate level of communication and sharing of results amongst
                                                                                              3.4%
all players
Other                                                                                         2.2%

G. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Sudan
1. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of         Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)                              (Responses Combined; N=265)
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                                     31.7%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Sudan’s economy                    28.3%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                                 23.4%
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                                20.4%
Mobilize third party financial resources                                                      19.2%
Work faster                                                                                   14.3%
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                                          13.6%
Offer more innovative financial (non-lending) products                                        9.4%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Sudan’s specific challenges                  8.7%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                      7.5%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                              7.2%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                        6.4%
Other                                                                                         2.6%
Increase availability of Fee-Based services                                                   1.9%
Increase the level of World Bank Group staffing in Sudan’s office                             1.9%


                                                       82
The World Bank Group                                  Sudan                            Country Opinion Survey 2015


G. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Sudan (continued)

2. When considering the combination of services that the WBG offers in Sudan
and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following
do you believe the WBG should offer more of in Sudan?                                Percentage of Respondents
(Select only ONE response)                                                                    (N=254)
Leveraging more resources from trust funds                                                     62.2%
Knowledge products                                                                             14.2%
Convening services                                                                             4.3%
None of the above                                                                              3.9%
The combination is appropriate for Sudan                                                       3.1%
Don't know                                                                                     12.2%



G. Communication and Information Sharing

1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social                 Percentage of Respondents
  development issues in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)                             (Responses Combined; N=262)
Internet                                                                                       63.4%
Local newspapers                                                                               29.4%
Periodicals                                                                                    22.1%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                       18.7%
Local radio                                                                                    15.3%
Local television                                                                               13.7%
International television                                                                       13.4%
International newspapers                                                                       5.7%
International radio                                                                            4.6%
Other                                                                                          4.2%

2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?            Percentage of Respondents
(Choose no more than TWO)                                                            (Responses Combined; N=265)
World Bank Group’s website                                                                     39.2%
World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials                                    33.2%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                                                           32.1%
World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/ conferences                                             30.6%
e-Newsletters                                                                                  29.1%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                       10.2%
Mobile phones                                                                                  7.9%
The World Bank’s Information Center for Development located at the University of
                                                                                                6.4%
Khartoum
Other                                                                                           0.4%

3. Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under
which the Bank Group will now disclose any information in its possession that is     Percentage of Respondents
not on a list of exceptions?                                                                  (N=252)
Yes                                                                                            21.0%
No                                                                                             79.0%

4. Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities        Percentage of Respondents
in the past year?                                                                             (N=241)
Yes                                                                                            17.8%
No                                                                                             82.2%


                                                        83
The World Bank Group                                 Sudan                            Country Opinion Survey 2015


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

                                                                                    Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                                       (N=45)
Yes                                                                                                57.8%
No                                                                                                 42.2%

                                                                                    Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                                            (N=248)
Yes                                                                                                88.7%
No                                                                                                 11.3%

                                                                                    Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have used the World Bank Group’s website?                                           (N=252)
Yes                                                                                                58.7%
No                                                                                                 41.3%

8. Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank        Percentage of Respondents
Group website? (Select only ONE response)                                                         (N=216)
High speed/WiFi                                                                                    56.5%
Dial-up                                                                                            43.5%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.                             Level of Agreement
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                             N       DK Mean         SD
9. I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.                         167       71     7.47   2.47
10. I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.               156       68     7.70   2.09
11. The World Bank Group’s social media channels (e.g., blogs, Facebook, Twitter,
                                                                                    140      104      7.04   2.42
    YouTube, Flickr) are valuable sources of information about the institution
12. When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it         184      62       7.09   2.91
13. The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and inquiries     148      92       6.98   2.50



H. Background Information
1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                     Percentage of Respondents
(Select only ONE response)                                                                        (N=266)
Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency                            20.3%
Media                                                                                              20.3%
NGO/ Community-Based Organization                                                                  15.8%
PMU overseeing implementation of project/Consultant/Contractor working on
                                                                                                   12.4%
WBG supported project/program
Private Sector Organization                                                                        7.9%
Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                                             7.1%
Other                                                                                              6.0%
Local Government Office or Staff                                                                   3.4%
Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                                      2.6%
Bilateral/ Multilateral Agency                                                                     1.9%
Independent Government Institution                                                                 1.1%
Office of Minister                                                                                 .4%
Private Foundation                                                                                 .4%
Youth Group                                                                                        .4%




                                                       84
The World Bank Group                                   Sudan                         Country Opinion Survey 2015


H. Background Information (continued)

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                        Percentage of Respondents
(Select only ONE response)                                                                  (N=264)
Other                                                                                        23.1%
Generalist (specialized in multiple sectors)                                                 15.9%
Macroeconomics and fiscal management                                                         11.0%
Education                                                                                    8.0%
Environment and natural resources                                                            6.8%
Agriculture                                                                                  6.1%
Health, nutrition, and population                                                            5.3%
Urban, rural, and social development                                                         5.3%
Transport and ICT                                                                            4.9%
Social protection and labor                                                                  4.2%
Finance and markets                                                                          2.3%
Jobs                                                                                         2.3%
Governance                                                                                   1.5%
Water                                                                                        1.1%
Trade and competitiveness                                                                     .8%
Fragility, conflict and violence                                                              .4%
Public-private partnerships                                                                   .4%
Poverty                                                                                       .4%
Climate Change                                                                                .4%

3. Which one of the following best describes your level of interaction             Percentage of Respondents
with the World Bank Group in your country? (Select only ONE response)                       (N=267)
I currently collaborate with the World Bank Group                                            15.0%
I have previously collaborated with the World Bank Group                                     22.5%
Both of the above (I currently collaborate and previously have collaborated with
                                                                                             18.4%
the World Bank Group)
I have never collaborated with the World Bank Group                                          44.2%

4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank        Percentage of Respondents
  Group in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)                                        (Responses Combined; N=252)
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                                59.9%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                               34.5%
Observer                                                                                     23.4%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                           23.4%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                            19.0%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
5. What’s your gender?                                                                      (N=261)
Female                                                                                       26.8%
Male                                                                                         73.2%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
6. Which best represents your geographic location?                                          (N=257)
Central Sudan                                                                                61.9%
Western Sudan                                                                                17.5%
Northern Sudan                                                                               14.8%
Eastern Sudan                                                                                5.8%




                                                        85
The World Bank Group                                                                                          Sudan                                                                           Country Opinion Survey 2015


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups1
Employee of a Ministry N=54  PMU/Consultant on WBG-supported Program N=33  Local Government N=9  Bilateral/Multilateral Agency N=5
Private Sector N=21  Financial Sector/Private Bank N=7  NGO/CBO N=42  Media N=54  Academia N=19  Other N=22

A. General Issues facing Sudan

In general, would you say that Sudan is headed in...?*
                                                                                 PMU/                 Bilateral/                                     Financial
                                                                  Employee of Consultant on  Local   Multilateral                      Private        Sector/
    Percentage of Respondents                                      a Ministry WBG Program Government   Agency                          Sector      Private Bank      NGO/CBO         Media   Academia       Other
    The right direction                                              52.0%       29.0%      50.0%       20.0%                          40.0%           28.6%          12.5%          34.0%     26.3%        19.0%
    The wrong direction                                              24.0%       41.9%      50.0%          -                           45.0%           28.6%          55.0%          47.2%     57.9%        47.6%
    Not sure                                                         24.0%       29.0%         -        80.0%                          15.0%           42.9%          32.5%          18.9%     15.8%        33.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




1
    Only 266 respondents provided the information about their current positions. Thus only these respondents were included in the across-stakeholder analysis presented in this Appendix.
                                                                                                               86
The World Bank Group                                                                       Sudan                                                                   Country Opinion Survey 2015

A. General Issues facing Sudan (continued)

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Sudan. Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Sudan?
                                                                        PMU/                          Bilateral/               Financial
  Percentage of Respondents                            Employee of Consultant on         Local      Multilateral Private        Sector/
  (Responses combined)                                  a Ministry WBG Program Government              Agency       Sector   Private Bank NGO/CBO        Media      Academia     Other
  Social protection                                       7.5%           6.1%            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        4.9%         7.4%        5.3%       23.8%
  Food security                                           17.0%         24.2%            44.4%           0.0%       19.0%        42.9%       22.0%        31.5%       21.1%      28.6%
  Security/stabilization/reconstruction                   45.3%         42.4%            22.2%          20.0%       42.9%        42.9%       41.5%        38.9%       63.2%      9.5%
  Public sector governance/reform*                        32.1%         21.2%            0.0%            0.0%        4.8%        14.3%       4.9%         3.7%        15.8%      14.3%
  Global/regional integration                             3.8%           0.0%            11.1%           0.0%        4.8%        14.3%       2.4%         5.6%        5.3%       4.8%
  Gender equity                                           0.0%           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Private sector development*                             5.7%           6.1%            22.2%          60.0%        4.8%        0.0%        4.9%         3.7%        0.0%       9.5%
  Foreign direct investment                               3.8%           3.0%            11.1%          20.0%       19.0%        0.0%        2.4%         13.0%       5.3%       19.0%
  Water and sanitation*                                   7.5%          21.2%            0.0%            0.0%        4.8%        0.0%        9.8%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Energy*                                                 1.9%          12.1%            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       4.8%
  Regional conflict and tensions                          3.8%           6.1%            0.0%            0.0%       14.3%        0.0%        2.4%         3.7%        10.5%      4.8%
  Job creation/employment*                                7.5%           6.1%            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        2.4%         22.2%       0.0%       4.8%
  Rural development                                       18.9%         18.2%            33.3%          60.0%        9.5%        0.0%        17.1%        14.8%       10.5%      9.5%
  Financial markets                                       0.0%           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        4.9%         3.7%        0.0%       4.8%
  Urban development                                       1.9%           3.0%            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Environmental sustainability                            9.4%           3.0%            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        4.9%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Equality of opportunity                                 7.5%           6.1%            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%        14.3%       7.3%         11.1%       0.0%       0.0%
  Health                                                  7.5%           0.0%            33.3%           0.0%        9.5%        0.0%        7.3%         14.8%       10.5%      19.0%
  Education                                               24.5%         24.2%            33.3%           0.0%       52.4%        0.0%        26.8%        25.9%       42.1%      23.8%
  Poverty reduction                                       17.0%         36.4%            0.0%            0.0%        4.8%        28.6%       34.1%        24.1%       15.8%      23.8%
  Transport                                               7.5%           9.1%            0.0%           40.0%        0.0%        0.0%        7.3%         7.4%        10.5%      4.8%
  Social cohesion                                         0.0%           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%        9.5%        0.0%        0.0%         3.7%        0.0%       4.8%
  Climate change                                          3.8%           0.0%            11.1%           0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Agricultural development                                20.8%          9.1%            11.1%          20.0%       28.6%        57.1%       17.1%        13.0%       21.1%      23.8%
  Trade and exports                                       0.0%           3.0%            0.0%            0.0%        4.8%        14.3%       0.0%         3.7%        0.0%       0.0%
  Crime and violence                                      0.0%           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Economic growth                                         3.8%           3.0%            22.2%           0.0%        9.5%        14.3%       7.3%         9.3%        10.5%      0.0%
  Law and justice                                         1.9%           3.0%            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        4.9%         0.0%        5.3%       4.8%
  Regulatory framework                                    0.0%           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       4.8%
  Communicable/non-communicable diseases                  0.0%           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Local governance and institutions                       0.0%           6.1%            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        4.9%         0.0%        10.5%      0.0%
  Natural resource management                             1.9%           3.0%            11.1%           0.0%        4.8%        14.3%       12.2%        0.0%        0.0%       14.3%
  Anti-corruption*                                        15.1%         12.1%            0.0%            0.0%       33.3%        42.9%       34.1%        5.6%        26.3%      23.8%
  Disaster management                                     7.5%           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Information and communications technology               1.9%           3.0%            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       4.8%
  Debt relief and access to finance*                      11.3%          3.0%            11.1%          80.0%       19.0%        0.0%        12.2%        25.9%       5.3%       9.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                                                                            87
The World Bank Group                                                                      Sudan                                                                  Country Opinion Survey 2015



A. General Issues facing Sudan (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty
in Sudan? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                       PMU/                       Bilateral/                Financial
  Percentage of Respondents                          Employee of Consultant on         Local     Multilateral Private        Sector/
  (Responses combined)                                a Ministry WBG Program Government            Agency      Sector     Private Bank NGO/CBO        Media     Academia      Other
  Water and sanitation*                                  7.4%          25.0%           0.0%          0.0%       4.8%          0.0%         0.0%       3.8%        5.3%        19.0%
  Equality of opportunity                               13.0%           6.3%           0.0%          0.0%       4.8%          28.6%        4.9%       15.4%      21.1%        23.8%
  Economic growth                                       24.1%          12.5%          44.4%         20.0%      47.6%          42.9%        31.7%      30.8%      21.1%        33.3%
  Climate change                                         9.3%           3.1%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         2.4%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
  Regional conflict and tensions*                        1.9%           0.0%          11.1%         40.0%       0.0%          0.0%         12.2%      0.0%        0.0%        4.8%
  Global/regional integration                            3.7%           9.4%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       11.5%       0.0%        0.0%
  Gender equity                                          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         4.9%       3.8%        0.0%        0.0%
  Rural development                                     27.8%          37.5%          44.4%         60.0%      23.8%          14.3%        31.7%      34.6%      42.1%        28.6%
  Urban development                                      0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         2.4%       3.8%        5.3%        14.3%
  Regulatory framework*                                  0.0%           0.0%           0.0%         20.0%       0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
  Local governance and institutions                      5.6%           6.3%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
  Social protection                                      5.6%           9.4%          11.1%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       3.8%       10.5%        0.0%
  Law and justice                                        9.3%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        4.8%
  Transport*                                             7.4%           9.4%           0.0%         80.0%       4.8%          14.3%        0.0%       1.9%        0.0%        0.0%
  Crime and violence*                                    0.0%           0.0%          11.1%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        9.5%
  Communicable/non-communicable diseases                 0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
  Information and communications technology              0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       3.8%        0.0%        0.0%
  Debt relief and access to finance                     16.7%          15.6%          33.3%          0.0%       4.8%          0.0%         17.1%      15.4%      15.8%        4.8%
  Security/stabilization/reconstruction*                40.7%          46.9%          22.2%         40.0%      33.3%          57.1%        22.0%      30.8%      42.1%        4.8%
  Anti-corruption                                        7.4%           6.3%          11.1%          0.0%      23.8%          14.3%        7.3%       9.6%       21.1%        14.3%
  Private sector development                             3.7%           6.3%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         9.8%       3.8%       15.8%        14.3%
  Foreign direct investment                              0.0%           3.1%           0.0%          0.0%      14.3%          0.0%         7.3%       7.7%        0.0%        0.0%
  Energy                                                 0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       4.8%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
  Public sector governance/reform                       20.4%          15.6%           0.0%         20.0%       0.0%          0.0%         4.9%       3.8%       15.8%        14.3%
  Social cohesion                                        0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       4.8%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
  Education                                             18.5%          21.9%          33.3%          0.0%      42.9%          28.6%        26.8%      17.3%      36.8%        19.0%
  Natural resource management                            7.4%           3.1%          11.1%          0.0%       9.5%          28.6%        9.8%       0.0%        0.0%        9.5%
  Environmental sustainability                           1.9%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         7.3%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
  Health                                                11.1%           9.4%          33.3%          0.0%      19.0%          14.3%        7.3%       3.8%        5.3%        23.8%
  Agricultural development                              18.5%          18.8%          11.1%          0.0%      28.6%          14.3%        43.9%      25.0%      21.1%        33.3%
  Disaster management                                    0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
  Job creation/employment*                              14.8%          18.8%           0.0%          0.0%      19.0%          0.0%         19.5%      38.5%      10.5%        4.8%
  Financial markets*                                     0.0%           3.1%           0.0%         20.0%       4.8%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        5.3%        0.0%
  Trade and exports                                      0.0%           3.1%           0.0%          0.0%       4.8%          14.3%        12.2%      11.5%       5.3%        0.0%
  Food security                                         20.4%           3.1%          22.2%          0.0%       0.0%          28.6%        14.6%      17.3%       0.0%        14.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                          88
The World Bank Group                                                                      Sudan                                                                  Country Opinion Survey 2015

A. General Issues facing Sudan (continued)

When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this woul d be achieved in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                        PMU/                        Bilateral/                  Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                            Employee of Consultant on          Local    Multilateral Private           Sector/
 (Responses combined)                                   a Ministry WBG Program Government            Agency        Sector    Private Bank NGO/CBO        Media    Academia    Other
 Better employment opportunities for young people         11.3%         18.2%            42.9%        20.0%        23.8%          16.7%         15.0%    25.5%     26.3%      45.5%
 Better employment opportunities for women                0.0%           0.0%            0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%      4.5%
 Greater access to micro-finance for the poor             24.5%         30.3%            28.6%         0.0%        23.8%          33.3%         32.5%    43.1%     26.3%      18.2%
 Debt relief and access to finance*                       17.0%          0.0%            42.9%        20.0%         4.8%          0.0%          17.5%    21.6%     10.5%      4.5%
 Greater voice and participation for citizens to help
                                                          5.7%           9.1%            0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%      9.1%
 ensure greater accountability
 Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens      1.9%           6.1%            0.0%          0.0%         4.8%          16.7%         5.0%     7.8%      15.8%      4.5%
 Better entrepreneurial opportunities*                    24.5%          9.1%            28.6%        60.0%         9.5%          0.0%          5.0%     21.6%      0.0%      4.5%
 Better natural resource management                       17.0%         24.2%            0.0%          0.0%        19.0%          33.3%         35.0%    9.8%      15.8%      18.2%
 A growing middle class*                                  0.0%           0.0%            0.0%         20.0%         4.8%          16.7%         5.0%     9.8%      21.1%      9.1%
 Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural
                                                          1.9%          15.2%            14.3%         0.0%         9.5%          0.0%          20.0%    7.8%       0.0%      9.1%
 areas
 Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban
                                                          0.0%           3.0%            0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          5.0%     0.0%       0.0%      0.0%
 areas
 Better security and peace building*                      28.3%         12.1%            0.0%          0.0%        23.8%          33.3%         17.5%    13.7%     15.8%      45.5%
 Consistent economic growth*                              30.2%         27.3%            28.6%         0.0%        33.3%          33.3%         2.5%     13.7%     10.5%      13.6%
 More reliable social safety net                          3.8%           3.0%            0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          2.5%     3.9%       0.0%      0.0%
 Greater equity of fiscal policy                          5.7%           3.0%            0.0%          0.0%        14.3%          16.7%         5.0%     5.9%      10.5%      0.0%
 Education and training that better ensure job
                                                          18.9%         24.2%            14.3%        80.0%        19.0%          0.0%          30.0%    11.8%     36.8%      4.5%
 opportunity*
 Better quality public services                           1.9%           0.0%            0.0%          0.0%         4.8%          0.0%          2.5%     2.0%       0.0%      0.0%
 Other                                                    3.8%           6.1%            0.0%          0.0%         4.8%          0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       5.3%      9.1%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                          89
The World Bank Group                                                                                                   Sudan                                                                                         Country Opinion Survey 2015

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                          Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                               Financial Sector/
                                            Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency        Private Sector       Private Bank           NGO/CBO             Media               Academia             Other
                                          N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD                 N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N     Mean SD       N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
How familiar are you with the work of
                                          52   6.54   2.80   33   7.06   2.34    9    6.78   2.22   5    7.60   2.19     21     4.24    2.97    6    3.50   1.98   40    5.48   2.64   54   6.54    3.27   19     6.21   2.51   22   4.36    2.90
the World Bank Group in Sudan?*
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                          Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                               Financial Sector/
                                            Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency        Private Sector       Private Bank           NGO/CBO             Media               Academia             Other
                                          N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD                 N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N     Mean SD       N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
Overall, please rate your impression of
the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in   44   7.07   2.57   31   6.13   2.84    8    7.25   2.71   5    5.20   1.30     14      4.29   3.20    4    6.25   1.50   30    6.40   3.02   45   6.00    3.22   17     5.24   2.66   19   4.89    2.87
Sudan.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)    *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                          Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                               Financial Sector/
                                            Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency        Private Sector       Private Bank           NGO/CBO             Media               Academia             Other
                                          N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD                 N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N     Mean SD       N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the
WBG's staff is well prepared to help
                                          48   7.96   2.13   32   7.00   2.30    9    9.11   0.93   5    5.80   2.17     15     4.73    3.20    4    8.50   1.73   29    7.31   2.73   40   7.03    3.48   14     6.57   2.98   19   5.95    3.31
Sudan solve its most complicated
development challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                       90
The World Bank Group                                                                     Sudan                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2015


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Sudan, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most
of its resources in Sudan? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                    PMU/                       Bilateral/                 Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                           Employee of Consultant on    Local       Multilateral Private         Sector/
 (Responses combined)                                  a Ministry WBG Program Government         Agency      Sector    Private Bank NGO/CBO         Media     Academia      Other
 Social protection*                                      1.9%        9.1%        33.3%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%       5.3%        22.7%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction*                  29.6%      36.4%         0.0%            0.0%       28.6%          71.4%         31.0%     53.7%       47.4%       13.6%
 Crime and violence                                      3.7%        3.0%         0.0%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          4.8%       1.9%       0.0%        0.0%
 Transport*                                              9.3%       18.2%         0.0%           80.0%        4.8%          14.3%         2.4%       9.3%       15.8%       0.0%
 Agricultural development                                31.5%      27.3%        44.4%           40.0%       28.6%          57.1%         57.1%     24.1%       47.4%       31.8%
 Global/regional integration                             1.9%        3.0%         0.0%           20.0%        0.0%          14.3%         4.8%       3.7%       5.3%        0.0%
 Gender equity                                           0.0%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Public sector governance/reform                         11.1%      12.1%        11.1%            0.0%        4.8%          14.3%         9.5%      14.8%       26.3%       18.2%
 Health                                                  24.1%       9.1%        22.2%            0.0%       14.3%          0.0%          19.0%     16.7%       10.5%       13.6%
 Rural development                                       18.5%      33.3%        55.6%            0.0%       23.8%          14.3%         16.7%     14.8%       15.8%       22.7%
 Foreign direct investment                               5.6%        9.1%        11.1%            0.0%        9.5%          0.0%          14.3%     16.7%       0.0%        9.1%
 Education                                               20.4%      21.2%        11.1%            0.0%       28.6%          0.0%          26.2%     25.9%       15.8%       27.3%
 Energy                                                  0.0%        3.0%         0.0%            0.0%        4.8%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%       10.5%       0.0%
 Social cohesion                                         0.0%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                 13.0%      12.1%         0.0%            0.0%        4.8%          0.0%          7.1%      14.8%       10.5%       4.5%
 Financial markets                                       0.0%        3.0%         0.0%            0.0%        9.5%          0.0%          0.0%       3.7%       0.0%        0.0%
 Urban development                                       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%        4.8%          0.0%          0.0%       3.7%       0.0%        0.0%
 Environmental sustainability*                           14.8%       6.1%         0.0%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          4.8%       0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                 0.0%        3.0%         0.0%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       5.6%       15.8%       9.1%
 Regional conflict and tensions                          0.0%        6.1%         0.0%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          4.8%       0.0%       5.3%        4.5%
 Private sector development                              13.0%       3.0%         0.0%           40.0%       14.3%          0.0%          4.8%       3.7%       5.3%        4.5%
 Water and sanitation                                    7.4%       15.2%         0.0%            0.0%        4.8%          0.0%          2.4%       3.7%       0.0%        9.1%
 Food security                                           11.1%       9.1%         0.0%            0.0%       14.3%          14.3%         21.4%      5.6%       0.0%        13.6%
 Climate change                                          9.3%        3.0%         0.0%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       1.9%       0.0%        0.0%
 Poverty reduction                                       18.5%      21.2%        22.2%           40.0%       19.0%          28.6%         21.4%      5.6%       10.5%       36.4%
 Trade and exports*                                      1.9%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%       14.3%          14.3%         0.0%       0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Economic growth                                         11.1%       3.0%         0.0%            0.0%       19.0%          14.3%         11.9%     14.8%       26.3%       22.7%
 Law and justice                                         3.7%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       3.7%       5.3%        4.5%
 Local governance and institutions                       0.0%        6.1%         0.0%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          2.4%       0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                    0.0%        3.0%         0.0%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                  0.0%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Natural resource management*                            9.3%        6.1%         0.0%           60.0%        4.8%          14.3%         7.1%       5.6%       0.0%        9.1%
 Information and communications technology*              1.9%        0.0%        22.2%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%       0.0%        4.5%
 Anti-corruption                                         1.9%        3.0%         0.0%            0.0%        9.5%          0.0%          16.7%      3.7%       10.5%       4.5%
 Disaster management                                     0.0%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       1.9%       0.0%        0.0%
 Debt relief and access to finance*                      22.2%      12.1%        33.3%           20.0%       33.3%          14.3%         7.1%      38.9%       5.3%        4.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                         91
The World Bank Group                                                                                                 Sudan                                                                                           Country Opinion Survey 2015

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Sudan?
                                                                       PMU/                         Bilateral/                  Financial
 Greatest Value                                     Employee of Consultant on            Local     Multilateral Private          Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                           a Ministry WBG Program Government               Agency       Sector      Private Bank NGO/CBO         Media                                                   Academia          Other
 Convening/facilitating                                 10.0%           3.3%             0.0%          0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        7.5%                                                     0.0%            0.0%
 Data and statistics                                    12.0%          10.0%             0.0%          0.0%        0.0%           20.0%         8.3%        0.0%                                                     5.3%            0.0%
 Policy advice, studies, analyses                       16.0%          16.7%            12.5%          0.0%       33.3%           20.0%         8.3%       11.3%                                                    21.1%            27.3%
 Financial resources*                                   12.0%           3.3%            37.5%          0.0%       42.9%           20.0%         44.4%      15.1%                                                     5.3%            40.9%
 Capacity development                                   30.0%          36.7%            25.0%         60.0%        4.8%           20.0%         22.2%      22.6%                                                    42.1%            13.6%
 Technical assistance                                   6.0%            3.3%             0.0%          0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        5.7%                                                     5.3%            4.5%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources*            0.0%           10.0%             0.0%         20.0%        4.8%           0.0%          2.8%        0.0%                                                     0.0%            0.0%
 Donor coordination and policy dialogue                 10.0%           6.7%            12.5%         20.0%        4.8%           0.0%          5.6%       18.9%                                                    10.5%            13.6%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                          0.0%            0.0%             0.0%          0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        1.9%                                                     0.0%            0.0%
 Strategy formulation                                   4.0%           10.0%            12.5%          0.0%        9.5%           20.0%         8.3%       17.0%                                                    10.5%            0.0%
 Other                                                  0.0%            0.0%             0.0%          0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%                                                     0.0%            0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                  PMU/                 Bilateral/                                                 Financial
   nd
 2 Greatest Value                                                  Employee of Consultant on  Local   Multilateral                               Private           Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                          a Ministry WBG Program Government   Agency                                   Sector         Private Bank          NGO/CBO        Media         Academia          Other
 Convening/facilitating                                               4.1%         3.6%      12.5%       20.0%                                    9.5%              16.7%               0.0%         7.4%           10.5%            0.0%
 Data and statistics*                                                 2.0%        17.9%       0.0%        0.0%                                    4.8%              16.7%               8.3%         0.0%            0.0%            5.0%
 Policy advice, studies, analyses                                     10.2%       14.3%       0.0%        0.0%                                    4.8%              0.0%                5.6%         3.7%           15.8%            0.0%
 Financial resources                                                  8.2%        14.3%       0.0%       20.0%                                    4.8%              16.7%              11.1%         14.8%           5.3%            5.0%
 Capacity development                                                 32.7%        7.1%      37.5%       20.0%                                   33.3%              16.7%              30.6%         31.5%          10.5%            40.0%
 Technical assistance                                                 14.3%       10.7%      12.5%        0.0%                                    4.8%              0.0%                0.0%         3.7%            5.3%            5.0%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources*                          2.0%         7.1%       0.0%        0.0%                                    0.0%              0.0%                5.6%         7.4%           26.3%            5.0%
 Donor coordination and policy dialogue                               10.2%       14.3%      12.5%        0.0%                                   23.8%              33.3%              19.4%         18.5%           5.3%            15.0%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                        0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%                                    0.0%              0.0%                8.3%         3.7%            5.3%            5.0%
 Strategy formulation                                                 16.3%       10.7%      25.0%       40.0%                                   14.3%              0.0%               11.1%         9.3%           15.8%            20.0%
 Other                                                                0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%                                    0.0%              0.0%                0.0%         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the following areas in Sudan? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                        Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                              Financial Sector/
                                          Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency        Private Sector      Private Bank             NGO/CBO              Media               Academia             Other
                                        N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD                 N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N     Mean SD        N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
Project implementation (or other
                                        41   8.10   2.10   31   7.90   1.94    4    8.25   0.96   3    7.00   0.00     13     5.54   3.50    4    6.25   3.50     26    6.04   2.69    34   7.74    2.87   10     6.00   2.67   11   7.09    3.39
organizational strengthening)*
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                        34   6.03   2.61   32   6.97   2.19    6    8.33   1.51                           8   4.13   3.31    4    5.25   1.71     16    3.94   2.46    28   6.25    3.08   13     5.23   3.27   9    7.44    2.40
citizens' voices into development)*
Policy design (for clarity and better
incentives to achieve development       37   7.76   2.13   28   6.18   2.48    6    7.67   2.25   3    7.00   0.00     12     6.42   3.50    4    7.25   1.71     20    6.15   2.76    29   6.83    2.65   11     6.00   2.83   9    7.67    2.29
goals)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                                     92
The World Bank Group                                                                                                 Sudan                                                                                         Country Opinion Survey 2015

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Sudan to help ensure better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in
the following aspects of capacity building? (1-Not important all, 10-Very important)
                                        Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                              Financial Sector/
                                          Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency        Private Sector      Private Bank           NGO/CBO              Media               Academia              Other
                                        N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD                 N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N     Mean SD        N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD        N    Mean    SD
Project implementation (or other
                                        47   8.91   1.92   32   8.94   1.70    4    8.75   1.50   5    7.60   1.34     13     8.69   2.29    5    7.80   2.28   25    7.80   2.31    31   8.29    2.31   14     8.57    2.50   13   9.23    1.42
organizational strengthening)
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                        40   7.68   2.59   32   8.63   2.01    6    9.17   1.33   2    7.50   3.54        8   9.38   0.92    5    8.20   1.92   21    8.00   2.35    28   7.46    3.14   14     8.64    2.02   13   8.69    2.25
citizens' voices into development)
Policy design (for clarity and better
incentives to achieve development       44   8.70   2.13   29   8.59   1.97    6    9.50   0.84   5    8.40   1.14     12     9.75   0.62    5    8.80   2.17   23    9.22   0.90    30   7.97    2.66   13     8.38    1.50   11   9.09    1.92
goals)


Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                        PMU/                       Bilateral/              Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                              Employee of Consultant on     Local       Multilateral Private      Sector/
 (Responses combined)                                    a Ministry WBG Program Government           Agency     Sector   Private Bank                                               NGO/CBO        Media         Academia           Other
 Staff too inaccessible*                                   0.0%          0.0%         22.2%           0.0%      28.6%        16.7%                                                    7.3%         5.6%           21.1%             42.9%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                  11.5%         6.1%         0.0%            0.0%       9.5%        0.0%                                                     0.0%         9.3%            0.0%             0.0%
 Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside
                                                           9.6%          9.1%         0.0%            0.0%      19.0%        33.3%                                                   17.1%          14.8%          21.1%            0.0%
 the Government
 Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to
                                                           13.5%         9.1%         0.0%           80.0%       0.0%        0.0%                                                    4.9%           18.5%          26.3%            0.0%
 practical problem solving*
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                  9.6%          3.0%         22.2%          20.0%      23.8%        33.3%                                                   22.0%          16.7%          21.1%            19.0%
 Arrogant in its approach                                  0.0%          0.0%         0.0%            0.0%       9.5%        0.0%                                                    2.4%           3.7%           0.0%             0.0%
 Not client focused                                        3.8%          3.0%         0.0%            0.0%      14.3%        0.0%                                                    4.9%           0.0%           10.5%            9.5%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                     0.0%          3.0%         0.0%            0.0%       4.8%        0.0%                                                    2.4%           3.7%           0.0%             0.0%
 World Bank Group’s processes too complex*                 15.4%        27.3%         33.3%          20.0%       4.8%        0.0%                                                    7.3%           5.6%           0.0%             23.8%
 Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform
                                                           9.6%          6.1%         0.0%            0.0%       0.0%        0.0%                                                    7.3%           1.9%               0.0%         19.0%
 efforts in the country
 Too influenced by developed countries*                    13.5%        15.2%         11.1%          80.0%      19.0%        16.7%                                                   9.8%           14.8%              5.3%         0.0%
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to
                                                           1.9%          9.1%         0.0%            0.0%       9.5%        0.0%                                                    12.2%          20.4%              0.0%         19.0%
 political realities
 World Bank Group’s processes too slow*                    17.3%        27.3%         11.1%           0.0%       0.0%        0.0%                                                    22.0%          5.6%           15.8%            0.0%
 Not aligned with other donors’ work                       0.0%          0.0%         0.0%            0.0%       0.0%        0.0%                                                    7.3%           3.7%           5.3%             9.5%
 Not aligned with country priorities                       3.8%          6.1%         0.0%            0.0%       4.8%        0.0%                                                    2.4%           9.3%           0.0%             0.0%
 Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities
                                                           13.5%         0.0%         44.4%           0.0%       4.8%        50.0%                                                   19.5%          24.1%              5.3%         9.5%
 in Sudan*
 Not focused enough on issues that are unique to
                                                           13.5%         0.0%         0.0%            0.0%       0.0%        0.0%                                                    7.3%           13.0%          26.3%            0.0%
 post-conflict countries*
 Inadequate number of World Bank Group staff
                                                           13.5%        15.2%         22.2%           0.0%      14.3%        16.7%                                                   2.4%           0.0%               5.3%         14.3%
 members located in the country
 Other                                                     5.8%         15.2%         0.0%            0.0%       4.8%        0.0%                                                    2.4%           3.7%           0.0%             4.8%
 Don’t know                                                19.2%        21.2%         11.1%           0.0%      14.3%        33.3%                                                   19.5%          11.1%          15.8%            4.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                                     93
The World Bank Group                                                                      Sudan                                                             Country Opinion Survey 2015

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                     PMU/                          Bilateral/             Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                          Employee of Consultant on         Local      Multilateral Private      Sector/
 (Responses combined)                                a Ministry WBG Program Government              Agency     Sector   Private Bank     NGO/CBO   Media   Academia       Other
 Knowledge products/services                           13.0%         27.3%            0.0%            0.0%     42.9%        14.3%         22.0%    18.5%    21.1%         27.3%
 Technical assistance*                                 44.4%         42.4%           66.7%            0.0%     19.0%        0.0%           9.8%    20.4%    42.1%         9.1%
 Capacity development                                  57.4%         69.7%           66.7%            0.0%     47.6%        57.1%         68.3%    55.6%    52.6%         40.9%
 Trust Fund management*                                13.0%          9.1%            0.0%           80.0%     14.3%        14.3%          4.9%    18.5%    10.5%         9.1%
 Multi-sectoral approaches                              9.3%          9.1%            0.0%            0.0%      0.0%        0.0%           9.8%    7.4%      0.0%         13.6%
 Co-financing arrangements                             27.8%         24.2%           33.3%           20.0%     19.0%        42.9%         46.3%    51.9%    31.6%         31.8%
 Sector-wide approaches*                                0.0%         12.1%           22.2%           80.0%      9.5%        0.0%           4.9%    0.0%      5.3%         9.1%
 Emergency Recovery lending                            13.0%          6.1%           11.1%           20.0%     14.3%        14.3%          7.3%    16.7%     5.3%         18.2%
 Other                                                  5.6%          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%      0.0%        0.0%           2.4%    0.0%      5.3%         9.1%
 Don’t know*                                            5.6%          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%     19.0%        28.6%          4.9%    3.7%     10.5%         13.6%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group's work and support help the poorest in Sudan?* (Select only ONE response)
                                                                      PMU/                        Bilateral/                Financial
                                                     Employee of Consultant on        Local      Multilateral Private        Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                            a Ministry WBG Program Government            Agency        Sector   Private Bank   NGO/CBO   Media   Academia        Other
 To a fully sufficient degree                              -            -             43%              -          10%           -           3%       4%        -            5%
 To a somewhat sufficient degree                         46%           42%            14%              -          10%          20%         33%      20%      11%           14%
 To a somewhat insufficient degree                       33%           45%            43%            80%          15%           -          18%      34%      37%           23%
 To a very insufficient degree                           15%            -               -            20%          30%          40%         25%      32%      32%           41%
 Don’t know                                               7%           12%              -              -          35%          40%         23%      10%      21%           18%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                          94
The World Bank Group                                                                                                   Sudan                                                                                        Country Opinion Survey 2015

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country? (Choose no more
than TWO)
                                                                          PMU/                       Bilateral/               Financial
  Percentage of Respondents                              Employee of Consultant on       Local     Multilateral Private        Sector/
  (Responses combined)                                    a Ministry WBG Program Government           Agency      Sector    Private Bank NGO/CBO        Media     Academia      Other
  Academia/think tanks/research institutes*                 34.0%         27.3%          33.3%          0.0%      28.6%         33.3%        7.1%       24.1%       68.4%       54.5%
  Donor community*                                          20.8%         9.1%           0.0%          60.0%      19.0%         16.7%        26.2%       5.6%        0.0%       13.6%
  Media*                                                     0.0%         3.0%           22.2%          0.0%      23.8%         16.7%        2.4%       42.6%        5.3%       13.6%
  Local government                                          18.9%         15.2%          22.2%         20.0%      14.3%         16.7%        16.7%      20.4%       15.8%       4.5%
  Private sector*                                            3.8%         15.2%          0.0%          80.0%      47.6%         16.7%        14.3%      24.1%       42.1%       18.2%
  Parliament                                                 3.8%         0.0%           0.0%           0.0%       0.0%         16.7%        0.0%        0.0%        5.3%       0.0%
  NGOs/CBOs*                                                49.1%         27.3%          33.3%         20.0%      14.3%         0.0%         54.8%      31.5%       21.1%       22.7%
  Youth/university groups                                    9.4%         18.2%          33.3%          0.0%      14.3%         0.0%         7.1%        3.7%       15.8%       9.1%
  Beneficiaries*                                            47.2%         48.5%          22.2%          0.0%       9.5%         50.0%        28.6%      11.1%       15.8%       22.7%
  Foundations*                                               3.8%         15.2%          22.2%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       13.0%        0.0%       18.2%
  UN and regional peace keeping forces*                      0.0%         0.0%           0.0%           0.0%      14.3%         0.0%         0.0%        3.7%        0.0%       0.0%
  Emerging donors                                            1.9%         0.0%           0.0%           0.0%       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        9.3%        0.0%       0.0%
  UN agencies                                                5.7%         15.2%          11.1%         20.0%       4.8%         0.0%         16.7%       1.9%        0.0%       9.1%
  Regional organizations                                     0.0%         3.0%           0.0%           0.0%       9.5%         0.0%         4.8%        0.0%        0.0%       4.5%
  Other                                                      1.9%         0.0%           0.0%           0.0%       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Don’t know                                                 0.0%         3.0%           0.0%           0.0%       0.0%         16.7%        9.5%        3.7%        0.0%       0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Sudan? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                          Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                              Financial Sector/
                                            Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency        Private Sector      Private Bank           NGO/CBO             Media               Academia             Other
                                          N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD                 N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N     Mean SD       N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently
plays a relevant role in development in   50   6.96   3.19   31   6.16   2.62    7    6.43   3.31   5    4.80   1.79     15     5.07   2.92    3    6.67   3.22   35    5.03   2.84   36   5.97    3.19   16     4.75   2.44   19   4.79    2.76
Sudan
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned
with what I consider the development      46   7.09   2.87   31   7.03   2.06    5    7.20   1.30   5    4.20   1.79     15     5.47   3.04    3    6.33   3.06   34    5.06   2.91   38   6.61    3.37   16     4.50   3.03   18   5.89    3.20
priorities for Sudan*
The World Bank Group supports
programs and strategies that are          45   7.04   2.76   31   6.94   1.75    5    6.60   1.14   5    4.60   2.19     15     4.80   3.10    2    5.50   3.54   33    5.24   2.86   39   6.51    3.12   15     5.47   2.64   17   5.71    3.29
realistic for Sudan*
The World Bank Group treats clients and
                                          45   8.18   2.63   32   8.31   1.66    6    9.33   0.82   5    6.80   1.30     14     6.57   2.82    1   10.00     .    31    7.90   2.86   36   8.17    2.87   14     6.64   2.98   18   7.72    3.20
stakeholders in Sudan with respect
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                       95
The World Bank Group                                                                                                      Sudan                                                                                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Sudan in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                             Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                              Financial Sector/
                                               Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency        Private Sector      Private Bank           NGO/CBO             Media               Academia             Other
                                             N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD                 N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N     Mean SD       N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
Responsiveness to needs*                     44   7.09   2.37   32   6.16   2.20    5    5.00   2.35   5    3.00   1.73     15     5.73   3.13    2    3.50   3.54   32    5.28   2.88   36   5.42    3.20   17     4.47   2.55   18   4.89    2.78
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s
                                             41   6.61   2.25   32   6.41   1.86    7    6.29   3.35   5    3.60   1.34     12     5.58   3.03    3    3.67   3.79   25    5.56   2.76   32   5.78    3.19   16     4.63   1.82   18   4.78    2.76
products and services)*
Flexibility (in terms of changing country
                                             42   7.05   2.25   31   6.13   2.22    5    5.40   3.36   5    4.00   1.41     15     6.07   3.20    2    3.50   2.12   17    5.24   3.15   35   5.40    3.37   16     4.13   2.45   19   4.58    2.80
circumstances)*
Being inclusive*                             40   7.08   2.62   29   5.41   2.04    5    5.00   2.74   5    4.60   1.34     15     5.93   2.71    2    2.50   2.12   28    5.00   2.52   26   6.04    2.96   15     5.07   2.02   17   5.88    2.71
Openness (sharing data and other
                                             39   6.72   2.32   29   6.55   2.21    5    5.60   2.19   5    7.00   2.24     14     6.07   2.06    3    5.00   4.00   27    5.93   2.54   34   6.62    3.43   13     4.77   3.14   19   5.58    2.91
information)
Staff accessibility                          43   7.09   2.61   32   6.75   2.21    6    8.17   1.47   5    6.20   1.10     13     5.00   2.97    2    7.50   2.12   31    5.16   3.08   34   6.38    3.68   14     5.50   2.65   19   5.47    3.10
Straightforwardness and honesty*             41   8.15   2.21   33   8.52   1.97    5    9.20   0.45   5    6.40   1.95     13     7.23   2.46    4    6.25   4.11   23    8.09   1.68   30   8.20    2.61   11     5.91   3.39   15   6.33    3.11
Ease of access to the people at the
World Bank Group who are making              45   6.89   2.56   31   6.16   2.78    5    6.80   3.49   5    4.40   2.19     13     5.23   3.37    3    2.67   2.89   28    5.54   3.25   36   5.03    3.44   14     4.79   2.67   18   5.50    3.00
decisions important to my work
Collaboration with civil society             44   6.93   2.24   29   5.90   2.41    7    8.71   1.80   4    5.25   1.50     13     5.23   3.37    3    4.67   3.51   32    5.81   2.87   39   6.56    3.50   15     5.67   3.02   17   5.65    2.91
Collaboration with the UN*                   34   8.47   1.48   24   7.25   2.35    4    9.50   0.58   5    6.00   2.83     12     7.42   2.61    2    9.50   0.71   23    8.22   2.00   32   8.25    2.85   13     6.54   2.67   17   6.18    3.28
Collaboration with the Government*           45   8.18   2.25   31   7.77   1.94    5    7.40   3.13   4    4.75   0.50     14     6.71   2.53    3    7.00   4.36   32    7.13   2.42   39   6.85    3.09   16     6.38   1.63   19   6.47    2.63
Collaboration with other donors and
                                             37   7.95   1.56   26   7.35   2.33    4    9.25   0.50   4    8.25   0.50     14     6.14   2.14    1    8.00     .    22    6.23   2.35   36   7.81    2.53   12     6.42   2.35   17   5.71    2.52
development partners*
Collaboration with the private sector        34   5.82   2.74   26   5.04   2.20    4    9.00   2.00   4    3.75   2.06     15     4.40   3.02    2    3.50   3.54   25    5.68   3.21   26   4.88    2.92   14     5.50   1.91   18   4.83    2.81
The speed in which it gets things
                                             46   7.07   2.13   33   6.73   2.10    5    7.20   0.84   4    3.25   2.50     15     5.53   3.16    1    5.00     .    33    5.03   3.29   30   6.47    3.08   14     5.64   2.93   20   5.50    2.69
accomplished on the ground*
Being a long-term partner                    40   7.78   2.66   30   7.37   2.80    5    8.00   2.92   4    7.00   2.00     14     6.64   3.27    1    9.00     .    29    6.55   3.81   35   7.23    3.07   15     6.67   2.85   18   6.67    2.61
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To be more effective development partner in Sudan, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…? (Select only ONE response)
                                                                        PMU/                      Bilateral/              Financial
                                                     Employee of Consultant on         Local    Multilateral Private       Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                            a Ministry WBG Program Government            Agency    Sector     Private Bank NGO/CBO                                                           Media         Academia          Other
 More local presence                                    87.0%           87.9%         66.7%        100.0%     95.2%         85.7%     88.1%                                                            87.0%          94.4%            90.5%
 The current level of local presence is adequate         7.4%            9.1%         22.2%            -        -             -       11.9%                                                            5.6%              -             4.8%
 Less local presence                                     3.7%              -          11.1%            -      4.8%            -         -                                                              3.7%              -               -
 Don't know                                              1.9%            3.0%            -             -        -           14.3%       -                                                              3.7%            5.6%            4.8%




                                                                                                                          96
The World Bank Group                                                                        Sudan                                                                   Country Opinion Survey 2015

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In the past year, have you seen more, less, or just about the same level of effective collaboration between the UN and the World Bank Group in your country?* (Select only ONE response)
                                                                            PMU/                        Bilateral/              Financial
                                                         Employee of Consultant on           Local     Multilateral Private      Sector/
  Percentage of Respondents                               a Ministry WBG Program Government              Agency      Sector   Private Bank NGO/CBO        Media     Academia      Other
  More effective collaboration                              23.1%           6.1%            11.1%         60.0%      14.3%        14.3%         9.5%       18.5%      11.1%       9.1%
  The same level of effective collaboration                 26.9%           33.3%           44.4%         40.0%      19.0%        14.3%         7.1%       20.4%      16.7%       9.1%
  Less effective collaboration                              17.3%           24.2%              -             -       19.0%          -          11.9%       24.1%      11.1%      40.9%
  Don't know                                                32.7%           36.4%           44.4%            -       47.6%        71.4%        71.4%       37.0%      61.1%      40.9%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which THREE of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                         PMU/                         Bilateral/              Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                               Employee of Consultant on      Local       Multilateral Private       Sector/
 (Responses combined)                                     a Ministry WBG Program Government            Agency     Sector    Private Bank NGO/CBO          Media   Academia         Other
 The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow
                                                            19.2%        15.2%         22.2%             0.0%     30.0%          0.0%         26.2%       9.3%      10.5%         31.8%
 through/follow-up
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society
                                                            48.1%        39.4%         66.7%            20.0%     55.0%         50.0%         73.8%       40.7%     52.6%         40.9%
 participation
 The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to
                                                            9.6%         15.2%         22.2%            20.0%     20.0%          0.0%         21.4%       29.6%     31.6%         27.3%
 political/social realities on the ground
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in
                                                            44.2%        51.5%         33.3%             0.0%     30.0%         16.7%         11.9%       14.8%     15.8%         13.6%
 Government*
 Poor donor coordination*                                   5.8%          6.1%         11.1%            60.0%     40.0%          0.0%         11.9%       16.7%     26.3%         40.9%
 The World Bank Group works too slowly                      9.6%         12.1%          0.0%             0.0%     20.0%          0.0%          7.1%       5.6%      15.8%         18.2%
 The Government works inefficiently*                        7.7%         24.2%         33.3%             0.0%     10.0%         33.3%         31.0%       35.2%     21.1%         9.1%
 Political pressures and obstacles*                         34.6%        21.2%         11.1%           100.0%     25.0%         83.3%          9.5%       38.9%     47.4%         40.9%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country
                                                            26.9%         9.1%         66.7%             0.0%      5.0%          0.0%         14.3%       24.1%     10.5%         13.6%
 challenges*
 Ongoing conflict and instability                           50.0%        33.3%         11.1%            40.0%     20.0%         66.7%         38.1%       33.3%     42.1%         27.3%
 Inadequate funding                                         26.9%        36.4%         22.2%            60.0%     30.0%         33.3%         28.6%       25.9%     21.1%         31.8%
 Other                                                      0.0%          9.1%          0.0%             0.0%      0.0%          0.0%          7.1%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                            97
The World Bank Group                                                                                                 Sudan                                                                                        Country Opinion Survey 2015

C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Sudan? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                        Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                              Financial Sector/
                                          Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency        Private Sector      Private Bank           NGO/CBO             Media               Academia             Other
                                        N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD                 N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N     Mean SD       N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
Crime and violence*                     34   6.85   3.03   28   4.64   2.68    6    8.67   1.63   4    3.75   3.50     14     8.29   2.97    3    4.00   5.20   21    6.57   3.43   37   5.43    3.73   15     4.07   2.74   15   5.93    3.94
Financial markets*                      38   7.37   2.95   26   6.12   2.54    6    8.67   1.86   5    5.20   1.79     17     7.76   3.11    4    6.00   4.69   29    8.41   2.43   42   7.43    3.09   15     6.27   2.60   17   8.24    2.66
Transport                               40   7.85   2.48   32   8.09   2.04    7    7.29   3.25   5    9.60   0.89     19     7.89   3.20    4    7.75   4.50   30    7.97   2.76   43   7.51    3.12   16     7.94   3.11   18   7.22    2.82
Anti-corruption                         41   7.83   2.82   28   7.86   2.22    7    7.71   3.25   5    6.00   2.83     18     7.56   3.26    4    5.50   5.20   27    8.81   1.92   40   8.25    3.09   15     7.13   2.97   19   8.16    2.99
Regional conflict and tensions*         43   7.70   2.96   29   6.83   2.44    6    8.67   1.37   5    3.00   2.83     17     8.71   2.42    4    3.25   4.50   29    8.10   2.06   37   6.54    3.65   15     7.07   2.34   16   7.75    2.84
Law and justice*                        39   5.82   2.95   29   6.90   2.48    5    8.80   1.64   5    2.40   1.52     14     6.79   3.75    4    5.50   5.20   26    5.15   3.31   39   5.46    3.56   14     5.07   3.03   16   6.69    3.61
Urban development                       43   7.42   2.65   32   7.47   2.45    7    7.29   2.50   5    9.20   1.30     19     8.32   2.73    4   10.00 0.00     30    7.67   2.32   43   7.91    2.88   15     6.47   2.83   19   7.63    2.63
Environmental sustainability            46   8.28   2.16   33   8.18   2.21    7    7.71   3.45   5    7.80   2.28     16     7.38   2.92    4   10.00 0.00     28    8.82   1.87   40   7.48    2.97   15     7.73   2.66   19   8.16    2.71
Regulatory framework                    44   7.18   2.61   31   7.06   2.19    7    8.57   1.81   5    6.40   2.30     16     7.56   2.48    2    5.50   2.12   32    7.28   2.44   36   6.69    3.43   14     5.93   2.67   18   7.17    2.75
Information and communications
                                        44   7.95   2.35   29   7.41   2.37    7    8.57   1.90   5    8.00   2.35     19     8.00   2.49    4    4.75   4.11   32    6.59   2.85   42   7.57    3.05   14     6.43   3.55   19   8.16    2.73
technology
Poverty reduction                       47   9.04   1.65   32   8.59   2.06    8    8.38   2.77   5    9.20   1.10     20     8.35   2.98    4   10.00 0.00     37    9.24   1.28   43   8.63    2.66   17     8.06   2.63   19   9.47    1.17
Gender equity*                          45   6.47   3.06   28   6.25   2.40    7    8.43   1.40   5    7.00   3.46     15     7.40   3.50    4    2.50   1.92   29    7.48   2.54   40   7.15    3.54   16     4.63   2.80   17   7.12    3.31
Private sector development              40   6.73   3.31   30   7.03   2.54    7    7.57   3.26   5    9.40   0.89     20     7.90   3.14    4    6.25   3.86   33    7.55   2.98   41   7.68    3.14   15     7.40   2.23   19   8.11    2.05
Foreign direct investment               39   7.67   2.73   27   6.89   2.44    7    7.29   2.98   5    8.40   1.67     20     8.60   2.37    4    9.25   0.96   34    7.71   3.16   38   8.13    3.20   15     6.33   3.24   18   8.22    2.44
Local governance and institutions       40   5.95   2.84   30   7.03   2.80    4    7.25   4.27   5    6.60   2.70     17     7.00   2.26    4    5.00   3.92   34    6.76   2.66   37   6.54    3.37   15     6.27   2.66   18   7.83    2.09
Water and sanitation                    47   8.53   1.79   32   8.03   2.04    7    8.43   1.51   5    8.60   0.55     18     7.50   2.77    5    9.80   0.45   32    7.31   2.93   44   7.82    2.98   17     7.24   3.03   19   9.00    1.53
Trade and exports*                      38   6.63   3.09   26   6.65   3.02    6    8.17   2.14   5    8.00   2.35     20     7.95   2.19    4    7.25   4.27   26    7.00   3.21   37   8.27    2.79   14     6.43   3.23   18   9.11    1.49
Economic growth                         44   8.55   1.82   28   7.61   2.15    6    8.50   2.35   5    8.80   1.30     20     8.15   2.82    4   10.00 0.00     29    8.55   2.52   44   8.91    2.13   15     7.40   3.16   20   9.30    1.26
Energy                                  40   7.55   2.61   28   7.43   2.90    7    8.00   3.42   5    7.40   0.55     18     7.56   2.71    4    8.00   4.00   31    7.81   2.54   42   7.76    3.11   15     7.47   2.85   18   8.78    2.24
Disaster management                     47   7.77   2.56   28   7.07   2.97    7    8.71   1.80   5    7.80   0.84     18     7.83   2.57    4    7.75   4.50   33    8.21   2.32   40   8.00    2.83   16     5.94   3.02   18   8.89    1.53
Public sector governance/reform         41   7.61   2.75   32   8.16   2.52    7    7.86   3.08   5    7.20   3.49     18     7.56   2.46    4    3.25   4.50   32    6.72   3.19   42   7.81    3.10   16     7.69   2.98   18   8.78    1.83
Job creation/employment                 44   7.68   2.51   31   7.55   2.64    7    8.57   2.15   5    8.20   0.84     20     7.60   3.15    4    8.75   2.50   33    7.48   3.13   40   7.53    3.31   16     7.75   3.07   18   8.67    1.97
Social cohesion                         43   5.81   3.40   28   6.79   3.08    7    7.86   3.19   5    6.60   1.67     18     6.78   3.61    4    3.25   4.50   33    6.12   3.04   42   5.90    3.78   13     4.85   2.97   17   7.41    3.43
Communicable/non-communicable
                                        44   7.39   2.79   27   7.11   2.47    7    8.43   1.40   4    6.75   0.96     20     7.70   2.87    4    7.75   4.50   31    6.19   3.06   41   6.63    3.59   13     6.15   2.97   18   9.06    1.70
diseases
Equality of opportunity                 42   7.17   3.11   29   7.31   2.71    7    9.29   0.76   5    7.80   0.45     20     7.55   2.61    4    5.75   4.92   27    7.78   2.42   41   7.17    3.20   14     7.29   2.95   18   8.50    1.92
Health*                                 46   8.93   1.25   33   8.30   2.01    8    9.00   1.77   5    5.80   2.49     20     7.70   2.74    4    7.50   4.36   37    7.27   3.07   46   8.17    2.71   18     7.67   2.68   17   9.06    1.52
Rural development                       46   8.93   1.86   32   8.69   2.02    7    9.00   1.53   5    8.00   1.41     17     7.88   2.60    4    9.75   0.50   36    8.69   1.95   43   8.40    2.77   17     8.12   2.91   19   8.79    2.12
Global/regional integration             43   8.26   1.97   30   7.23   2.32    7    7.86   2.04   5    8.00   1.23     19     7.74   2.62    4    9.00   2.00   25    7.76   2.44   39   7.97    2.85   15     6.73   3.06   17   8.47    2.24
Food security                           45   8.89   1.81   30   8.47   1.93    7    8.43   2.64   5    8.20   0.84     17     7.59   2.67    4    9.75   0.50   34    8.79   1.61   42   8.38    2.84   15     7.73   3.43   19   8.63    2.06
Natural resource management             43   6.86   3.04   24   7.71   2.61    6    8.67   2.16   5    7.80   2.17     20     7.85   2.83    5    8.20   4.03   28    7.46   3.23   41   7.54    3.16   14     6.57   3.72   17   8.00    2.83
Security/stabilization/reconstruction   48   8.58   1.88   31   8.19   2.51    8    8.75   1.75   5    7.00   1.41     20     7.95   2.59    4    5.50   5.20   33    7.67   2.87   42   8.43    2.75   16     6.50   3.63   20   8.75    2.34
Social protection*                      41   5.34   2.90   29   6.66   2.68    6    8.00   1.90   5    6.00   1.41     20     7.45   3.00    4    5.75   4.92   31    6.84   3.16   40   7.08    2.97   15     5.33   2.87   18   8.28    2.08
Climate change*                         41   7.66   3.09   32   7.41   2.77    6    5.67   3.83   5    5.80   2.78     17     6.82   3.64    4    3.00   2.31   31    8.03   2.14   41   6.85    3.25   14     6.93   2.97   18   8.72    2.08
Agricultural development                46   8.98   1.33   33   8.24   2.56    7    8.71   1.89   5    9.00   1.41     21     8.38   2.38    4    9.75   0.50   33    8.70   2.40   43   8.35    2.68   16     8.06   2.98   17   9.12    1.65
Education                               47   8.70   1.83   30   8.63   1.87    8    8.63   2.07   5    8.40   0.89     20     7.90   2.92    4    9.50   1.00   37    7.95   3.04   44   8.39    2.76   18     8.00   2.99   18   8.83    2.48
Debt relief and access to finance       40   8.83   2.28   27   8.26   2.52    8    9.13   1.64   5    9.60   0.89     21     8.14   3.25    4    7.75   4.50   34    9.18   1.47   48   8.81    2.58   16     7.56   3.35   19   8.84    2.43
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                     98
The World Bank Group                                                                                                  Sudan                                                                                        Country Opinion Survey 2015

C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Sudan? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                         Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                              Financial Sector/
                                           Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency        Private Sector      Private Bank           NGO/CBO             Media               Academia             Other
                                         N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD                 N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N     Mean SD       N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
Anti-corruption*                         21   4.43   2.99   22   4.68   2.95    3    6.67   1.53   3    7.00   0.00        7   2.71   1.70    1    1.00     .    19    6.21   3.28   19   4.05    2.88   11     2.82   1.83   7    4.43    3.91
Information and communications
                                         25   6.08   2.75   22   4.73   2.39    5    7.60   1.34   3    8.00   0.00     10     5.30   4.03    2    4.00   4.24   21    5.90   3.25   23   4.78    3.07   10     2.20   1.69   10   5.50    3.92
technology*
Transport                                24   4.29   2.27   23   4.87   2.38    4    5.50   0.58   3    9.00   0.00        8   5.25   3.92    4    4.50   3.42   22    5.36   3.29   21   4.19    2.82   11     3.00   2.57   9    6.00    3.94
Crime and violence                       21   4.33   2.92   20   3.50   2.28    1    7.00    .     3    2.00   0.00        5   2.60   2.19    2    3.50   3.54   19    4.16   2.63   22   4.41    3.28   10     3.60   2.22   8    4.38    3.70
Regional conflict and tensions           28   5.68   3.22   24   4.58   2.77    2    6.00   1.41   3    2.00   0.00     10     4.80   3.85    3    3.33   4.04   11    5.64   3.20   24   5.83    3.44   13     3.92   2.93   9    5.00    3.39
Law and justice                          23   4.09   2.84   24   5.08   2.13    1    7.00    .     3    3.00   0.00        7   3.43   2.51    3    3.00   3.46   12    2.83   2.66   20   3.95    3.07   10     2.60   1.84   8    4.13    3.72
Urban development                        30   6.80   2.83   23   5.39   2.50    4    4.25   2.50   3    6.00   0.00     10     5.40   3.34    3    6.67   4.93   20    5.35   3.38   26   6.04    3.24   12     3.25   1.71   11   5.55    3.83
Environmental sustainability*            32   7.13   2.86   32   6.44   2.44    5    8.00   2.83   3    6.33   0.58     10     5.50   3.03    2    4.50   4.95   19    6.00   2.67   24   5.96    3.07   14     3.71   2.70   13   5.15    3.18
Regulatory framework*                    30   5.97   3.07   26   6.35   2.37    3    7.33   1.16   3    7.33   0.58        6   4.50   3.33    3    5.00   3.61   16    6.31   2.96   16   6.00    3.08   13     2.85   1.99   11   4.82    3.55
Communicable/non-communicable
                                         33   6.94   2.14   23   4.70   2.75    3    7.00   2.00   3    5.67   2.52     13     5.62   3.20    3    5.33   4.04   11    3.91   2.81   22   5.68    2.84   13     3.38   2.66   10   4.80    3.23
diseases*
Poverty reduction                        38   7.37   2.79   28   6.25   2.70    5    6.80   1.79   3    5.67   2.52     13     6.23   2.65    4    6.75   3.95   28    7.25   2.69   30   6.47    3.16   15     4.80   2.34   15   5.80    2.83
Gender equity                            29   6.41   2.87   27   6.30   2.49    5    8.40   0.89   3    6.67   1.16        8   5.88   2.75    3    5.33   4.04   22    6.23   2.33   20   5.85    3.44   13     4.62   3.18   12   5.08    2.68
Private sector development               25   5.76   2.95   23   4.61   2.02    2    3.50   2.12   2    7.00   1.41     12     5.67   3.28    3    4.00   2.65   22    6.55   3.71   22   4.95    3.05   12     4.25   2.05   13   5.62    2.79
Foreign direct investment                24   4.88   3.72   19   4.11   1.56    1    8.00    .     3    5.00   0.00     11     6.55   2.73    3    5.33   4.51   23    6.78   3.57   29   5.00    3.65   12     3.17   1.99   10   4.70    2.98
Local governance and institutions        27   5.48   2.90   24   5.04   2.44    2    5.00   4.24   3    4.33   0.58        8   6.38   2.39    2    1.00   0.00   14    5.43   3.03   23   4.48    2.76   12     3.17   1.85   11   4.36    2.29
Water and sanitation*                    32   6.50   3.10   29   6.79   2.27    5    7.60   1.34   3    3.00   1.73     10     6.20   2.78    4    6.00   3.46   25    6.08   2.33   29   6.48    2.57   15     4.13   2.92   15   5.20    2.48
Trade and exports                        24   5.54   3.30   22   4.50   1.97    1    6.00    .     1    7.00    .       11     5.18   2.96    3    2.67   2.89   21    6.48   2.86   25   4.72    3.17   11     2.82   2.32   13   4.62    2.18
Economic growth                          30   6.60   2.55   27   6.00   2.11    5    6.00   2.00   3    6.67   0.58     12     5.42   3.12    4    6.50   3.87   25    6.80   2.55   25   5.52    3.00   13     3.92   2.63   13   5.62    2.76
Energy                                   21   4.90   2.88   20   4.15   1.87    4    6.00   1.41   1    6.00    .       10     5.90   3.18    3    4.00   3.61   13    6.00   2.27   24   5.00    3.30   13     3.08   2.36   12   4.58    3.06
Disaster management*                     31   6.71   3.05   19   5.42   2.24    3    7.00   2.00   3    4.00   1.73     11     4.64   3.30    4    4.50   4.04   17    5.59   2.60   19   6.95    2.64   13     3.23   2.39   13   4.92    3.20
Public sector governance/reform*         26   5.77   3.05   21   5.90   2.34    2    4.00   2.83   3    6.00   0.00        9   4.67   2.24    2    1.00   0.00   14    6.21   2.86   28   6.50    3.03   12     3.42   2.07   13   5.23    3.32
Job creation/employment                  33   5.58   2.94   25   4.76   2.67    5    5.60   1.95   3    2.00   0.00     11     4.55   3.11    3    3.67   3.06   22    4.91   2.96   26   4.58    3.44   13     2.23   1.36   13   4.15    3.11
Social cohesion                          28   5.04   2.91   23   4.57   2.27    3    5.33   4.04   3    4.00   0.00     11     3.91   3.30    3    3.00   1.73   21    3.76   2.32   21   4.43    3.39   12     2.08   1.24   14   3.71    3.25
Financial markets*                       19   5.63   3.06   20   4.35   2.39    1    7.00    .     1    3.00    .          9   3.89   1.97    4    3.75   4.27   17    6.41   2.83   22   4.23    2.76   11     2.45   1.75   12   5.67    3.26
Equality of opportunity*                 31   6.32   3.04   25   5.00   2.47    4    7.25   0.50   3    3.00   0.00        7   3.14   1.77    3    4.00   3.61   22    6.36   3.53   24   5.33    3.46   12     2.92   2.23   16   5.38    3.38
Health*                                  37   7.59   2.51   26   5.69   2.48    5    7.40   1.52   1    6.00    .       15     5.67   3.06    3    5.33   3.79   27    5.67   2.45   26   6.38    2.64   14     3.86   2.57   14   4.50    2.79
Rural development*                       39   7.31   2.99   32   6.72   2.22    6    8.33   1.51   3    5.33   1.16     13     5.54   2.96    4    6.50   3.87   27    6.56   2.50   27   6.85    3.02   14     3.64   2.06   15   5.33    3.22
Global/regional integration*             28   6.96   2.52   25   4.84   2.51    5    7.60   2.07   3    4.67   1.16     10     4.60   3.86    3    6.33   4.73   10    5.90   2.92   23   4.04    2.14   13     3.08   2.22   14   5.50    3.18
Food security*                           33   6.88   2.89   28   5.25   2.41    5    6.80   2.28   3    4.33   2.31     12     5.83   3.01    4    6.00   4.24   25    6.88   2.28   20   5.45    2.98   13     2.62   1.85   14   5.43    3.18
Education*                               40   6.88   2.59   29   6.76   2.18    5    6.60   2.19   3    6.33   1.16     12     4.42   3.12    3    4.33   2.89   23    6.04   2.40   27   6.15    3.10   15     3.53   2.62   16   4.69    3.16
Security/stabilization/reconstruction*   37   6.59   2.96   24   6.00   2.74    4    7.75   2.22   1    5.00    .       11     5.00   3.13    3    4.33   3.51   24    5.33   3.02   26   6.04    2.97   15     3.73   2.43   17   4.12    2.89
Social protection                        25   5.12   3.23   21   4.81   2.56    2    6.00   0.00   3    5.67   0.58     11     5.09   2.81    3    1.67   1.16   14    4.00   2.86   17   3.24    2.39   13     2.62   1.12   11   4.09    3.08
Climate change*                          34   7.12   3.06   25   5.24   2.13    5    8.20   1.92   3    4.00   0.00     11     4.55   3.21    3    2.00   1.00   12    5.92   2.64   20   4.70    2.23   14     3.00   2.45   14   5.07    2.87
Agricultural development*                33   6.70   3.02   24   5.42   2.67    5    6.80   1.92   3    5.00   0.00     11     6.36   2.62    4    5.25   4.03   27    6.11   3.40   24   5.75    2.54   12     2.67   1.44   16   5.19    2.90
Natural resource management*             26   5.35   3.32   21   4.71   2.88    2    7.50   0.71   3    4.33   0.58     13     5.46   2.63    5    5.40   4.34   18    5.61   3.31   17   3.53    2.18   12     2.08   1.38   13   4.54    3.31
Debt relief and access to finance        27   5.85   3.73   24   4.21   2.09    4    5.25   3.95   3    3.00   0.00     13     5.31   3.68    4    3.50   4.36   20    6.35   3.98   31   4.97    2.93   12     2.50   2.15   14   5.07    3.41
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                      99
The World Bank Group                                                                                                   Sudan                                                                                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Sudan? (Select only ONE response)
                                                                      PMU/                       Bilateral/               Financial
                                                    Employee of Consultant on         Local    Multilateral Private        Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                           a Ministry WBG Program Government            Agency       Sector   Private Bank                                                 NGO/CBO         Media        Academia          Other
 At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)              50.0%          45.5%          44.4%         60.0%       42.9%        33.3%                                                     38.1%          44.4%         47.4%            52.4%
 In the country                                        18.5%           9.1%          33.3%            -          -          16.7%                                                      9.5%          18.5%            -             19.0%
 Don't know                                            31.5%          45.5%          22.2%         40.0%       57.1%        50.0%                                                     52.4%          37.0%         52.6%            28.6%

                                          Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                             Financial Sector/
                                            Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency     Private Sector        Private Bank           NGO/CBO              Media               Academia             Other
                                          N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N     Mean SD        N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
To what extent does the World Bank
Group’s work help to achieve              50   7.28   2.55   33   6.67   1.90    5    4.80   2.68   5    4.60   2.19     16    5.81   4.05    3    9.67   0.58   34    6.97   2.73    41   6.24    3.11   16     4.75   1.92   19   6.42    3.49
development results in Sudan?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                          Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                             Financial Sector/
                                            Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency     Private Sector        Private Bank           NGO/CBO              Media               Academia             Other
                                          N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N     Mean SD        N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
To what extent does the World Bank
Group help to build/strengthen existing   47   7.77   2.78   31   7.65   2.20    5    7.20   2.39   4    5.75   1.50     10    5.70   3.43    2    7.50   2.12   17    6.88   3.37    38   5.68    2.68   14     5.29   2.89   19   6.37    3.91
country systems in Sudan?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Sudan? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                          Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                             Financial Sector/
                                            Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency      Private Sector       Private Bank           NGO/CBO              Media               Academia             Other
                                          N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD               N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N     Mean SD        N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
The World Bank Group’s program of
managing trust funds and partnerships     37   5.41   2.88   28   5.54   2.46    8    6.50   3.42   4    5.75   2.50      9    3.56   3.50    4    7.00   4.08   27    3.44   2.47    38    4.87   3.18   14     2.50   1.91   15   4.87    3.00
meets the needs of Sudan*
The World Bank Group meets Sudan’s
                                          44   5.77   3.21   26   5.69   2.75    8    8.00   2.62   4    6.75   2.50     12    5.75   3.11    2    1.00   0.00   16    4.56   2.94    37    6.11   3.10   14     4.07   1.98   15   4.47    2.92
needs for knowledge services*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                          Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                             Financial Sector/
                                            Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency     Private Sector        Private Bank           NGO/CBO              Media               Academia             Other
                                          N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N     Mean SD        N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the World
Bank Group measures and corrects its      38   6.24   2.78   29   5.62   2.16    8    7.00   2.98   4    7.00   2.00     12    5.00   3.02    3    6.67   4.93   21    7.19   3.25    28   5.82    3.07   10     6.80   2.30   16   4.88    2.63
work in real time in Sudan?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                                       100
The World Bank Group                                                                                                    Sudan                                                                                        Country Opinion Survey 2015

D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?* (Select only ONE respon se)
                                                                    PMU/                         Bilateral/               Financial
                                                    Employee of Consultant on         Local     Multilateral Private       Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                           a Ministry WBG Program Government            Agency       Sector   Private Bank                                                  NGO/CBO        Media         Academia          Other
 Weekly                                                15.1%         6.1%             22.2%           -           -           -                                                           -          3.7%              -               -
 Monthly                                               5.7%         39.4%               -          40.0%          -           -                                                         2.4%         14.8%           5.3%            15.0%
 A few times a year                                    50.9%        24.2%             33.3%        20.0%        5.3%        14.3%                                                       7.1%         27.8%          57.9%            20.0%
 Rarely                                                9.4%         18.2%             33.3%        20.0%       36.8%          -                                                        47.6%         25.9%          10.5%            30.0%
 Never                                                 18.9%        12.1%             11.1%        20.0%       57.9%        85.7%                                                      42.9%         27.8%          26.3%            35.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In Sudan, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                           Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                             Financial Sector/
                                             Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency      Private Sector       Private Bank           NGO/CBO              Media               Academia             Other
                                           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD               N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N     Mean SD        N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
Are timely                                 45   6.16   2.93   29   5.55   1.94    8    7.38   2.72   3    5.00   0.00     10    6.40   2.76    4    5.25   3.30   22    6.27   2.96    31   6.81    2.80   12     4.83   2.21   17   4.53    2.76
Include appropriate level of stakeholder
                                           46   7.39   2.85   31   5.81   2.18    7    7.71   2.36   3    7.00   0.00     16    6.63   2.90    4    5.25   3.10   20    5.60   2.33    30   6.50    3.11   14     4.86   1.66   16   5.31    2.41
involvement during preparation*
Lead to practical solutions*               46   7.48   2.22   30   6.53   1.83    7    7.57   2.37   3    5.00   0.00     17    6.53   2.96    5    6.80   3.56   29    5.83   2.00    35   6.71    3.02   15     4.80   2.18   17   5.65    2.32
Are accessible (well written and easy to
                                           47   7.26   2.53   30   6.70   1.97    7    7.29   2.69   3    8.00   0.00     16    6.38   3.01    4    5.75   3.78   24    7.42   2.55    35   6.26    3.04   15     7.93   1.67   15   6.20    2.88
understand)
Are source of relevant information on
                                           45   7.71   2.30   28   6.71   2.40    7    8.71   1.38   3    8.00   0.00     16    6.44   2.71    5    6.80   3.56   22    7.95   1.76    37   8.49    1.84   15     8.00   1.73   16   5.63    2.92
global good practices*
Are adequately disseminated                44   6.32   2.40   31   6.13   3.00    7    7.71   2.69   3    8.00   0.00     16    6.06   3.21    5    4.00   2.83   26    5.62   2.04    34   6.32    2.85   15     6.60   2.56   17   5.59    2.58
Are translated enough into local
                                           39   5.87   3.05   29   5.31   2.71    7    7.43   3.05   3    5.00   0.00     17    6.76   2.64    5    4.40   3.29   28    6.50   2.60    36   6.56    3.02   15     6.60   2.38   16   6.19    2.99
language
Are adaptable to Sudan’s specific
development challenges and country         40   7.40   2.65   28   6.64   2.20    8    7.75   2.66   3    5.67   0.58     14    6.93   3.15    3    8.00   2.00   27    8.41   1.69    36   7.14    2.86   15     6.53   3.23   17   6.88    2.96
circumstances
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                           Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                             Financial Sector/
                                             Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency      Private Sector       Private Bank           NGO/CBO              Media               Academia             Other
                                           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD               N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N     Mean SD        N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
Overall, how significant a contribution
do you believe the WBG's knowledge
                                           51   8.02   2.07   31   7.61   1.84    9    8.22   2.28   4    6.75   0.50     19    7.11   3.41    5    9.80   0.45   35    8.57   2.13    38   8.47    1.98   16     6.75   2.15   21   8.86    2.13
work and activities make to
development results in your country?*
Overall, how would you rate the
technical quality of the World Bank        47   7.68   2.49   31   7.68   1.56    8    8.13   2.42   4    7.25   0.50     17    6.71   3.06    3    9.00   1.00   29    7.76   2.40    40   7.95    2.42   15     8.07   1.44   20   6.35    3.07
Group's knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




                                                                                                                    101
The World Bank Group                                                                                                     Sudan                                                                                              Country Opinion Survey 2015

E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                            Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                             Financial Sector/
                                              Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency      Private Sector       Private Bank             NGO/CBO                  Media               Academia             Other
                                            N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD               N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N     Mean SD            N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds
                                            43   5.28   3.27   33   5.79   2.58    6    7.17   2.32   3    4.00   0.00     13    5.38   3.20    3    2.67   2.89     18        5.17   3.00    31   4.32    3.68   10     3.30   2.58   16   4.94    2.93
promptly
The World Bank Group effectively
monitors and evaluates the projects and     50   8.26   2.09   33   7.39   2.26    8    9.25   0.89   4    7.50   1.00     15    6.80   2.83    4    9.25   1.50     32        7.50   2.00    40   8.28    2.15   14     7.64   2.59   18   6.56    2.83
programs it supports*
The World Bank Group’s approvals and
                                            45   6.76   2.48   32   6.28   2.20    6    8.50   1.23   4    4.75   0.50     17    5.00   2.98    5    5.40   4.28     26        7.08   1.81    35   6.89    2.90   10     4.70   3.13   18   5.67    2.45
reviews are done in a timely fashion*
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard
                                            38   7.84   2.01   29   6.62   2.15    6    5.33   3.39   2    3.50   0.71     14    5.86   2.45    4    4.75   3.86     18        6.61   2.55    28   6.11    2.79   9      5.56   2.13   17   5.71    2.57
Policy? requirements are reasonable*
The World Bank Group takes decisions
                                            36   6.22   2.45   30   5.33   2.32    6    4.67   3.20   4    4.25   2.06     14    5.29   3.07    4    3.50   3.00     21        4.71   2.72    32   3.94    3.03   11     3.64   2.62   17   5.65    2.57
quickly in Sudan*
Working with the World Bank Group
                                            50   8.64   1.94   33   7.97   2.01    8    9.25   1.04   4    7.00   0.82     18    6.94   3.30    5    7.80   3.90     33        8.42   2.09    37   9.03    1.62   15     7.00   1.77   18   7.22    2.60
increases Sudan’s institutional capacity*
Where country systems are adequate,
the World Bank Group makes                  39   8.00   2.33   31   7.65   2.21    6    8.67   1.37   4    3.00   2.45     15    6.87   3.00    4    8.75   1.50     21        7.48   2.75    33   8.21    2.64   10     8.50   1.35   14   6.36    2.56
appropriate use of them*
The World Bank Group provides
                                            48   7.90   2.27   33   7.15   2.32    6    9.00   1.10   4    8.00   0.00     16    6.94   2.67    4    6.00   3.92     31        7.52   2.14    32   8.00    2.29   15     7.07   1.94   17   6.65    3.04
effective implementation support
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                            Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                             Financial Sector/
                                              Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency      Private Sector       Private Bank             NGO/CBO                  Media               Academia             Other
                                            N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD               N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N     Mean SD            N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe that the
World Bank Group’s work helps to find
                                            34   6.50   2.64   27   6.41   2.36    7    8.71   1.25   4    4.75   0.50     16    6.88   3.69    4    7.25   4.19    26         6.69   2.41    37   7.35    2.51   16     6.31   1.96   15   7.93    3.11
solutions that promote private public
partnerships in Sudan?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Sudan? (Select only ONE response)
                                                                      PMU/                        Bilateral/                                                         Financial
                                                      Employee of Consultant on       Local     Multilateral Private                                                  Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                             a Ministry WBG Program Government           Agency     Sector                                               Private Bank              NGO/CBO        Media         Academia          Other
 The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Sudan        5.6%           -           25.0%             -       9.5%                                                      -                      -           3.7%              -             19.0%
 The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in
                                                          7.4%        15.2%          25.0%          40.0%     23.8%                                                        -                  19.0%          18.5%          15.8%           14.3%
 Sudan
 The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is
                                                         44.4%        54.5%          37.5%          60.0%      4.8%                                                   33.3%                   23.8%          37.0%          42.1%           19.0%
 appropriate
 Don't know                                              42.6%        30.3%          12.5%             -      61.9%                                                   66.7%                   57.1%          40.7%          42.1%           47.6%




                                                                                                                     102
The World Bank Group                                                                                                   Sudan                                                                                          Country Opinion Survey 2015

E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in Sudan?* (Select only ONE response)
                                                                        PMU/                      Bilateral/                                                       Financial
                                                       Employee of Consultant on      Local     Multilateral                                      Private           Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                              a Ministry WBG Program Government          Agency                                         Sector         Private Bank          NGO/CBO        Media         Academia          Other
 The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and
 focuses on the most important development                48.1%         45.5%        87.5%          80.0%                                         23.8%             50.0%               24.4%          44.4%          31.6%           27.3%
 challenges in Sudan
 The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in
 Sudan, and it is involved in too many areas of           24.1%         30.3%        12.5%             -                                          28.6%             16.7%               26.8%          24.1%          21.1%           13.6%
 development
 Don’t know                                               27.8%         24.2%           -           20.0%                                         47.6%             33.3%               48.8%          31.5%          47.4%           59.1%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                          Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                             Financial Sector/
                                            Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency      Private Sector       Private Bank             NGO/CBO              Media               Academia             Other
                                          N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD               N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N     Mean SD        N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the World
Bank Group is adequately staffed in       35   5.54   2.49   29   5.07   2.24    6    7.33   3.56   5    4.40   0.89     12    4.75   3.33    4    4.50   4.36     22    4.73   2.76    22   5.73    3.20   12     5.17   2.89   16   4.31    2.87
Sudan?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                   103
The World Bank Group                                                                    Sudan                                                               Country Opinion Survey 2015

F. The Multi Partner/Donor Trust Fund in Sudan as Managed by the World Bank

Which of the following best describe what you consider the greatest STRENGTHS of the Multi Donor Trust Fund in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                        PMU/                       Bilateral/              Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                            Employee of Consultant on       Local      Multilateral Private       Sector/
 (Responses combined)                                   a Ministry WBG Program Government           Agency       Sector  Private Bank NGO/CBO      Media   Academia        Other
 The donors worked collaboratively with the
                                                          24.5%         37.5%         50.0%           0.0%       14.3%       14.3%       23.8%     24.1%    15.8%          9.1%
 government
 The donors were well coordinated*                        11.3%         21.9%         50.0%          80.0%        4.8%       0.0%        21.4%     16.7%    15.8%          4.5%
 There was an adequate level of communication and
                                                          43.4%         34.4%         25.0%          20.0%       14.3%       28.6%       21.4%     27.8%    26.3%         31.8%
 sharing of results amongst all players
 The Trust Fund's development priorities were
                                                          26.4%         28.1%         25.0%          60.0%        9.5%       28.6%        7.1%     22.2%     0.0%         18.2%
 aligned with country development priorities*
 The level of resources distributed was sufficient        1.9%          3.1%          25.0%           0.0%        0.0%       14.3%       14.3%     3.7%      5.3%          9.1%
 The Trust Fund was adequately staffed                    3.8%          3.1%          0.0%            0.0%        9.5%       0.0%         9.5%     3.7%      5.3%          0.0%
 The Trust Fund adequately took into consideration
                                                          7.5%          9.4%          0.0%            0.0%       14.3%       0.0%         7.1%     11.1%    21.1%          0.0%
 voices from outside of government
 Don’t know                                               35.8%         28.1%         12.5%          20.0%       61.9%       57.1%       45.2%     40.7%    47.4%         59.1%
 Other                                                    1.9%          3.1%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     1.9%     0.0%          9.1%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which of the following best describe what you consider the greatest WEAKNESSES of the Multi Donor Trust Fund in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                       PMU/                       Bilateral/               Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                            Employee of Consultant on       Local     Multilateral Private        Sector/
 (Responses combined)                                   a Ministry WBG Program Government          Agency        Sector  Private Bank NGO/CBO      Media   Academia       Other
 The Trust Fund was not adequately staffed                5.6%         12.1%          11.1%         20.0%         4.8%       0.0%        4.8%      5.6%      0.0%         9.1%
 The level of resources distributed was too low*          27.8%        51.5%          11.1%         80.0%         4.8%       0.0%        19.0%     27.8%    15.8%         18.2%
 There was an inadequate level of communication
                                                          5.6%          3.0%          11.1%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        7.1%      1.9%      0.0%          0.0%
 and sharing of results amongst all players
 The Trust Fund's development priorities were not
                                                          3.7%          0.0%          33.3%          0.0%        14.3%       14.3%       16.7%     14.8%     5.3%          0.0%
 aligned with country development priorities*
 The donors were not well coordinated*                    3.7%          0.0%          44.4%          0.0%         9.5%       0.0%        11.9%     7.4%      5.3%          4.5%
 The donors did not work collaboratively with the
                                                          3.7%          6.1%          22.2%          0.0%         4.8%       0.0%        2.4%      11.1%     0.0%         13.6%
 government
 The Trust Fund did not adequately take into
                                                          9.3%         21.2%          11.1%          0.0%        14.3%       14.3%       9.5%      9.3%     10.5%          0.0%
 consideration voices from outside of government
 Don’t know*                                              51.9%        24.2%          0.0%          20.0%        61.9%       71.4%       45.2%     38.9%    68.4%         50.0%
 Other                                                    5.6%          0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.9%     0.0%          9.1%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                        104
The World Bank Group                                                                         Sudan                                                                    Country Opinion Survey 2015

G. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Sudan
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                      PMU/                        Bilateral/             Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                          Employee of Consultant on          Local     Multilateral Private     Sector/
 (Responses combined)                                a Ministry WBG Program Government             Agency     Sector   Private Bank          NGO/CBO      Media      Academia        Other
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/
                                                       15.4%          24.2%            11.1%        20.0%     52.4%        57.1%               40.5%       20.8%       10.5%        54.5%
 statistics/figures on Sudan’s economy*
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work                5.8%            0.0%            11.1%         0.0%      0.0%        14.3%               0.0%        13.2%       10.5%        13.6%
 Offer more innovative financial (non-lending)
                                                       3.8%            6.1%            22.2%        60.0%     14.3%        28.6%               9.5%        11.3%       5.3%          0.0%
 products*
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing
                                                       9.6%            9.1%            0.0%          0.0%      9.5%        0.0%                2.4%        7.5%        10.5%         9.1%
 compared to markets
 Reach out more to groups outside of Government*       13.5%           9.1%            11.1%        20.0%      9.5%        14.3%               45.2%       20.8%       26.3%        13.6%
 Mobilize third party financial resources*             32.7%          39.4%            0.0%          0.0%     14.3%        14.3%               7.1%        17.0%       15.8%        9.1%
 Work faster                                           13.5%           6.1%            11.1%         0.0%     19.0%        0.0%                4.8%        24.5%       15.8%        22.7%
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to
                                                       3.8%            6.1%            11.1%         0.0%     23.8%        14.3%               7.1%        15.1%       5.3%          0.0%
 Sudan’s specific challenges
 Offer more innovative knowledge services              3.8%           15.2%            11.1%        20.0%      9.5%        0.0%                9.5%        3.8%        0.0%          9.1%
 Collaborate more effectively with Government
                                                       17.3%           9.1%            33.3%         0.0%      4.8%        28.6%               11.9%       13.2%       15.8%        13.6%
 clients
 Increase the level of capacity development in the
                                                       38.5%          45.5%            66.7%        60.0%     19.0%        14.3%               23.8%       15.1%       52.6%        27.3%
 country*
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank
                                                       26.9%          12.1%            11.1%        20.0%      9.5%        0.0%                26.2%       32.1%       31.6%        27.3%
 Group financing
 Increase availability of Fee-Based services           5.8%            0.0%            0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%                4.8%        0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
 Increase the level of World Bank Group staffing in
                                                       1.9%            9.1%            0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        14.3%               0.0%        0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
 Sudan’s office*
 Other                                                 1.9%            6.1%            0.0%          0.0%     14.3%        0.0%                2.4%        0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Sudan, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the
World Bank Group should offer more of in Sudan?* (Select only ONE response)
                                                                      PMU/                          Bilateral/                 Financial
                                                      Employee of Consultant on        Local      Multilateral Private          Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                             a Ministry WBG Program Government             Agency       Sector     Private Bank NGO/CBO         Media       Academia     Other
 Leveraging more resources from trust funds*             76.0%        77.4%           66.7%          100.0%       52.4%          85.7%          57.5%      62.7%       27.8%       42.9%
 Knowledge products*                                     6.0%         12.9%              -               -         4.8%             -           5.0%       23.5%       38.9%       33.3%
 Convening services                                      4.0%          6.5%              -               -            -          14.3%          7.5%       5.9%           -           -
 None of the above*                                        -             -               -               -        19.0%             -           5.0%          -         5.6%       9.5%
 The combination is appropriate for Sudan*               2.0%          3.2%           33.3%              -            -             -             -        3.9%         5.6%          -
 Don't know*                                             12.0%           -               -               -        23.8%             -           25.0%      3.9%        22.2%       14.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups



                                                                                             105
The World Bank Group                                                                         Sudan                                                                    Country Opinion Survey 2015

H. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                      PMU/                       Bilateral/             Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                         Employee of Consultant on         Local      Multilateral Private     Sector/
 (Responses combined)                               a Ministry WBG Program Government             Agency     Sector   Private Bank           NGO/CBO      Media      Academia       Other
 Periodicals*                                          26.9%          43.8%          22.2%          0.0%      9.5%        28.6%                9.5%       11.1%       61.1%         10.0%
 International newspapers*                             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%         60.0%      4.8%        0.0%                 2.4%       11.1%       11.1%         10.0%
 Local radio                                           25.0%           6.3%          11.1%          0.0%      4.8%        28.6%               11.9%       20.4%       11.1%         10.0%
 International radio                                   5.8%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%      14.3%       0.0%                 2.4%       7.4%         5.6%         0.0%
 Local television                                      15.4%          12.5%          44.4%         20.0%      9.5%        14.3%                7.1%       16.7%       16.7%         5.0%
 International television                              9.6%           25.0%           0.0%         20.0%      14.3%       0.0%                23.8%       7.4%         5.6%         15.0%
 Local newspapers                                      25.0%          12.5%          33.3%         60.0%      38.1%       28.6%               26.2%       42.6%       11.1%         40.0%
 Internet                                              63.5%          65.6%          44.4%         40.0%      61.9%       71.4%               69.0%       57.4%       72.2%         65.0%
 Social media*                                         23.1%          21.9%          33.3%          0.0%      28.6%       0.0%                33.3%       5.6%         0.0%         20.0%
 Other                                                 0.0%            6.3%           0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        14.3%                4.8%       11.1%        0.0%         0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                     PMU/                      Bilateral/                  Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                           Employee of Consultant on      Local     Multilateral Private          Sector/
 (Responses combined)                                 a Ministry WBG Program Government         Agency      Sector      Private Bank NGO/CBO         Media           Academia       Other
 Direct contact with World Bank Group*                  32.1%        48.5%         66.7%         20.0%      23.8%            0.0%         22.0%      27.8%            22.2%         50.0%
 e-Newsletters*                                         30.2%        30.3%         11.1%         60.0%      42.9%            14.3%        36.6%      33.3%            11.1%         4.5%
 WBG’s seminars/workshops/ conferences                  26.4%        15.2%         11.1%          0.0%      47.6%            14.3%        31.7%      42.6%            38.9%         31.8%
 WBG’s publications and other written materials*        45.3%        33.3%         22.2%         60.0%      14.3%            42.9%        39.0%      22.2%            55.6%         18.2%
 World Bank Group’s website*                            49.1%        45.5%         88.9%         40.0%      19.0%            42.9%        36.6%      25.9%            27.8%         45.5%
 Social media*                                          1.9%          9.1%          0.0%          0.0%      28.6%            28.6%        17.1%      11.1%            11.1%         0.0%
 Mobile phones*                                         1.9%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       9.5%            14.3%         2.4%      16.7%            11.1%         22.7%
 The World Bank’s Information Center for
                                                        3.8%          9.1%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%            0.0%          4.9%      7.4%              11.1%        18.2%
 Development located at the University of Khartoum
 Other*                                                 0.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%            14.3%         0.0%      0.0%              0.0%          0.0%

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                                                       PMU/                       Bilateral/                 Financial
                                                      Employee of Consultant on        Local     Multilateral Private         Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                             a Ministry WBG Program Government            Agency       Sector   Private Bank NGO/CBO             Media       Academia     Other
 Yes                                                     17.6%         31.3%          25.0%         60.0%         9.5%            -           9.5%         27.7%         22.2%      25.0%
 No                                                      82.4%         68.8%          75.0%         40.0%         90.5%       100.0%          90.5%        72.3%         77.8%      75.0%

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?
                                                                       PMU/                    Bilateral/                      Financial
                                                    Employee of Consultant on           Local Multilateral         Private      Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                           a Ministry WBG Program Government          Agency             Sector    Private Bank    NGO/CBO      Media      Academia       Other
 Yes                                                   15.7%           16.0%            14.3%    60.0%             14.3%           -          19.5%       24.4%       11.1%         15.0%
 No                                                    84.3%           84.0%            85.7%    40.0%             85.7%        100.0%        80.5%       75.6%       88.9%         85.0%
                                                                                             106
The World Bank Group                                                                                                    Sudan                                                                                          Country Opinion Survey 2015

H. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                                                                     PMU/                 Bilateral/                                                Financial
                                                                      Employee of Consultant on  Local   Multilateral                              Private           Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                             a Ministry WBG Program Government   Agency                                  Sector         Private Bank          NGO/CBO        Media         Academia           Other
 Yes                                                                     75.0%       60.0%      100.0%         -                                   33.3%                -                60.0%         54.5%          50.0%            100.0%
 No                                                                      25.0%       40.0%         -       100.0%                                  66.7%                -                40.0%         45.5%          50.0%               -

Do you have access to the Internet?
                                                                                     PMU/                 Bilateral/                                                Financial
                                                                      Employee of Consultant on  Local   Multilateral                              Private           Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                             a Ministry WBG Program Government   Agency                                  Sector         Private Bank          NGO/CBO        Media         Academia          Other
 Yes                                                                     85.7%       90.3%      75.0%       80.0%                                  90.5%             100.0%              85.7%         90.5%          89.5%            95.5%
 No                                                                      14.3%        9.7%      25.0%       20.0%                                   9.5%                -                14.3%         9.5%           10.5%            4.5%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?
                                                                                     PMU/                 Bilateral/                                                Financial
                                                                      Employee of Consultant on  Local   Multilateral                              Private           Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                             a Ministry WBG Program Government   Agency                                  Sector         Private Bank          NGO/CBO        Media         Academia          Other
 Yes                                                                     66.0%       65.6%      57.1%       60.0%                                  47.6%              16.7%              52.4%         54.3%          73.7%            63.6%
 No                                                                      34.0%       34.4%      42.9%       40.0%                                  52.4%              83.3%              47.6%         45.7%          26.3%            36.4%

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?*
                                                                        PMU/                 Bilateral/                                                             Financial
                                                     Employee of Consultant on        Local Multilateral                                           Private           Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                             a Ministry WBG Program Government      Agency                                               Sector         Private Bank          NGO/CBO        Media         Academia          Other
 High speed/WiFi                                         47.6%          66.7%         14.3%   100.0%                                               93.8%              50.0%              60.6%         37.0%          76.5%            56.3%
 Dial-up                                                 52.4%          33.3%         85.7%       -                                                 6.3%              50.0%              39.4%         63.0%          23.5%            43.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                           Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                             Financial Sector/
                                             Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency      Private Sector       Private Bank             NGO/CBO              Media               Academia             Other
                                           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD        N Mean SD               N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N     Mean SD        N    Mean    SD     N      Mean SD       N    Mean     SD
I find the World Bank Group’s websites
                                           35   7.49   2.84   26   7.96   1.80    4    7.25   2.63   3    8.00   0.00     11    8.18   1.89    2    7.50   3.54     26    6.65   2.50    30   7.17    2.94   15     8.13   2.53   14    7.43   2.07
easy to navigate.
I find the information on the World Bank
                                           34   7.88   1.97   24   7.96   1.60    4    9.00   0.82   3    8.00   0.00     10    5.80   1.48    2    7.50   2.12     27    7.15   2.70    24   7.63    2.39   15     8.67   1.88   12    8.17   1.19
Group’s websites useful.
The World Bank Group’s social media
channels are valuable sources of           31   7.48   2.61   17   6.00   2.29    2    8.00   1.41   3    6.00   0.00     12    6.67   2.90    4    7.00   1.41     21    7.10   2.45    29   7.28    2.51   10     6.70   2.58   10    7.70   1.77
information about the institution
When I need information from the World
                                           44   7.45   2.82   27   6.70   2.77    2    9.00   0.00   3    8.00   0.00     12    5.92   3.00    2    7.00   0.00     32    7.28   3.09    31   7.55    3.23   15     5.80   3.14   15    7.07   2.46
Bank Group I know how to find it
The World Bank Group is responsive to
                                           36   7.47   2.55   26   6.77   2.69    2    9.00   0.00   3    9.00   0.00      7    5.57   2.44    3    6.67   3.06     22    7.05   2.30    27   6.96    2.46   10     5.40   2.41   11    7.18   2.60
my information requests and inquiries
*Significantly different between stakeholder group

                                                                                                                    107
The World Bank Group                                                                     Sudan                                                               Country Opinion Survey 2015

I. Background Information
Which one of the following best describes your level of interaction with the World Bank Group in your country?* (Select only ONE response)
                                                                           PMU/                      Bilateral/                Financial
                                                        Employee of Consultant on        Local      Multilateral Private        Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                               a Ministry WBG Program Government             Agency      Sector    Private Bank NGO/CBO   Media   Academia        Other
 I currently collaborate with the World Bank Group         21.2%           48.5%         22.2%            -           -          14.3%      4.8%    5.6%     15.8%          9.1%
 I have previously collaborated with the World Bank
                                                           30.8%           18.2%         11.1%            -        14.3%           -       42.9%    16.7%    21.1%         13.6%
 Group
 Both of the above (I currently collaborate and
 previously have collaborated with the World Bank          28.8%           33.3%         33.3%         80.0%        4.8%           -        4.8%    9.3%     21.1%          9.1%
 Group)
 I have never collaborated with the World Bank
                                                           19.2%             -           33.3%         20.0%       81.0%         85.7%     47.6%    68.5%    42.1%         68.2%
 Group
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                       PMU/                      Bilateral/               Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                            Employee of Consultant on       Local     Multilateral Private       Sector/
 (Responses combined)                                  a Ministry WBG Program Government          Agency      Sector    Private Bank   NGO/CBO      Media   Academia       Other
 Observer*                                                9.6%          0.0%          22.2%        40.0%      40.0%         60.0%       30.8%       42.0%    21.1%         10.0%
 Use World Bank Group reports/data                        19.2%        21.2%           0.0%         0.0%       5.0%         40.0%        7.7%       28.0%    31.6%         25.0%
 Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored
                                                          55.8%        63.6%          44.4%         0.0%      20.0%         0.0%         30.8%      14.0%    42.1%         10.0%
 events/activities*
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties*           69.2%        69.7%          77.8%        80.0%      55.0%        20.0%         51.3%      60.0%    26.3%         70.0%
 Use World Bank Group website for information,
                                                          15.4%        15.2%           0.0%         0.0%      25.0%        20.0%         41.0%      20.0%    52.6%         20.0%
 data, research, etc.*

What’s your gender?
                                                                     PMU/                 Bilateral/                      Financial
                                                      Employee of Consultant on  Local   Multilateral         Private      Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                             a Ministry WBG Program Government   Agency             Sector    Private Bank   NGO/CBO      Media   Academia       Other
 Female                                                  25.0%       18.2%      22.2%       20.0%             33.3%         14.3%       36.6%       26.9%    21.1%         28.6%
 Male                                                    75.0%       81.8%      77.8%       80.0%             66.7%         85.7%       63.4%       73.1%    78.9%         71.4%




                                                                                         108
The World Bank Group                                                 Sudan                                            Country Opinion Survey 2015




Appendix C: Responses to All Questions by Geographical Locations2
Central Sudan N=159                Other Areas N=98
A. General Issues facing Sudan

In general, would you say that Sudan is headed in...?

    Percentage of Respondents                                                  Central Sudan              Other Areas
    The right direction                                                           26.7%                     41.1%
    The wrong direction                                                           48.0%                     34.7%
    Not sure                                                                      25.3%                     24.2%

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Sudan. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Sudan?
    Percentage of Respondents
    (Responses combined)                                                       Central Sudan              Other Areas
    Social protection                                                              7.0%                      7.2%
    Food security                                                                 23.4%                     26.8%
    Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                         35.4%                     47.4%
    Public sector governance/reform                                               12.7%                     15.5%
    Global/regional integration                                                    4.4%                      4.1%
    Gender equity                                                                  0.0%                      0.0%
    Private sector development                                                     6.3%                      7.2%
    Foreign direct investment                                                      8.9%                      8.2%
    Water and sanitation                                                           5.7%                      7.2%
    Energy                                                                         1.9%                      3.1%
    Regional conflict and tensions                                                 6.3%                      3.1%
    Job creation/employment                                                        9.5%                      5.2%
    Rural development                                                             12.7%                     20.6%
    Financial markets*                                                             0.0%                      5.2%
    Urban development                                                              0.0%                      2.1%
    Environmental sustainability                                                   3.8%                      2.1%
    Equality of opportunity                                                        7.0%                      3.1%
    Health                                                                        10.1%                      9.3%
    Education                                                                     26.6%                     28.9%
    Poverty reduction                                                             25.3%                     19.6%
    Transport*                                                                     3.2%                     12.4%
    Social cohesion                                                                1.9%                      1.0%
    Climate change                                                                 1.3%                      1.0%
    Agricultural development                                                      19.6%                     14.4%
    Trade and exports                                                              2.5%                      1.0%
    Crime and violence                                                             0.0%                      0.0%
    Economic growth                                                                8.2%                      4.1%
    Law and justice                                                                1.9%                      2.1%
    Regulatory framework                                                           0.6%                      0.0%
    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                         0.0%                      0.0%
    Local governance and institutions                                              1.9%                      3.1%
    Natural resource management*                                                   7.6%                      1.0%
    Anti-corruption                                                               21.5%                     13.4%
    Disaster management*                                                           0.0%                      4.1%
    Information and communications technology                                      1.3%                      1.0%
    Debt relief and access to finance*                                            19.0%                      9.3%
*Significantly different between locations

2
  Only 257 respondents provided the information about their current locations. Thus only these respondents were included in the geographical
comparisons presented in this appendix.



                                                                     109
The World Bank Group                                      Sudan                                    Country Opinion Survey 2015




A. General Issues facing Sudan (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Sudan? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                             Central Sudan          Other Areas
 Water and sanitation                                                 5.8%                 11.3%
 Equality of opportunity                                             12.2%                  9.3%
 Economic growth                                                     30.1%                 28.9%
 Climate change                                                       1.3%                  5.2%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                       3.8%                  4.1%
 Global/regional integration                                          2.6%                  4.1%
 Gender equity                                                        2.6%                  0.0%
 Rural development                                                   30.1%                 35.1%
 Urban development                                                    1.3%                  5.2%
 Regulatory framework                                                 0.6%                  0.0%
 Local governance and institutions                                    0.6%                  4.1%
 Social protection*                                                   6.4%                  1.0%
 Law and justice                                                      3.8%                  0.0%
 Transport*                                                           3.2%                  9.3%
 Crime and violence                                                   1.3%                  1.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                               0.0%                  0.0%
 Information and communications technology                            0.0%                  2.1%
 Debt relief and access to finance                                   16.7%                 11.3%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                               30.1%                 36.1%
 Anti-corruption                                                     10.9%                 11.3%
 Private sector development                                           4.5%                  9.3%
 Foreign direct investment                                            5.1%                  3.1%
 Energy                                                               0.6%                  0.0%
 Public sector governance/reform                                      9.0%                 14.4%
 Social cohesion                                                      0.0%                  1.0%
 Education                                                           26.3%                 18.6%
 Natural resource management                                          7.1%                  4.1%
 Environmental sustainability                                         0.6%                  3.1%
 Health*                                                             14.7%                  4.1%
 Agricultural development                                            26.9%                 21.6%
 Disaster management                                                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                             20.5%                 14.4%
 Financial markets                                                    1.9%                  1.0%
 Trade and exports                                                    7.7%                  3.1%
 Food security*                                                       9.0%                 20.6%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                          110
The World Bank Group                                                 Sudan                                             Country Opinion Survey 2015




A. General Issues facing Sudan (continued)

When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this
would be achieved in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                          Central Sudan                 Other Areas
 Better employment opportunities for young people                                 21.3%                        23.2%
 Better employment opportunities for women                                         0.0%                         1.1%
 Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                     31.6%                        26.3%
 Debt relief and access to finance                                                15.5%                        11.6%
 Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure
                                                                                    3.2%                        3.2%
 greater accountability
 Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                5.8%                       5.3%
 Better entrepreneurial opportunities                                               16.8%                      9.5%
 Better natural resource management                                                 18.1%                      18.9%
 A growing middle class                                                             7.1%                       5.3%
 Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                            9.0%                       9.5%
 Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                            1.3%                       1.1%
 Better security and peace building                                                 19.4%                      22.1%
 Consistent economic growth                                                         16.1%                      24.2%
 More reliable social safety net                                                    1.3%                       4.2%
 Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                    7.1%                       4.2%
 Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                          19.4%                      22.1%
 Better quality public services                                                     0.6%                       3.2%
 Other                                                                              3.9%                       2.1%
*Significantly different between locations



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                                  Central Sudan                 Other Areas
                                                                                              N       Mean      SD         N       Mean     SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Sudan?                          157     6.03      2.81       97      5.88    3.14
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)


                                                                                                  Central Sudan                 Other Areas
                                                                                              N       Mean      SD         N       Mean     SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Sudan.        132     6.09      2.84       79      6.15    3.07
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


                                                                                                  Central Sudan                 Other Areas
                                                                                              N       Mean      SD         N       Mean     SD
To what extent do you believe the WBG's staff is well prepared to help Sudan solve its most
                                                                                              126     6.85      2.85       81      7.47    2.76
complicated development challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                     111
The World Bank Group                                      Sudan                                    Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Sudan, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources in Sudan? (Choose no more than
THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                             Central Sudan          Other Areas
 Social protection                                                    4.4%                  6.1%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                               38.4%                 30.6%
 Crime and violence                                                   1.9%                  3.1%
 Transport*                                                           6.9%                 15.3%
 Agricultural development                                            35.2%                 33.7%
 Global/regional integration                                          4.4%                  2.0%
 Gender equity                                                        0.0%                  0.0%
 Public sector governance/reform                                     11.3%                 14.3%
 Health                                                              17.0%                 15.3%
 Rural development                                                   22.0%                 17.3%
 Foreign direct investment                                           10.7%                  9.2%
 Education                                                           23.3%                 18.4%
 Energy                                                               0.6%                  3.1%
 Social cohesion                                                      0.0%                  0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                              9.4%                 11.2%
 Financial markets*                                                   0.0%                  5.1%
 Urban development                                                    0.6%                  2.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                         3.8%                  5.1%
 Equality of opportunity                                              1.3%                  5.1%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                       2.5%                  2.0%
 Private sector development                                           6.9%                  8.2%
 Water and sanitation*                                                2.5%                 10.2%
 Food security                                                       10.7%                 11.2%
 Climate change                                                       3.1%                  2.0%
 Poverty reduction                                                   18.2%                 17.3%
 Trade and exports                                                    1.3%                  2.0%
 Economic growth                                                     13.2%                 15.3%
 Law and justice                                                      1.9%                  1.0%
 Local governance and institutions                                    1.9%                  0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                                 0.0%                  1.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                               0.0%                  0.0%
 Natural resource management                                          8.8%                  6.1%
 Information and communications technology                            2.5%                  0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                      7.5%                  4.1%
 Disaster management                                                  0.6%                  0.0%
 Debt relief and access to finance                                   23.3%                 17.3%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                          112
The World Bank Group                                                   Sudan                                           Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of
  second greatest value in Sudan?
 Greatest Value
 Percentage of Respondents                                         Central Sudan            Other Areas
 Convening/facilitating*                                               1.4%                     8.7%
 Data and statistics                                                   3.4%                     7.6%
 Policy advice, studies, analyses                                      14.2%                   20.7%
 Financial resources                                                   23.0%                   21.7%
 Capacity development                                                  25.7%                   23.9%
 Technical assistance                                                  3.4%                     2.2%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                            3.4%                     1.1%
 Donor coordination and policy dialogue*                               14.9%                    5.4%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                         0.7%                     0.0%
 Strategy formulation                                                  10.1%                    8.7%
 Other                                                                 0.0%                     0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

   nd
 2 Greatest Value
 Percentage of Respondents                                                       Central Sudan               Other Areas
 Convening/facilitating                                                              7.5%                       3.3%
 Data and statistics                                                                 5.4%                       3.3%
 Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                    5.4%                       9.9%
 Financial resources                                                                12.2%                       7.7%
 Capacity development                                                               26.5%                      27.5%
 Technical assistance                                                                8.2%                       4.4%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                          5.4%                       7.7%
 Donor coordination and policy dialogue                                             15.6%                      15.4%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                       1.4%                       3.3%
 Strategy formulation                                                               12.2%                      17.6%
 Other                                                                               0.0%                       0.0%

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the
  following areas in Sudan? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                                  Central Sudan                 Other Areas
                                                                                             N        Mean      SD         N       Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                               97       7.40      2.51       72      7.14    2.86

Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)                         84       6.02      2.66       61      6.18    3.07

Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)               94       7.11      2.38       59      6.44    2.78


When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Sudan to help ensure better development results, looking forward,
how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building? (1-Not important
all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                                  Central Sudan                 Other Areas
                                                                                             N        Mean      SD         N       Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                              104       8.49      2.09       77      8.86    1.80

Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)                         94       8.12      2.41       70      8.46    2.28

Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)               98       8.72      1.70       72      8.78    2.16




                                                                       113
The World Bank Group                                           Sudan                                Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Sudan?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                  Central Sudan     Other Areas
 Staff too inaccessible                                                   10.3%            12.4%
 Not exploring alternative policy options*                                 1.9%             9.3%
 Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the
                                                                          12.3%             12.4%
 Government
 Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical
                                                                          12.3%             10.3%
 problem solving
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                 16.1%             15.5%
 Arrogant in its approach                                                 2.6%              1.0%
 Not client focused                                                       4.5%              4.1%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                                    1.9%              2.1%
 World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                 10.3%             16.5%
 Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in
                                                                           4.5%              8.2%
 the country
 Too influenced by developed countries                                    16.1%             10.3%
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political
                                                                          13.5%              4.1%
 realities*
 World Bank Group’s processes too slow                                    12.9%             13.4%
 Not aligned with other donors’ work                                      2.6%              4.1%
 Not aligned with country priorities                                      3.2%              6.2%
 Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Sudan          14.2%             16.5%
 Not focused enough on issues that are unique to post-conflict
                                                                           7.7%             10.3%
 countries
 Inadequate number of World Bank Group staff members
                                                                           9.0%              8.2%
 located in the country
 Other                                                                    3.9%              7.2%
 Don’t know                                                               17.4%             12.4%
*Significantly different between locations

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Sudan?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                  Central Sudan     Other Areas
 Knowledge products/services                                              22.2%            17.3%
 Technical assistance                                                     28.5%            21.4%
 Capacity development                                                     58.9%            53.1%
 Trust Fund management                                                    12.7%            14.3%
 Multi-sectoral approaches                                                 7.0%             8.2%
 Co-financing arrangements                                                32.9%            42.9%
 Sector-wide approaches                                                    7.0%             6.1%
 Emergency Recovery lending                                                8.9%            16.3%
 Other                                                                     1.9%             4.1%
 Don’t know                                                                7.6%             6.1%

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group's work and support help the poorest in Sudan?
  (Select only ONE response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Central Sudan     Other Areas
 To a fully sufficient degree                                              4.5%             2.4%
 To a somewhat sufficient degree                                          24.8%            31.0%
 To a somewhat insufficient degree                                        31.8%            29.8%
 To a very insufficient degree                                            23.6%            21.4%
 Don’t know                                                               15.3%            15.5%



                                                               114
The World Bank Group                                                Sudan                                           Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank
Group collaborate with more in your country? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                          Central Sudan             Other Areas
 Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                         30.4%                    28.9%
 Donor community                                                                  13.3%                    17.5%
 Media                                                                            13.3%                    14.4%
 Local government                                                                 14.6%                    20.6%
 Private sector*                                                                  24.7%                    13.4%
 Parliament                                                                        1.9%                     1.0%
 NGOs/CBOs                                                                        32.3%                    36.1%
 Youth/university groups                                                           8.2%                    12.4%
 Beneficiaries                                                                    27.2%                    26.8%
 Foundations                                                                       8.2%                     7.2%
 UN and regional peace keeping forces                                              1.9%                     2.1%
 Emerging donors                                                                   2.5%                     2.1%
 UN agencies                                                                       5.7%                    12.4%
 Regional organizations                                                            3.8%                     0.0%
 Other                                                                             0.0%                     1.0%
 Don’t know                                                                        4.4%                     2.1%
*Significantly different between locations

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Sudan?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                 Central Sudan              Other Areas
                                                                                             N       Mean      SD      N       Mean     SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development in Sudan         131     5.84    2.71      77      5.99     3.33
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities for
                                                                                             126     6.20    2.81      76      6.20     3.14
Sudan
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Sudan           122     6.23    2.64      78      6.28     3.03

The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Sudan with respect                   125     8.01    2.36      72      7.88     2.93




                                                                     115
The World Bank Group                                                Sudan                                         Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Sudan in terms of each of the following? (1-To
no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                                               Central Sudan              Other Areas
                                                                                          N        Mean      SD      N       Mean     SD
Responsiveness to needs                                                                   127      5.71    2.80      71      5.72     2.73
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)                         121      5.93    2.60      63      5.67     2.63
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                                  112      5.37    2.81      68      6.22     2.85
Being inclusive                                                                           114      5.81    2.53      60      5.87     2.61
Openness (sharing data and other information)                                             118      6.23    2.64      62      6.35     2.75
Staff accessibility                                                                       125      6.46    2.73      66      5.91     3.16
Straightforwardness and honesty                                                           106      7.95    2.27      66      7.85     2.53
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making decisions important
                                                                                          120      5.98    2.92      70      5.29     3.21
to my work
Collaboration with civil society                                                          120      6.09    2.83      75      6.48     2.84
Collaboration with the UN                                                                 98       7.96    2.32      63      7.57     2.56
Collaboration with the Government*                                                        121      6.92    2.49      79      7.82     2.33
Collaboration with other donors and development partners                                  105      7.11    2.28      63      7.48     2.17
Collaboration with the private sector                                                     103      5.55    2.75      57      5.04     2.78
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground                              124      6.22    2.77      69      6.13     2.77
Being a long-term partner                                                                 114      7.19    2.83      70      7.20     3.15
*Significantly different between locations

To be more effective development partner in Sudan, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?
(Select only ONE response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                  Central Sudan              Other Areas
 More local presence                                                           89.2%                     86.6%
 The current level of local presence is adequate                                7.0%                      7.2%
 Less local presence                                                            2.5%                        -
 Don't know                                                                     1.3%                      6.2%

In the past year, have you seen more, less, or just about the same level of effective collaboration between the UN and the
World Bank Group in your country?* (Select only ONE response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                  Central Sudan              Other Areas
 More effective collaboration                                                  14.6%                     16.5%
 The same level of effective collaboration                                     19.1%                     22.7%
 Less effective collaboration                                                  19.1%                     19.6%
 Don't know                                                                    47.1%                     41.2%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                    116
The World Bank Group                                         Sudan                                   Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which THREE of the following would you
 attribute this to? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                Central Sudan        Other Areas
 The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow
                                                                        15.9%                21.6%
 through/follow-up
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society
                                                                        47.8%                49.5%
 participation
 The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to
                                                                        23.6%                16.5%
 political/social realities on the ground
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                    26.8%                27.8%
 Poor donor coordination                                                17.2%                18.6%
 The World Bank Group works too slowly                                  10.8%                8.2%
 The Government works inefficiently                                     23.6%                19.6%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                      32.5%                33.0%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges        19.7%                17.5%
 Ongoing conflict and instability                                       36.3%                35.1%
 Inadequate funding                                                     24.8%                34.0%
 Other                                                                  1.3%                 4.1%




                                                             117
The World Bank Group                                      Sudan                                        Country Opinion Survey 2015




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Sudan? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                    Central Sudan             Other Areas
                                                                                N       Mean      SD      N      Mean     SD
Crime and violence                                                             107      6.10    3.46     64      5.89      3.32
Financial markets                                                              126      7.29    2.95     66      7.64      2.56
Transport                                                                      132      7.83    2.57     74      8.04      2.85
Anti-corruption                                                                125      8.04    2.83     71      8.10      2.48
Regional conflict and tensions                                                 120      7.31    2.91     71      7.42      2.89
Law and justice                                                                115      6.21    3.21     68      5.79      3.29
Urban development                                                              129      7.73    2.51     80      7.79      2.54
Environmental sustainability                                                   126      8.02    2.45     77      8.25      2.40
Regulatory framework                                                           122      7.21    2.59     74      6.97      2.58
Information and communications technology*                                     129      7.89    2.48     76      6.91      3.04
Poverty reduction                                                              141      8.99    1.93     81      8.73      2.13
Gender equity                                                                  123      6.80    3.10     73      6.84      2.93
Private sector development                                                     129      7.78    2.76     77      7.16      2.95
Foreign direct investment                                                      124      8.06    2.62     75      7.45      3.02
Local governance and institutions                                              120      6.68    2.75     76      7.01      2.77
Water and sanitation                                                           134      8.19    2.20     82      7.84      2.66
Trade and exports                                                              120      7.69    2.83     66      7.30      2.84
Economic growth                                                                135      8.53    2.17     70      8.56      2.12
Energy                                                                         127      7.80    2.65     73      7.79      2.75
Disaster management                                                            129      7.86    2.52     77      7.81      2.65
Public sector governance/reform                                                129      7.76    2.65     78      7.67      3.08
Job creation/employment                                                        131      7.69    2.72     77      7.92      2.77
Social cohesion                                                                130      5.96    3.34     70      6.83      3.35
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                         126      7.33    2.87     73      7.00      2.94
Equality of opportunity                                                        123      7.28    2.78     74      8.07      2.62
Health                                                                         142      8.22    2.30     82      8.21      2.40
Rural development                                                              134      8.62    2.12     82      8.66      2.18
Global/regional integration                                                    126      7.93    2.51     70      7.83      2.09
Food security                                                                  130      8.42    2.31     79      8.73      1.93
Natural resource management                                                    123      7.85    2.82     72      7.04      3.13
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                          135      8.15    2.51     82      8.23      2.64
Social protection                                                              129      7.00    2.86     72      6.47      2.85
Climate change                                                                 122      7.38    2.98     79      7.48      2.78
Agricultural development                                                       136      8.65    2.11     79      8.63      2.27
Education                                                                      144      8.35    2.43     77      8.53      2.37
Debt relief and access to finance                                              137      8.70    2.56     78      8.58      2.38
*Significantly different between locations




                                                           118
The World Bank Group                                      Sudan                                         Country Opinion Survey 2015




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Sudan? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                     Central Sudan             Other Areas
                                                                                 N       Mean      SD      N      Mean     SD
Anti-corruption                                                                 67       4.67    3.15     43      4.58      2.78
Information and communications technology*                                      80       5.73    3.14     46      4.50      2.73
Transport                                                                       79       4.92    3.00     46      4.76      2.82
Crime and violence                                                              66       3.67    2.48     42      4.64      3.08
Regional conflict and tensions*                                                 73       4.49    2.87     50      6.00      3.39
Law and justice                                                                 66       3.70    2.52     42      4.48      2.97
Urban development                                                               83       5.57    3.03     55      5.80      3.15
Environmental sustainability                                                    87       6.08    2.87     61      6.02      3.03
Regulatory framework                                                            73       5.56    2.88     51      5.80      3.09
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                          77       5.38    2.76     51      5.33      3.02
Poverty reduction                                                               106      6.30    2.81     67      6.91      2.73
Gender equity                                                                   84       6.10    2.68     54      6.22      2.82
Private sector development                                                      86       5.63    2.92     46      5.07      2.89
Foreign direct investment                                                       84       5.23    3.25     48      5.19      3.24
Local governance and institutions                                               75       4.68    2.66     48      5.31      2.63
Water and sanitation                                                            100      5.91    2.54     61      6.49      2.86
Trade and exports                                                               79       4.95    2.99     50      5.20      2.67
Economic growth*                                                                94       5.55    2.65     60      6.58      2.57
Energy                                                                          70       4.59    2.74     48      5.31      2.75
Disaster management                                                             75       5.37    2.65     54      6.13      3.22
Public sector governance/reform                                                 81       5.48    2.67     46      5.93      3.14
Job creation/employment*                                                        91       4.20    2.70     59      5.34      3.22
Social cohesion*                                                                86       3.67    2.62     49      5.02      2.93
Financial markets                                                               68       4.69    2.79     45      5.09      2.96
Equality of opportunity                                                         85       5.20    3.11     58      5.67      3.13
Health                                                                          103      5.93    2.53     61      6.18      3.15
Rural development                                                               106      6.19    2.70     68      6.84      2.96
Global/regional integration                                                     76       5.08    2.91     54      5.56      2.86
Food security                                                                   91       5.47    2.77     62      6.34      2.95
Education                                                                       103      5.58    2.59     64      6.44      3.13
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                           93       5.25    2.69     63      6.16      3.28
Social protection                                                               71       4.24    2.54     45      4.49      3.03
Climate change                                                                  76       5.04    2.76     61      6.00      2.98
Agricultural development                                                        92       5.52    2.78     63      6.11      3.08
Natural resource management                                                     81       4.57    2.87     45      5.18      3.24
Debt relief and access to finance                                               90       5.21    3.24     57      4.91      3.37
*Significantly different between locations




                                                           119
The World Bank Group                                                Sudan                                          Country Opinion Survey 2015




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Sudan? (Select only ONE response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                           Central Sudan                  Other Areas
 At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                               45.9%                         41.7%
 In the country                                                                         16.4%                          8.3%
 Don't know                                                                             37.7%                         50.0%


                                                                                                Central Sudan             Other Areas
                                                                                            N       Mean      SD      N      Mean     SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in
                                                                                            134      6.66   2.81     82      6.24      2.92
Sudan?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)


                                                                                                Central Sudan             Other Areas
                                                                                            N       Mean      SD      N      Mean     SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group help to build/strengthen existing country
                                                                                            113      6.76   2.77     68      6.75      3.28
systems in Sudan?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Sudan?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                Central Sudan             Other Areas
                                                                                            N       Mean      SD      N      Mean     SD
The World Bank Group’s program of managing trust funds and partnerships meets the
                                                                                            110      4.55   2.90     71      5.24      3.05
needs of Sudan
The World Bank Group meets Sudan’s needs for knowledge services                             113      5.50   2.97     62      5.71      3.09



                                                                                                Central Sudan             Other Areas
                                                                                            N       Mean      SD      N      Mean     SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its work in real
                                                                                            101      6.30   2.78     63      5.92      2.80
time in Sudan?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do? (Select only ONE
response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                           Central Sudan                 Other Areas
 Weekly                                                                                  7.1%                         3.1%
 Monthly                                                                                13.0%                        11.2%
 A few times a year                                                                     28.6%                        28.6%
 Rarely                                                                                 25.3%                        22.4%
 Never                                                                                  26.0%                        34.7%




                                                                    120
The World Bank Group                                                 Sudan                                             Country Opinion Survey 2015




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Sudan, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all,
10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                                                   Central Sudan              Other Areas
                                                                                              N        Mean      SD       N      Mean     SD
Are timely                                                                                    111      6.21     2.54     64      5.58      2.96
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation                       114      6.28     2.60     66      6.30      2.82
Lead to practical solutions                                                                   127      6.29     2.40     70      6.74      2.51
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                          122      6.95     2.56     67      6.75      2.63
Are source of relevant information on global good practices                                   117      7.56     2.40     70      7.39      2.20
Are adequately disseminated                                                                   128      6.27     2.60     63      5.95      2.65
Are translated enough into local language                                                     124      6.15     2.72     66      6.27      2.99
Are adaptable to Sudan’s specific development challenges and country circumstances            116      7.21     2.78     70      7.36      2.35


                                                                                                   Central Sudan              Other Areas
                                                                                              N        Mean      SD       N      Mean     SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the WBG's knowledge work and
                                                                                              138      7.86     2.35     85      8.41      2.01
activities make to development results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge
                                                                                              131      7.57     2.30     75      7.47      2.58
work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)



E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                   Central Sudan              Other Areas
                                                                                              N        Mean      SD       N      Mean     SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                                 103      5.21     3.19     67      4.76      2.97
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
                                                                                              131      7.87     2.22     81      7.56      2.43
supports
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                     120      6.52     2.64     73      6.19      2.55
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable                         97       6.53     2.55     64      6.45      2.53
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Sudan                                         107      5.20     2.84     64      4.80      2.55
Working with the World Bank Group increases Sudan’s institutional capacity                    134      8.16     2.23     80      8.24      2.13
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes appropriate use of
                                                                                              102      7.66     2.41     72      7.68      2.76
them
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support                                118      7.49     2.16     81      7.48      2.59


                                                                                                   Central Sudan              Other Areas
                                                                                              N        Mean      SD       N      Mean     SD
To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find solutions that
                                                                                              116      6.97     2.68     64      6.83      2.48
promote private public partnerships in Sudan?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                     121
The World Bank Group                                               Sudan                                           Country Opinion Survey 2015




E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Sudan? (Select only ONE response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                           Central Sudan                 Other Areas
 The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Sudan                                       1.9%                         8.3%
 The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Sudan                                19.6%                        10.4%
 The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                                 38.6%                        33.3%
 Don't know                                                                             39.9%                        47.9%

Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in Sudan? (Select only ONE response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                           Central Sudan                 Other Areas
 The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses on the
                                                                                        37.6%                          45.4%
 most important development challenges in Sudan
 The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in Sudan, and it
                                                                                        25.5%                          22.7%
 is involved in too many areas of development
 Don’t know                                                                             36.9%                          32.0%

                                                                                                Central Sudan             Other Areas
                                                                                            N       Mean      SD      N      Mean     SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group is adequately staffed in Sudan?         100       5.45   2.67     57       4.58     2.74
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

F. The Multi Partner/Donor Trust Fund in Sudan as Managed by the World Bank
Which of the following best describe what you consider the greatest STRENGTHS of the Multi Donor Trust Fund in Sudan?
(Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                                Central Sudan                 Other Areas
 The donors worked collaboratively with the government                                  25.3%                        21.6%
 The donors were well coordinated                                                       14.6%                        19.6%
 There was an adequate level of communication and sharing of
                                                                                        30.4%                          27.8%
 results amongst all players
 The Trust Fund's development priorities were aligned with country
                                                                                        15.2%                          26.8%
 development priorities*
 The level of resources distributed was sufficient                                       6.3%                          6.2%
 The Trust Fund was adequately staffed                                                   3.8%                          6.2%
 The Trust Fund adequately took into consideration voices from
                                                                                         8.2%                          10.3%
 outside of government
 Don’t know                                                                             43.0%                          38.1%
 Other                                                                                  1.3%                           3.1%
*Significantly different between locations

Which of the following best describe what you consider the greatest WEAKNESSES of the Multi Donor Trust Fund in Sudan?
(Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                                Central Sudan                 Other Areas
 The Trust Fund was not adequately staffed                                               5.0%                         9.2%
 The level of resources distributed was too low                                         23.3%                        30.6%
 There was an inadequate level of communication and sharing of
                                                                                         4.4%                          2.0%
 results amongst all players
 The Trust Fund's development priorities were not aligned with
                                                                                        10.1%                          6.1%
 country development priorities
 The donors were not well coordinated                                                    7.5%                          7.1%
 The donors did not work collaboratively with the government                             5.0%                          9.2%
 The Trust Fund did not adequately take into consideration voices
                                                                                         9.4%                          11.2%
 from outside of government
 Don’t know                                                                             47.8%                          38.8%
 Other                                                                                  1.3%                           4.1%



                                                                    122
The World Bank Group                                        Sudan                                    Country Opinion Survey 2015




G. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Sudan
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Sudan? (Choose no more than
TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                     Central Sudan              Other Areas
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on
                                                                              29.7%                      27.1%
 Sudan’s economy
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                       5.7%                       8.3%
 Offer more innovative financial (non-lending) products                       9.5%                       10.4%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets             7.6%                       6.3%
 Reach out more to groups outside of Government                               18.4%                      21.9%
 Mobilize third party financial resources                                     19.6%                      18.8%
 Work faster                                                                  14.6%                      13.5%
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Sudan’s specific
                                                                              6.3%                       11.5%
 challenges
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                     7.0%                       8.3%
 Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                         13.3%                      15.6%
 Increase the level of capacity development in the country                    33.5%                      28.1%
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                25.9%                      18.8%
 Increase availability of Fee-Based services                                  1.3%                       3.1%
 Increase the level of World Bank Group staffing in Sudan’s office            0.6%                       3.1%
 Other                                                                        3.2%                       2.1%

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Sudan, and taking into account its limited
level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in Sudan?* (Select
only ONE response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                Central Sudan              Other Areas
 Leveraging more resources from trust funds                                  65.1%                     61.5%
 Knowledge products                                                          11.2%                     16.5%
 Convening services                                                           3.9%                      4.4%
 None of the above                                                            4.6%                      2.2%
 The combination is appropriate for Sudan                                     3.9%                      2.2%
 Don't know                                                                  11.2%                     13.2%



H. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Sudan? (Choose no more than
TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                    Central Sudan               Other Areas
 Periodicals                                                                21.8%                      21.1%
 International newspapers                                                    7.1%                       4.2%
 Local radio*                                                                6.4%                      29.5%
 International radio                                                         3.2%                       7.4%
 Local television                                                           12.2%                      16.8%
 International television                                                   16.0%                       9.5%
 Local newspapers                                                           32.1%                      25.3%
 Internet*                                                                  71.8%                      48.4%
 Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                   16.0%                      24.2%
 Other                                                                       4.5%                       3.2%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                            123
The World Bank Group                                       Sudan                                   Country Opinion Survey 2015




H. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                    Central Sudan             Other Areas
 Direct contact with World Bank Group                                       35.0%                    27.8%
 e-Newsletters                                                              31.2%                    28.9%
 World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/ conferences                         35.0%                    24.7%
 World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials                29.9%                    39.2%
 World Bank Group’s website                                                 36.9%                    39.2%
 Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                    7.6%                    15.5%
 Mobile phones                                                               8.3%                     8.2%
 The World Bank’s Information Center for Development located at
                                                                              4.5%                     8.2%
 the University of Khartoum
 Other                                                                        0.0%                     0.0%

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any
information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Central Sudan             Other Areas
 Yes                                                                        21.3%                    22.0%
 No                                                                         78.7%                    78.0%

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Central Sudan             Other Areas
 Yes                                                                        20.4%                    15.7%
 No                                                                         79.6%                    84.3%

Were you able to obtain this information?
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Central Sudan             Other Areas
 Yes                                                                        51.9%                    66.7%
 No                                                                         48.1%                    33.3%

Do you have access to the Internet?
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Central Sudan             Other Areas
 Yes                                                                        88.6%                    88.6%
 No                                                                         11.4%                    11.4%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Central Sudan             Other Areas
 Yes                                                                        56.3%                    63.3%
 No                                                                         43.7%                    36.7%

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?*
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Central Sudan             Other Areas
 High speed/WiFi                                                            63.0%                    46.6%
 Dial-up                                                                    37.0%                    53.4%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                           124
The World Bank Group                                                Sudan                                          Country Opinion Survey 2015




H. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                Central Sudan             Other Areas
                                                                                            N       Mean      SD      N      Mean     SD
I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.                                   103      7.62    2.41     58      7.14      2.63
I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.                          96       7.61    2.02     54      7.85      2.22
The World Bank Group’s social media channels are valuable sources of information about
                                                                                           89       6.92    2.49     45      7.20      2.32
the institution
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it                    117      7.32    2.81     60      6.65      3.02
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and inquiries                92       6.92    2.57     50      6.88      2.43



I. Background Information
Which one of the following best describes your level of interaction with the World Bank Group in your country?* (Select
only ONE response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Central Sudan                   Other Areas
 I currently collaborate with the World Bank Group                                    17.6%                          10.4%
 I have previously collaborated with the World Bank Group                             27.0%                          14.6%
 Both of the above (I currently collaborate and previously have
                                                                                         14.5%                         24.0%
 collaborated with the World Bank Group)
 I have never collaborated with the World Bank Group                                     40.9%                         51.0%
*Significantly different between locations

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                              Central Sudan                   Other Areas
 Observer                                                                             27.5%                          17.0%
 Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                    20.9%                          16.0%
 Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                       35.9%                          30.9%
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                        58.2%                          61.7%
 Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research,
                                                                                         15.7%                         36.2%
 etc.*
*Significantly different between locations

What’s your gender?*
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Central Sudan                   Other Areas
 Female                                                                               34.4%                          15.3%
 Male                                                                                 65.6%                          84.7%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                    125
The World Bank Group                                                  Sudan                                             Country Opinion Survey 2015




Appendix D: Responses to All Questions by Levels of Collaboration3
Currently Collaborating N=89                  Previously Collaborated N=60                  Never Collaborated N=118
A. General Issues facing Sudan
In general, would you say that Sudan is headed in...?*
                                                                                Currently             Previously               Never
    Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborating          Collaborated          Collaborated
    The right direction                                                           41.2%                  25.0%                 28.9%
    The wrong direction                                                           42.4%                  32.1%                 47.4%
    Not sure                                                                      16.5%                  42.9%                 23.7%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Sudan?
 Percentage of Respondents                                           Currently       Previously             Never
 (Responses combined)                                              Collaborating    Collaborated        Collaborated
 Social protection                                                      7.9%             3.4%               7.8%
 Food security                                                         18.0%            32.2%               25.9%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                 44.9%            32.2%               39.7%
 Public sector governance/reform                                       16.9%            16.9%               7.8%
 Global/regional integration*                                           1.1%             1.7%               7.8%
 Gender equity                                                          0.0%             0.0%               0.0%
 Private sector development*                                           10.1%            10.2%               1.7%
 Foreign direct investment                                             11.2%             1.7%               11.2%
 Water and sanitation*                                                  6.7%            11.9%               2.6%
 Energy*                                                                5.6%             0.0%               0.9%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                         7.9%             1.7%               4.3%
 Job creation/employment                                                3.4%            10.2%               9.5%
 Rural development                                                     15.7%            13.6%               18.1%
 Financial markets*                                                     0.0%             0.0%               4.3%
 Urban development                                                      2.2%             0.0%               0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                           3.4%             5.1%               1.7%
 Equality of opportunity                                                5.6%             1.7%               8.6%
 Health                                                                 6.7%            15.3%               9.5%
 Education                                                             23.6%            30.5%               29.3%
 Poverty reduction                                                     25.8%            28.8%               16.4%
 Transport                                                              9.0%             3.4%               7.8%
 Social cohesion*                                                       0.0%             0.0%               5.2%
 Climate change                                                         3.4%             0.0%               0.0%
 Agricultural development                                              14.6%            25.4%               18.1%
 Trade and exports                                                      2.2%             3.4%               0.9%
 Crime and violence                                                     0.0%             0.0%               0.0%
 Economic growth                                                        7.9%             5.1%               8.6%
 Law and justice                                                        2.2%             0.0%               3.4%
 Regulatory framework                                                   0.0%             0.0%               0.9%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                 0.0%             0.0%               0.0%
 Local governance and institutions                                      4.5%             1.7%               0.9%
 Natural resource management                                            4.5%             6.8%               4.3%
 Anti-corruption                                                       15.7%            18.6%               20.7%
 Disaster management                                                    0.0%             3.4%               1.7%
 Information and communications technology                              0.0%             3.4%               0.9%
 Debt relief and access to finance                                     16.9%             6.8%               15.5%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG
3
 Only 267 respondents provided the information about their levels of collaboration with the World Bank Group. Thus only these respondents
were included in the analysis presented in this appendix. Please note that, “I currently collaborate with the WBG? and “Both of the above?, we re
grouped into “Currently collaborating.?



                                                                       126
The World Bank Group                                             Sudan                                 Country Opinion Survey 2015




A. General Issues facing Sudan (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Sudan? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents                                         Currently         Previously           Never
 (Responses combined)                                            Collaborating     Collaborated       Collaborated
 Water and sanitation                                                 9.1%             11.7%              4.4%
 Equality of opportunity                                             14.8%             15.0%              7.9%
 Economic growth*                                                    13.6%             35.0%              37.7%
 Climate change                                                       4.5%              5.0%              0.0%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                       5.7%              0.0%              4.4%
 Global/regional integration                                          5.7%              0.0%              5.3%
 Gender equity                                                        0.0%              3.3%              1.8%
 Rural development                                                   34.1%             33.3%              30.7%
 Urban development                                                    3.4%              1.7%              2.6%
 Regulatory framework                                                 1.1%              0.0%              0.0%
 Local governance and institutions                                    2.3%              0.0%              2.6%
 Social protection*                                                   9.1%              0.0%              2.6%
 Law and justice                                                      2.3%              5.0%              0.9%
 Transport                                                            8.0%              1.7%              5.3%
 Crime and violence                                                   1.1%              0.0%              1.8%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                               0.0%              0.0%              0.0%
 Information and communications technology                            0.0%              0.0%              1.8%
 Debt relief and access to finance                                   17.0%             16.7%              11.4%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                               38.6%             31.7%              28.9%
 Anti-corruption                                                      5.7%             13.3%              13.2%
 Private sector development                                           9.1%              6.7%              5.3%
 Foreign direct investment*                                           0.0%              3.3%              7.9%
 Energy                                                               0.0%              0.0%              0.9%
 Public sector governance/reform                                     12.5%             11.7%              8.8%
 Social cohesion                                                      0.0%              0.0%              0.9%
 Education                                                           26.1%             16.7%              25.4%
 Natural resource management                                          9.1%              1.7%              4.4%
 Environmental sustainability                                         0.0%              3.3%              1.8%
 Health                                                              11.4%             11.7%              9.6%
 Agricultural development                                            25.0%             30.0%              24.6%
 Disaster management                                                  0.0%              0.0%              0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                             15.9%             18.3%              21.1%
 Financial markets                                                    2.3%              0.0%              1.8%
 Trade and exports*                                                   0.0%              8.3%              8.8%
 Food security                                                       10.2%              8.3%              15.8%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG




                                                                 127
The World Bank Group                                                    Sudan                                       Country Opinion Survey 2015




A. General Issues facing Sudan (continued)

When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this
would be achieved in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                          Currently          Previously           Never
 (Responses combined)                                             Collaborating       Collaborated      Collaborated
 Better employment opportunities for young people                     23.6%               19.0%             21.6%
 Better employment opportunities for women                             0.0%               0.0%               0.9%
 Greater access to micro-finance for the poor*                        23.6%               44.8%             27.9%
 Debt relief and access to finance                                    11.2%               12.1%             14.4%
 Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure
                                                                       5.6%               1.7%               1.8%
 greater accountability
 Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                   4.5%               8.6%               5.4%
 Better entrepreneurial opportunities                                 16.9%               12.1%             13.5%
 Better natural resource management                                   16.9%               19.0%             20.7%
 A growing middle class                                                3.4%               10.3%              6.3%
 Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas              12.4%               3.4%               9.0%
 Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas               2.2%               1.7%               0.0%
 Better security and peace building                                   18.0%               27.6%             21.6%
 Consistent economic growth                                           24.7%               13.8%             15.3%
 More reliable social safety net                                       1.1%               0.0%               4.5%
 Greater equity of fiscal policy                                       2.2%               5.2%               9.0%
 Education and training that better ensure job opportunity            24.7%               13.8%             21.6%
 Better quality public services                                        0.0%               1.7%               2.7%
 Other                                                                 4.5%               3.4%               1.8%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                        Currently         Previously            Never
                                                                                      Collaborating      Collaborated       Collaborated
                                                                                     N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD

How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Sudan?*                87   7.08   2.44   58   6.45   2.38   117   4.95   3.17
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG


                                                                                        Currently         Previously            Never
                                                                                      Collaborating      Collaborated       Collaborated
                                                                                     N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in
                                                                                     80   6.85   2.39   50   6.16   2.88   87    5.20    3.17
Sudan.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG


                                                                                        Currently         Previously            Never
                                                                                      Collaborating      Collaborated       Collaborated
                                                                                     N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD
To what extent do you believe the WBG's staff is well prepared to help Sudan solve
                                                                                     84   7.48   2.25   45   7.76   2.19   86    6.31    3.49
its most complicated development challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG




                                                                        128
The World Bank Group                                             Sudan                                 Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Sudan, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources in Sudan? (Choose no more than
THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents                                         Currently           Previously          Never
 (Responses combined)                                            Collaborating       Collaborated      Collaborated
 Social protection                                                    5.6%                1.7%             5.9%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                               29.2%               40.0%             39.0%
 Crime and violence                                                   3.4%                1.7%             1.7%
 Transport                                                           10.1%                6.7%             11.0%
 Agricultural development                                            33.7%               36.7%             36.4%
 Global/regional integration                                          0.0%                6.7%             4.2%
 Gender equity                                                        0.0%                0.0%             0.0%
 Public sector governance/reform                                     13.5%                8.3%             12.7%
 Health                                                              14.6%               25.0%             12.7%
 Rural development                                                   24.7%               18.3%             19.5%
 Foreign direct investment                                            9.0%                6.7%             11.9%
 Education                                                           21.3%               20.0%             23.7%
 Energy                                                               0.0%                3.3%             1.7%
 Social cohesion                                                      0.0%                0.0%             0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                              6.7%                5.0%             14.4%
 Financial markets                                                    2.2%                1.7%             3.4%
 Urban development                                                    0.0%                0.0%             2.5%
 Environmental sustainability*                                        9.0%                5.0%             0.8%
 Equality of opportunity                                              5.6%                0.0%             3.4%
 Regional conflict and tensions*                                      5.6%                0.0%             0.8%
 Private sector development                                           9.0%                8.3%             5.1%
 Water and sanitation                                                 9.0%                5.0%             3.4%
 Food security                                                        9.0%               11.7%             11.0%
 Climate change*                                                      6.7%                1.7%             0.0%
 Poverty reduction*                                                  16.9%               31.7%             12.7%
 Trade and exports                                                    1.1%                1.7%             2.5%
 Economic growth                                                     10.1%               16.7%             16.1%
 Law and justice                                                      0.0%                1.7%             4.2%
 Local governance and institutions*                                   3.4%                0.0%             0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                                 1.1%                0.0%             0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                               0.0%                0.0%             0.0%
 Natural resource management*                                        13.5%                6.7%             3.4%
 Information and communications technology                            0.0%                0.0%             3.4%
 Anti-corruption                                                      3.4%                6.7%             7.6%
 Disaster management                                                  0.0%                0.0%             0.8%
 Debt relief and access to finance                                   21.3%               15.0%             20.3%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG




                                                                 129
The World Bank Group                                                    Sudan                                       Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of
  second greatest value in Sudan?
 Greatest Value                                                        Currently          Previously         Never
 Percentage of Respondents                                           Collaborating       Collaborated    Collaborated
 Convening/facilitating                                                   3.6%               3.5%            4.5%
 Data and statistics                                                      9.6%               3.5%            3.6%
 Policy advice, studies, analyses                                        15.7%               17.5%           14.5%
 Financial resources*                                                     8.4%               17.5%           33.6%
 Capacity development*                                                   28.9%               36.8%           17.3%
 Technical assistance                                                     3.6%               5.3%            2.7%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources*                              6.0%               5.3%            0.0%
 Donor coordination and policy dialogue                                  10.8%               3.5%            14.5%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                            1.2%               0.0%            0.0%
 Strategy formulation                                                    12.0%               7.0%            9.1%
 Other                                                                    0.0%               0.0%            0.0%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

   nd
 2 Greatest Value                                                                  Currently          Previously              Never
 Percentage of Respondents                                                       Collaborating       Collaborated         Collaborated
 Convening/facilitating                                                               6.2%               3.5%                 6.4%
 Data and statistics                                                                  4.9%               8.8%                 3.7%
 Policy advice, studies, analyses*                                                   12.3%               7.0%                 2.8%
 Financial resources                                                                  8.6%               15.8%                8.3%
 Capacity development                                                                21.0%               26.3%                34.9%
 Technical assistance*                                                               12.3%               7.0%                 1.8%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                           6.2%               3.5%                 7.3%
 Donor coordination and policy dialogue                                              12.3%               12.3%                17.4%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                        3.7%               1.8%                 2.8%
 Strategy formulation                                                                12.3%               14.0%                14.7%
 Other                                                                                0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the
  following areas in Sudan? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                      Currently         Previously              Never
                                                                                    Collaborating      Collaborated         Collaborated
                                                                                   N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)*                   76   7.97   2.03    37   7.32   2.16     62    6.27    3.31
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)*             69   6.65   2.40    26   5.77   2.94     53    5.21    3.03
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)    64   6.88   2.35    35   7.11   2.30     58    6.55    2.90
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Sudan to help ensure better development results, looking forward,
how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?
(1-Not important all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                      Currently         Previously              Never
                                                                                    Collaborating      Collaborated         Collaborated
                                                                                   N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)*                   77   9.00   1.63    44   8.48   2.02     66    8.12    2.43
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)              71   8.56   1.96    34   8.00   2.71     62    7.74    2.67
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)    69   8.84   1.52    41   8.71   1.90     66    8.56    2.35
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG




                                                                         130
The World Bank Group                                             Sudan                                 Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Sudan?
  (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                              Currently      Previously           Never
 (Responses combined)                                                 Collaborating  Collaborated       Collaborated
 Staff too inaccessible*                                                  4.5%            6.9%              17.2%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                 2.3%            8.6%              6.9%
 Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the
                                                                          5.7%           22.4%              12.9%
 Government*
 Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical
                                                                          12.5%           1.7%              16.4%
 problem solving*
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                 13.6%          17.2%              17.2%
 Arrogant in its approach                                                 2.3%            1.7%              1.7%
 Not client focused                                                       3.4%            5.2%              5.2%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                                    0.0%            5.2%              1.7%
 World Bank Group’s processes too complex*                                19.3%           5.2%              9.5%
 Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the
                                                                          4.5%            5.2%              6.9%
 country
 Too influenced by developed countries                                    18.2%          10.3%              11.2%
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political
                                                                          6.8%           10.3%              12.1%
 realities
 World Bank Group’s processes too slow*                                   25.0%          10.3%              3.4%
 Not aligned with other donors’ work                                      2.3%            5.2%              2.6%
 Not aligned with country priorities                                      3.4%            1.7%              6.0%
 Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Sudan*         9.1%            8.6%              24.1%
 Not focused enough on issues that are unique to post-conflict
                                                                          5.7%           12.1%              8.6%
 countries
 Inadequate number of World Bank Group staff members located
                                                                          17.0%           8.6%              2.6%
 in the country*
 Other                                                                    8.0%            6.9%              1.7%
 Don’t know                                                               15.9%          20.7%              13.8%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Sudan?
  (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                          Currently          Previously          Never
 (Responses combined)                                             Collaborating       Collaborated     Collaborated
 Knowledge products/services                                          22.5%               13.3%            23.1%
 Technical assistance*                                                40.4%               21.7%            20.5%
 Capacity development                                                 58.4%               65.0%            51.3%
 Trust Fund management                                                16.9%               8.3%             12.0%
 Multi-sectoral approaches                                             4.5%               8.3%             8.5%
 Co-financing arrangements                                            25.8%               41.7%            39.3%
 Sector-wide approaches                                                7.9%               6.7%             5.1%
 Emergency Recovery lending                                           14.6%               3.3%             14.5%
 Other                                                                 3.4%               1.7%             2.6%
 Don’t know                                                            2.2%               11.7%            8.5%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG




                                                                 131
The World Bank Group                                                  Sudan                                     Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group's work and support help the poorest in Sudan?
  (Select only ONE response)
                                                                      Currently        Previously                          Never
 Percentage of Respondents                                          Collaborating     Collaborated                     Collaborated
 To a fully sufficient degree                                            1.2%               -                              7.8%
 To a somewhat sufficient degree                                        35.3%             38.3%                            13.6%
 To a somewhat insufficient degree                                      44.7%             21.7%                            24.3%
 To a very insufficient degree                                           9.4%             23.3%                            34.0%
 Don’t know                                                              9.4%             16.7%                            20.4%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank
Group collaborate with more in your country? (Choose no more than TWO)
  Percentage of Respondents                                              Currently        Previously           Never
  (Responses combined)                                                 Collaborating     Collaborated      Collaborated
  Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                 31.8%             31.7%             27.4%
  Donor community                                                          14.8%             13.3%             13.7%
  Media*                                                                    6.8%             5.0%              23.9%
  Local government                                                         21.6%             18.3%             13.7%
  Private sector                                                           20.5%             13.3%             23.1%
  Parliament                                                                0.0%             3.3%              1.7%
  NGOs/CBOs                                                                33.0%             36.7%             32.5%
  Youth/university groups                                                  13.6%             8.3%              8.5%
  Beneficiaries                                                            33.0%             33.3%             21.4%
  Foundations                                                              11.4%             10.0%             3.4%
  UN and regional peace keeping forces*                                     0.0%             0.0%              4.3%
  Emerging donors                                                           0.0%             3.3%              3.4%
  UN agencies                                                              10.2%             5.0%              7.7%
  Regional organizations                                                    1.1%             3.3%              2.6%
  Other                                                                     0.0%             0.0%              0.9%
  Don’t know                                                                0.0%             5.0%              5.1%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Sudan?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                    Currently         Previously             Never
                                                                                  Collaborating      Collaborated        Collaborated
                                                                                 N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development in
                                                                                 82   6.61   2.63   50   6.36   3.04   85    4.64    2.89
Sudan*
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the development
                                                                                 82   7.20   2.32   47   6.40   2.82   82    4.90    3.18
priorities for Sudan*
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic for
                                                                                 79   7.15   2.06   43   6.93   2.74   85    4.82    2.92
Sudan*
The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Sudan with respect*      81   8.17   2.28   49   8.67   1.69   72    7.08    3.30
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG




                                                                       132
The World Bank Group                                                 Sudan                                     Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Sudan in terms of each of the following? (1-To
no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                                   Currently         Previously            Never
                                                                                 Collaborating      Collaborated       Collaborated
                                                                                N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD
Responsiveness to needs*                                                        78   6.32   2.54   47   6.34   2.93   81    4.65    2.69
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*              74   6.15   2.45   44   6.91   2.48   73    4.67    2.51
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                       73   6.33   2.40   42   6.40   2.79   72    4.46    2.86
Being inclusive                                                                 70   5.99   2.56   45   6.27   2.86   69    5.28    2.38
Openness (sharing data and other information)                                   73   6.45   2.65   45   6.20   2.48   70    5.97    2.89
Staff accessibility*                                                            77   6.91   2.61   48   6.50   2.68   74    5.34    3.19
Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                73   8.45   2.33   42   8.02   2.02   65    6.92    2.68
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making decisions
                                                                                77   6.96   2.69   45   6.24   3.11   76    4.16    2.66
important to my work*
Collaboration with civil society*                                               75   6.80   2.52   45   6.40   2.68   81    5.54    3.18
Collaboration with the UN                                                       55   7.78   2.36   41   7.76   2.22   68    7.57    2.80
Collaboration with the Government*                                              77   7.71   2.08   49   7.49   2.53   80    6.49    2.75
Collaboration with other donors and development partners                        63   7.54   2.12   37   6.95   2.33   71    6.92    2.48
Collaboration with the private sector*                                          61   5.72   2.81   39   5.90   2.40   68    4.51    2.79
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                   77   6.56   2.56   48   6.38   2.61   74    5.49    2.99
Being a long-term partner                                                       69   7.19   2.70   46   7.35   3.08   74    6.91    3.19
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

To be more effective development partner in Sudan, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?
(Select only ONE response)
                                                                       Currently       Previously          Never
  Percentage of Respondents                                         Collaborating     Collaborated     Collaborated
  More local presence                                                    93.2%            86.4%            84.7%
  The current level of local presence is adequate                        3.4%             8.5%             8.5%
  Less local presence                                                    2.3%               -              3.4%
  Don't know                                                             1.1%             5.1%             3.4%

In the past year, have you seen more, less, or just about the same level of effective collaboration between the UN and the
World Bank Group in your country? (Select only ONE response)
                                                                          Currently          Previously           Never
  Percentage of Respondents                                             Collaborating       Collaborated      Collaborated
  More effective collaboration                                              19.8%               16.7%             11.0%
  The same level of effective collaboration                                 20.9%               23.3%             17.8%
  Less effective collaboration                                              15.1%               15.0%             23.7%
  Don't know                                                                44.2%               45.0%             47.5%




                                                                     133
The World Bank Group                                             Sudan                                 Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which THREE of the following would you
  attribute this to? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Currently       Previously            Never
 (Responses combined)                                                  Collaborating    Collaborated       Collaborated
 The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow
                                                                           11.6%            16.9%              24.1%
 through/follow-up
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation     44.2%            50.8%              52.6%
 The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social
                                                                           14.0%            22.0%              25.9%
 realities on the ground
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government*                      39.5%            28.8%              15.5%
 Poor donor coordination                                                   11.6%            18.6%              20.7%
 The World Bank Group works too slowly                                     12.8%            8.5%               8.6%
 The Government works inefficiently                                        19.8%            13.6%              27.6%
 Political pressures and obstacles*                                        34.9%            18.6%              36.2%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges           17.4%            16.9%              18.1%
 Ongoing conflict and instability*                                         39.5%            50.8%              28.4%
 Inadequate funding                                                        31.4%            33.9%              25.0%
 Other                                                                      4.7%            1.7%               0.9%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG




                                                                 134
The World Bank Group                                             Sudan                                        Country Opinion Survey 2015




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Sudan? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                 Currently          Previously            Never
                                                                               Collaborating       Collaborated       Collaborated
                                                                              N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD
Crime and violence*                                                           63    5.24   3.17   36   5.17   3.48   78    6.65    3.57
Financial markets                                                             64    7.06   2.74   39   7.13   2.94   96    7.70    2.97
Transport                                                                     79    7.91   2.47   41   7.61   2.64   94    7.88    3.06
Anti-corruption                                                               73    7.84   2.66   40   8.10   2.61   91    7.68    3.24
Regional conflict and tensions                                                73    6.71   3.07   40   7.20   3.11   88    7.59    2.96
Law and justice                                                               69    5.71   3.09   37   6.38   3.05   85    5.68    3.60
Urban development                                                             78    7.62   2.52   43   7.91   2.26   96    7.61    2.84
Environmental sustainability                                                  79    8.56   1.85   44   8.07   2.31   90    7.64    2.97
Regulatory framework                                                          74    7.19   2.53   46   7.28   2.42   85    6.75    2.86
Information and communications technology                                     76    7.47   2.71   45   8.09   2.40   94    7.21    2.95
Poverty reduction                                                             83    9.08   1.43   49   8.94   2.07   100   8.58    2.53
Gender equity                                                                 75    6.55   2.99   44   6.73   2.79   87    6.60    3.45
Private sector development                                                    77    7.35   2.69   40   7.70   2.81   97    7.40    3.13
Foreign direct investment                                                     74    7.46   2.75   38   7.45   2.65   95    8.06    2.96
Local governance and institutions                                             74    6.97   2.65   44   6.34   2.80   86    6.49    2.98
Water and sanitation                                                          79    8.11   2.11   50   8.28   2.06   97    7.85    2.85
Trade and exports*                                                            69    6.88   3.09   38   7.05   3.03   87    8.13    2.60
Economic growth                                                               80    8.35   1.99   43   8.14   2.31   92    8.76    2.39
Energy                                                                        77    7.45   2.59   37   7.76   2.72   94    7.96    2.86
Disaster management                                                           77    7.58   2.74   47   7.40   2.81   92    8.14    2.44
Public sector governance/reform                                               81    7.89   2.66   44   7.23   3.03   90    7.49    3.04
Job creation/employment                                                       83    8.00   2.39   44   7.55   2.60   91    7.65    3.23
Social cohesion                                                               72    6.00   3.29   45   6.04   2.98   93    6.37    3.63
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                        75    7.25   2.66   42   7.36   2.83   92    6.93    3.22
Equality of opportunity                                                       75    7.57   2.53   41   6.93   3.09   89    7.62    2.87
Health                                                                        87    8.23   2.15   50   8.26   2.31   97    7.96    2.74
Rural development                                                             82    9.06   1.44   49   8.43   2.16   95    8.29    2.72
Global/regional integration                                                   74    7.69   2.20   41   7.73   2.32   89    8.02    2.66
Food security                                                                 77    8.74   1.68   46   8.54   2.00   95    8.28    2.74
Natural resource management                                                   72    7.74   2.50   41   7.27   3.23   90    7.33    3.31
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                         84    8.17   2.31   45   8.51   2.16   98    7.85    3.07
Social protection                                                             75    6.19   2.70   40   6.23   3.02   94    7.16    3.07
Climate change*                                                               76    8.16   2.28   42   6.88   3.29   91    6.78    3.25
Agricultural development                                                      84    8.85   1.74   46   8.67   1.96   95    8.36    2.71
Education                                                                     83    8.61   1.99   49   8.31   2.41   99    8.27    2.84
Debt relief and access to finance                                             77    8.83   2.33   43   8.91   1.72   102   8.43    2.86
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG




                                                                 135
The World Bank Group                                             Sudan                                        Country Opinion Survey 2015




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Sudan? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                 Currently          Previously            Never
                                                                               Collaborating       Collaborated       Collaborated
                                                                              N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD
Anti-corruption                                                               46    5.00   2.99   26   5.00   3.54   41    3.76    2.52
Information and communications technology*                                    50    6.06   2.93   31   5.39   3.29   50    4.40    2.95
Transport                                                                     54    5.33   2.86   28   4.64   3.01   47    4.23    2.88
Crime and violence                                                            45    4.31   2.81   20   3.65   2.58   44    3.50    2.52
Regional conflict and tensions                                                56    5.30   3.13   19   4.68   3.23   50    4.74    3.19
Law and justice*                                                              48    4.75   2.70   22   3.36   2.77   39    2.95    2.01
Urban development*                                                            63    6.46   2.75   26   5.19   3.44   51    4.69    2.93
Environmental sustainability*                                                 71    7.41   2.35   34   5.71   3.06   49    4.35    2.59
Regulatory framework*                                                         56    6.91   2.54   30   5.40   2.98   41    4.10    2.76
Communicable/non-communicable diseases*                                       58    6.07   2.73   29   4.69   2.95   45    4.80    2.74
Poverty reduction*                                                            72    7.00   2.37   42   6.86   3.21   63    5.68    2.86
Gender equity*                                                                60    6.72   2.40   31   5.48   3.05   49    5.37    2.84
Private sector development                                                    54    5.78   2.72   30   5.50   3.32   52    4.83    2.84
Foreign direct investment                                                     47    4.81   2.73   28   5.79   3.54   58    4.90    3.42
Local governance and institutions                                             53    5.19   2.61   23   4.65   2.81   48    4.33    2.51
Water and sanitation*                                                         69    6.55   2.59   42   6.48   2.65   56    5.25    2.73
Trade and exports                                                             47    5.15   2.73   30   5.13   3.07   53    4.51    2.80
Economic growth*                                                              61    6.59   2.30   37   5.59   3.11   57    5.33    2.56
Energy                                                                        49    5.35   2.59   27   4.59   2.59   43    4.05    2.82
Disaster management                                                           50    5.74   2.76   31   6.16   3.11   50    4.96    2.90
Public sector governance/reform*                                              54    6.07   2.71   25   6.32   3.25   51    4.63    2.66
Job creation/employment                                                       64    5.03   2.70   32   4.19   2.99   56    4.14    3.04
Social cohesion                                                               58    4.60   2.67   29   3.69   2.48   50    3.62    2.84
Financial markets                                                             44    5.30   3.01   22   4.32   3.03   50    4.46    2.68
Equality of opportunity                                                       60    5.78   2.81   31   5.10   3.27   54    4.76    3.27
Health*                                                                       67    6.82   2.54   38   6.21   2.69   61    4.85    2.66
Rural development*                                                            75    7.12   2.35   40   6.78   2.92   63    5.27    3.02
Global/regional integration*                                                  57    5.93   2.71   25   5.44   3.22   52    4.38    2.75
Food security*                                                                62    5.73   2.64   35   6.71   2.74   58    5.10    3.04
Education*                                                                    70    6.43   2.35   38   6.50   2.74   63    4.84    3.04
Security/stabilization/reconstruction*                                        62    6.15   2.82   36   5.97   2.90   62    4.63    2.97
Social protection*                                                            46    4.89   2.75   20   3.85   2.96   52    3.60    2.31
Climate change*                                                               59    6.14   2.75   26   5.31   3.28   54    4.44    2.56
Agricultural development*                                                     60    6.03   2.58   35   6.46   3.19   62    4.85    2.88
Natural resource management                                                   50    4.88   3.04   24   5.08   3.15   54    4.13    2.80
Debt relief and access to finance                                             54    5.13   3.16   31   5.45   3.39   67    4.60    3.40
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Sudan? (Select only ONE response)
                                                                     Currently         Previously          Never
 Percentage of Respondents                                         Collaborating      Collaborated     Collaborated
 At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                              48.3%              43.3%            42.2%
 In the country                                                        14.6%              15.0%            11.2%
 Don't know                                                            37.1%              41.7%            46.6%




                                                                 136
The World Bank Group                                                 Sudan                                     Country Opinion Survey 2015




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

                                                                                   Currently         Previously             Never
                                                                                 Collaborating      Collaborated        Collaborated
                                                                                N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development
                                                                                85   6.84   2.21   52   6.87   2.90   85    5.93    3.27
results in Sudan?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

                                                                                   Currently         Previously             Never
                                                                                 Collaborating      Collaborated        Collaborated
                                                                                N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group help to build/strengthen existing
                                                                                77   7.69   2.26   45   6.42   3.25   65    5.78    3.16
country systems in Sudan?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Sudan?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                   Currently         Previously             Never
                                                                                 Collaborating      Collaborated        Collaborated
                                                                                N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD
The World Bank Group’s program of managing trust funds and partnerships meets
                                                                                68   5.06   2.85   38   4.68   3.01   78    4.36    3.10
the needs of Sudan
The World Bank Group meets Sudan’s needs for knowledge services                 73   5.58   2.81   38   5.87   3.22   67    5.21    3.12


                                                                                   Currently         Previously             Never
                                                                                 Collaborating      Collaborated        Collaborated
                                                                                N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its
                                                                                66   6.70   2.08   38   6.29   2.88   65    5.15    3.21
work in real time in Sudan?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*
(Select only ONE response)
                                                                   Currently           Previously                         Never
 Percentage of Respondents                                       Collaborating        Collaborated                    Collaborated
 Weekly                                                               9.5%                3.3%                            3.4%
 Monthly                                                             20.2%                15.0%                           4.3%
 A few times a year                                                  40.5%                31.7%                           16.4%
 Rarely                                                              15.5%                31.7%                           27.6%
 Never                                                               14.3%                18.3%                           48.3%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG




                                                                      137
The World Bank Group                                                   Sudan                                           Country Opinion Survey 2015




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Sudan, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                                      Currently           Previously               Never
                                                                                    Collaborating        Collaborated          Collaborated
                                                                                   N Mean SD            N Mean SD             N Mean SD
Are timely                                                                         71    6.07   2.31   43       6.49   2.60   65    5.40    3.10
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation            71    6.68   2.25   45       6.60   2.76   69    5.67    2.93
Lead to practical solutions                                                        76    6.87   2.06   48       6.35   2.63   78    6.13    2.69
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)*                              73    7.36   1.90   45       7.18   2.61   76    6.20    3.01
Are source of relevant information on global good practices                        73    7.62   2.15   42       7.50   2.50   77    7.34    2.47
Are adequately disseminated                                                        73    6.53   2.54   48       6.33   2.40   75    5.59    2.84
Are translated enough into local language                                          69    5.97   2.69   45       6.09   2.67   79    6.29    3.04
Are adaptable to Sudan’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                   69    6.94   2.35   47       7.77   2.85   73    7.08    2.70
circumstances
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

                                                                                      Currently           Previously               Never
                                                                                    Collaborating        Collaborated          Collaborated
                                                                                   N Mean SD            N Mean SD             N Mean SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the WBG's knowledge work
                                                                                   80    8.01   1.87   54       7.74   2.28   93    8.25    2.47
and activities make to development results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                   78    7.90   1.76   51       7.69   2.04   83    7.19    2.99
knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)



E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                      Currently           Previously               Never
                                                                                    Collaborating        Collaborated          Collaborated
                                                                                   N Mean SD            N Mean SD             N Mean SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly*                                     70    5.80   2.82   40       5.28   3.24   64    4.23    3.14
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                   81    8.21   2.04   52       7.46   2.28   83    7.51    2.46
programs it supports
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion*         75    6.89   2.27   43       6.37   2.43   78    5.85    2.95
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable*             60    7.25   1.75   32       6.81   2.63   71    5.55    2.77
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Sudan*                             62    5.73   2.40   37       5.68   2.44   74    4.09    2.98
Working with the World Bank Group increases Sudan’s institutional capacity         78    8.35   1.78   54       8.19   2.30   87    7.99    2.52
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes appropriate
                                                                                   64    7.58   2.42   35       7.29   2.48   76    7.80    2.70
use of them
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support                     74    7.91   1.85   49       7.18   2.51   81    7.25    2.63
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

                                                                                      Currently           Previously               Never
                                                                                    Collaborating        Collaborated          Collaborated
                                                                                   N Mean SD            N Mean SD             N Mean SD
To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find
                                                                                   64    6.52   2.38   37       7.19   2.23   83    6.94    2.97
solutions that promote private public partnerships in Sudan?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                          138
The World Bank Group                                                 Sudan                                    Country Opinion Survey 2015




E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Sudan? (Select only ONE response)
                                                                      Currently       Previously           Never
 Percentage of Respondents                                          Collaborating    Collaborated      Collaborated
 The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Sudan                       3.4%            1.7%              7.8%
 The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Sudan                 9.2%            15.0%             21.7%
 The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                 50.6%            41.7%             19.1%
 Don't know                                                             36.8%            41.7%             51.3%

Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in Sudan?* (Select only ONE response)
                                                                       Currently        Previously         Never
 Percentage of Respondents                                           Collaborating    Collaborated     Collaborated
 The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses on the
                                                                         55.2%            39.0%            28.4%
 most important development challenges in Sudan
 The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in Sudan, and it
                                                                         26.4%            16.9%            25.0%
 is involved in too many areas of development
 Don’t know                                                              18.4%            44.1%            46.6%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

                                                                                 Currently          Previously            Never
                                                                               Collaborating       Collaborated       Collaborated
                                                                              N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group is adequately staffed in
                                                                              63    5.22   2.66   38   5.45   2.46   60    4.85    3.09
Sudan?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



F. The Multi Partner/Donor Trust Fund in Sudan as Managed by the World Bank

Which of the following best describe what you consider the greatest STRENGTHS of the Multi Donor Trust Fund in Sudan?
(Choose no more than TWO)
  Percentage of Respondents                                             Currently      Previously            Never
  (Responses combined)                                                Collaborating   Collaborated       Collaborated
  The donors worked collaboratively with the government                   29.4%           20.0%              20.5%
  The donors were well coordinated                                        20.0%           15.0%              15.4%
  There was an adequate level of communication and sharing of
                                                                          38.8%           30.0%              21.4%
  results amongst all players*
  The Trust Fund's development priorities were aligned with country
                                                                          29.4%           16.7%              13.7%
  development priorities*
  The level of resources distributed was sufficient                        3.5%            8.3%              6.8%
  The Trust Fund was adequately staffed                                    1.2%            3.3%              7.7%
  The Trust Fund adequately took into consideration voices from
                                                                           5.9%            8.3%              9.4%
  outside of government
  Don’t know*                                                             31.8%           43.3%              49.6%
  Other                                                                    0.0%            3.3%              2.6%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG




                                                                      139
The World Bank Group                                             Sudan                                 Country Opinion Survey 2015




F. The Multi Partner/Donor Trust Fund in Sudan as Managed by the World Bank (continued)

Which of the following best describe what you consider the greatest WEAKNESSES of the Multi Donor Trust Fund in Sudan?
(Choose no more than TWO)
  Percentage of Respondents                                            Currently       Previously           Never
  (Responses combined)                                               Collaborating    Collaborated      Collaborated
  The Trust Fund was not adequately staffed                               9.2%            3.3%              5.9%
  The level of resources distributed was too low                         32.2%            20.0%             23.7%
  There was an inadequate level of communication and sharing of
                                                                          3.4%            8.3%              0.8%
  results amongst all players*
  The Trust Fund's development priorities were not aligned with
                                                                          6.9%            10.0%             11.0%
  country development priorities
  The donors were not well coordinated*                                   1.1%            8.3%              11.0%
  The donors did not work collaboratively with the government             5.7%            8.3%              5.9%
  The Trust Fund did not adequately take into consideration voices
                                                                         12.6%            11.7%             8.5%
  from outside of government
  Don’t know                                                             39.1%            45.0%             48.3%
  Other                                                                   0.0%            5.0%              2.5%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG



G. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Sudan
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Sudan? (Choose no more than
TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                           Currently          Previously         Never
 (Responses combined)                                              Collaborating       Collaborated    Collaborated
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on
                                                                       24.4%               22.4%           34.7%
 Sudan’s economy
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work*                                2.3%               3.4%            11.0%
 Offer more innovative financial (non-lending) products                 9.3%               5.2%            11.9%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets       5.8%               5.2%            7.6%
 Reach out more to groups outside of Government                        15.1%               24.1%           22.9%
 Mobilize third party financial resources*                             26.7%               25.9%           11.0%
 Work faster                                                            9.3%               10.3%           19.5%
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Sudan’s specific
                                                                        4.7%               10.3%           11.0%
 challenges
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                              11.6%               3.4%            5.9%
 Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                  14.0%               13.8%           13.6%
 Increase the level of capacity development in the country*            53.5%               31.0%           16.9%
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing*        12.8%               31.0%           26.3%
 Increase availability of Fee-Based services                            0.0%               5.2%            1.7%
 Increase the level of World Bank Group staffing in Sudan’s office      4.7%               0.0%            0.8%
 Other                                                                  1.2%               3.4%            3.4%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Sudan, and taking into account its limited
level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in Sudan?* (Select
only ONE response)
                                                                        Currently        Previously           Never
  Percentage of Respondents                                           Collaborating    Collaborated       Collaborated
  Leveraging more resources from trust funds                              70.7%            51.7%              61.9%
  Knowledge products                                                      11.0%            15.5%              15.9%
  Convening services                                                       3.7%             6.9%              3.5%
  None of the above                                                        1.2%             6.9%              3.5%
  The combination is appropriate for Sudan                                 6.1%             1.7%              1.8%
  Don't know                                                               7.3%            17.2%              13.3%



                                                                 140
The World Bank Group                                             Sudan                                         Country Opinion Survey 2015




H. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Sudan? (Choose no more than
TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                           Currently         Previously         Never
 (Responses combined)                                              Collaborating     Collaborated     Collaborated
 Periodicals                                                           22.9%             29.3%            16.9%
 International newspapers                                               7.2%              5.2%            5.1%
 Local radio                                                           10.8%             19.0%            16.1%
 International radio                                                    2.4%              6.9%            5.1%
 Local television                                                      16.9%             10.3%            13.6%
 International television                                              14.5%             15.5%            11.9%
 Local newspapers*                                                     31.3%             12.1%            37.3%
 Internet                                                              63.9%             69.0%            61.0%
 Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)              14.5%             24.1%            19.5%
 Other                                                                  6.0%              3.4%            3.4%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                           Currently       Previously                          Never
 (Responses combined)                                              Collaborating   Collaborated                      Collaborated
 Direct contact with World Bank Group*                                 44.7%           33.9%                             22.0%
 e-Newsletters                                                         29.4%           22.0%                             33.1%
 World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/ conferences                    34.1%           28.8%                             29.7%
 World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials           36.5%           35.6%                             28.8%
 World Bank Group’s website                                            37.6%           45.8%                             35.6%
 Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)*              4.7%            5.1%                             16.9%
 Mobile phones*                                                         2.4%            3.4%                             14.4%
 The World Bank’s Information Center for Development located at
                                                                        5.9%            6.8%                              6.8%
 the University of Khartoum
 Other                                                                  0.0%            0.0%                              0.8%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any
information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?*
                                                                      Currently        Previously            Never
  Percentage of Respondents                                         Collaborating     Collaborated       Collaborated
  Yes                                                                   27.7%             32.1%              10.0%
  No                                                                    72.3%             67.9%              90.0%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*
                                                                      Currently          Previously                      Never
 Percentage of Respondents                                         Collaborating        Collaborated                 Collaborated
 Yes                                                                    17.6%               39.3%                        7.4%
 No                                                                     82.4%               60.7%                        92.6%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

Were you able to obtain this information?*
                                                                              Currently          Previously              Never
 Percentage of Respondents                                                  Collaborating       Collaborated         Collaborated
 Yes                                                                            73.3%               70.0%                10.0%
 No                                                                             26.7%               30.0%                90.0%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG




                                                                 141
The World Bank Group                                                 Sudan                                             Country Opinion Survey 2015




H. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Do you have access to the Internet?
                                                                                     Currently           Previously              Never
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Collaborating        Collaborated         Collaborated
 Yes                                                                                   92.5%                86.2%                86.9%
 No                                                                                    7.5%                 13.8%                13.1%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*
                                                                                     Currently           Previously              Never
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Collaborating        Collaborated         Collaborated
 Yes                                                                                   67.1%                64.4%                48.1%
 No                                                                                    32.9%                35.6%                51.9%
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
                                                                       Currently       Previously                                Never
 Percentage of Respondents                                           Collaborating    Collaborated                           Collaborated
 High speed/WiFi                                                         56.3%            68.0%                                  50.0%
 Dial-up                                                                 43.7%            32.0%                                  50.0%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                        Currently          Previously              Never
                                                                                      Collaborating       Collaborated         Collaborated
                                                                                     N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N Mean SD
I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.                            59    7.80   2.19    44   7.45   2.41     63    7.19    2.78
I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.                   57    8.11   2.07    44   7.48   1.96     54    7.50    2.18
The World Bank Group’s social media channels are valuable sources of information
                                                                                    42    6.95   2.33    34   6.44   2.44     63    7.44    2.44
about the institution
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it             68    7.49   2.73    48   7.44   2.58     65    6.37    3.26
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and inquiries*        55    7.69   2.37    44   6.89   2.62     48    6.23    2.38
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG


I. Background Information
Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Currently       Previously         Never
 (Responses combined)                                                Collaborating    Collaborated    Collaborated
 Observer*                                                                8.2%            20.3%           37.7%
 Use World Bank Group reports/data                                       22.4%            16.9%           17.9%
 Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities*         58.8%            49.2%           7.5%
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties*                          69.4%            64.4%           49.1%
 Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research,
                                                                          9.4%            20.3%           36.8%
 etc.*
*Significantly different between those who currently, previously, or never collaborated with the WBG

What’s your gender?
                                                                                     Currently           Previously              Never
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Collaborating        Collaborated         Collaborated
 Female                                                                                28.2%                32.2%                23.5%
 Male                                                                                  71.8%                67.8%                76.5%




                                                                     142
The World Bank Group                                               Sudan                                           Country Opinion Survey 2015




Appendix E: Responses to All Questions by Gender4
Females N=70              Males N=191
A. General Issues facing Sudan
In general, would you say that Sudan is headed in...?

    Percentage of Respondents                                                   Females                    Males
    The right direction                                                          31.9%                     32.2%
    The wrong direction                                                          47.8%                     40.6%
    Not sure                                                                     20.3%                     27.2%

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Sudan. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Sudan?
    Percentage of Respondents
    (Responses combined)                                                         Female                    Male
    Social protection                                                             5.8%                     7.4%
    Food security                                                                 24.6%                    24.3%
    Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                         33.3%                    41.3%
    Public sector governance/reform*                                              5.8%                     16.9%
    Global/regional integration                                                   1.4%                     5.3%
    Gender equity                                                                 0.0%                     0.0%
    Private sector development                                                    5.8%                     6.9%
    Foreign direct investment                                                     7.2%                     9.0%
    Water and sanitation                                                          7.2%                     5.8%
    Energy                                                                        0.0%                     3.2%
    Regional conflict and tensions                                                5.8%                     4.8%
    Job creation/employment*                                                      1.4%                     10.1%
    Rural development*                                                            8.7%                     19.0%
    Financial markets                                                             4.3%                     1.1%
    Urban development                                                             1.4%                     0.5%
    Environmental sustainability                                                  1.4%                     3.7%
    Equality of opportunity                                                       4.3%                     5.8%
    Health*                                                                       18.8%                    6.9%
    Education                                                                     31.9%                    25.9%
    Poverty reduction*                                                            33.3%                    19.0%
    Transport*                                                                    1.4%                     9.5%
    Social cohesion                                                               1.4%                     1.6%
    Climate change                                                                0.0%                     1.6%
    Agricultural development                                                      15.9%                    19.0%
    Trade and exports                                                             1.4%                     2.1%
    Crime and violence                                                            0.0%                     0.0%
    Economic growth*                                                              15.9%                    3.7%
    Law and justice                                                               0.0%                     2.6%
    Regulatory framework                                                          0.0%                     0.5%
    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                        0.0%                     0.0%
    Local governance and institutions                                             4.3%                     1.6%
    Natural resource management                                                   5.8%                     4.8%
    Anti-corruption                                                               24.6%                    16.4%
    Disaster management                                                           0.0%                     2.1%
    Information and communications technology                                     1.4%                     1.1%
    Debt relief and access to finance                                             21.7%                    12.2%
*Significantly different between genders

4
  Only 261 respondents provided their demographic information about gender. Thus only these respondents were included in the comparisons
presented in this appendix.



                                                                   143
The World Bank Group                                      Sudan                                     Country Opinion Survey 2015




A. General Issues facing Sudan (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Sudan? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                Female                 Male
 Water and sanitation                                                 7.1%                  8.1%
 Equality of opportunity                                              10.0%                 11.8%
 Economic growth                                                      21.4%                 31.7%
 Climate change                                                       2.9%                  2.7%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                       2.9%                  4.3%
 Global/regional integration                                          1.4%                  3.8%
 Gender equity                                                        2.9%                  1.1%
 Rural development*                                                   22.9%                 36.6%
 Urban development                                                    4.3%                  2.2%
 Regulatory framework                                                 0.0%                  0.5%
 Local governance and institutions                                    1.4%                  2.2%
 Social protection                                                    1.4%                  5.4%
 Law and justice                                                      0.0%                  3.2%
 Transport*                                                           0.0%                  7.5%
 Crime and violence                                                   0.0%                  1.6%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                               0.0%                  0.0%
 Information and communications technology                            0.0%                  1.1%
 Debt relief and access to finance                                    14.3%                 14.5%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                37.1%                 31.2%
 Anti-corruption                                                      10.0%                 10.8%
 Private sector development                                           4.3%                  7.0%
 Foreign direct investment*                                           8.6%                  2.7%
 Energy                                                               0.0%                  0.5%
 Public sector governance/reform                                      10.0%                 11.3%
 Social cohesion                                                      0.0%                  0.5%
 Education                                                            30.0%                 21.0%
 Natural resource management                                          10.0%                 4.8%
 Environmental sustainability                                         0.0%                  2.2%
 Health                                                               15.7%                 9.1%
 Agricultural development                                             22.9%                 25.3%
 Disaster management                                                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                              22.9%                 17.2%
 Financial markets                                                    2.9%                  1.1%
 Trade and exports*                                                   11.4%                 3.8%
 Food security                                                        20.0%                 10.8%
*Significantly different between genders




                                                          144
The World Bank Group                                                   Sudan                                         Country Opinion Survey 2015




A. General Issues facing Sudan (continued)

When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this
would be achieved in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                               Female                   Male
 Better employment opportunities for young people                                    23.9%                   20.9%
 Better employment opportunities for women                                           1.5%                    0.0%
 Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                        29.9%                   29.9%
 Debt relief and access to finance                                                   13.4%                   13.9%
 Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure
                                                                                     4.5%                    2.7%
 greater accountability
 Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                 3.0%                    6.4%
 Better entrepreneurial opportunities                                                7.5%                    16.6%
 Better natural resource management                                                  14.9%                   20.3%
 A growing middle class                                                              7.5%                    5.9%
 Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                             14.9%                   7.0%
 Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                             1.5%                    1.1%
 Better security and peace building                                                  20.9%                   21.4%
 Consistent economic growth                                                          20.9%                   17.6%
 More reliable social safety net                                                     0.0%                    3.2%
 Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                     6.0%                    5.9%
 Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                           23.9%                   19.8%
 Better quality public services                                                      0.0%                    1.6%
 Other                                                                               3.0%                    3.2%



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                                   Females                    Males
                                                                                              N     Mean      SD        N     Mean       SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Sudan?                          67    6.40     2.81      189     5.77      2.96
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)


                                                                                                   Females                    Males
                                                                                              N     Mean      SD        N     Mean       SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Sudan.*       51    7.45     2.77      160     5.68      2.81
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)   *Significantly different between genders


                                                                                                   Females                    Males
                                                                                              N     Mean      SD        N     Mean       SD
To what extent do you believe the WBG's staff is well prepared to help Sudan solve its most
                                                                                              49    7.49     2.82      161     7.05      2.83
complicated development challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                       145
The World Bank Group                                      Sudan                                     Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Sudan, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources in Sudan? (Choose no more than
THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                 Female                Male
 Social protection                                                     5.7%                 4.7%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                 35.7%                35.1%
 Crime and violence                                                    2.9%                 2.1%
 Transport*                                                            0.0%                 13.6%
 Agricultural development                                              32.9%                35.6%
 Global/regional integration                                           2.9%                 3.7%
 Gender equity                                                         0.0%                 0.0%
 Public sector governance/reform                                       8.6%                 14.7%
 Health                                                                14.3%                17.3%
 Rural development                                                     22.9%                19.9%
 Foreign direct investment                                             5.7%                 11.0%
 Education                                                             28.6%                19.4%
 Energy                                                                1.4%                 1.6%
 Social cohesion                                                       0.0%                 0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                               4.3%                 12.0%
 Financial markets                                                     2.9%                 1.6%
 Urban development                                                     1.4%                 1.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                          5.7%                 4.2%
 Equality of opportunity*                                              7.1%                 1.0%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                        4.3%                 1.6%
 Private sector development                                            4.3%                 8.4%
 Water and sanitation                                                  5.7%                 5.2%
 Food security                                                         12.9%                9.9%
 Climate change                                                        2.9%                 2.6%
 Poverty reduction                                                     21.4%                17.8%
 Trade and exports                                                     0.0%                 2.1%
 Economic growth                                                       15.7%                12.6%
 Law and justice                                                       0.0%                 2.1%
 Local governance and institutions                                     2.9%                 0.5%
 Regulatory framework                                                  0.0%                 0.5%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                0.0%                 0.0%
 Natural resource management                                           11.4%                6.3%
 Information and communications technology*                            4.3%                 0.5%
 Anti-corruption                                                       7.1%                 5.8%
 Disaster management                                                   0.0%                 0.5%
 Debt relief and access to finance                                     20.0%                20.9%
*Significantly different between genders




                                                          146
The World Bank Group                                                   Sudan                                      Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of
  second greatest value in Sudan?
 Greatest Value
 Percentage of Respondents                                            Female                   Male
 Convening/facilitating                                                3.0%                     4.5%
 Data and statistics                                                   3.0%                     6.2%
 Policy advice, studies, analyses                                      19.7%                   15.2%
 Financial resources                                                   15.2%                   24.2%
 Capacity development*                                                 34.8%                   21.9%
 Technical assistance                                                  0.0%                     5.1%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                            1.5%                     2.8%
 Donor coordination and policy dialogue                                9.1%                    11.2%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                         0.0%                     0.6%
 Strategy formulation                                                  13.6%                    8.4%
 Other                                                                 0.0%                     0.0%
*Significantly different between genders

   nd
 2 Greatest Value
 Percentage of Respondents                                                        Female                  Male
 Convening/facilitating                                                            3.2%                   6.7%
 Data and statistics                                                               6.3%                   5.1%
 Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                  6.3%                   7.3%
 Financial resources                                                               12.7%                  9.6%
 Capacity development                                                              20.6%                  29.2%
 Technical assistance                                                              11.1%                  5.1%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                        1.6%                   7.9%
 Donor coordination and policy dialogue                                            22.2%                  12.9%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                     3.2%                   1.7%
 Strategy formulation                                                              12.7%                  14.6%
 Other                                                                             0.0%                   0.0%

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the
  following areas in Sudan? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                                Females                    Males
                                                                                           N     Mean      SD        N     Mean       SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)*                            40    8.48     1.38      133     7.02      2.83

Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)*                      35    6.91     2.64      112     5.83      2.83

Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)*            38    8.50     1.66      117     6.38      2.58
*Significantly different between genders

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Sudan to help ensure better development results, looking forward,
how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building? (1-Not important
all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                                Females                    Males
                                                                                           N     Mean      SD        N     Mean       SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)*                            41    9.20     1.57      144     8.50      2.05

Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)                       43    8.65     2.05      122     8.10      2.43

Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)             45    9.16     1.57      129     8.64      1.98
*Significantly different between genders




                                                                        147
The World Bank Group                                           Sudan                                Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Sudan?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                  Female               Male
 Staff too inaccessible                                                 12.0%               11.0%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                               3.0%                5.0%
 Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the
                                                                        9.0%                13.0%
 Government
 Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical
                                                                        4.0%                14.0%
 problem solving*
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                              20.0%                14.0%
 Arrogant in its approach                                              1.0%                 2.0%
 Not client focused                                                    6.0%                 4.0%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                                 3.0%                 2.0%
 World Bank Group’s processes too complex                              7.0%                 15.0%
 Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in
                                                                        3.0%                 6.0%
 the country
 Too influenced by developed countries                                 12.0%                14.0%
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political
                                                                       16.0%                 8.0%
 realities
 World Bank Group’s processes too slow                                 14.0%                13.0%
 Not aligned with other donors’ work                                   4.0%                 3.0%
 Not aligned with country priorities                                   3.0%                 5.0%
 Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Sudan       12.0%                16.0%
 Not focused enough on issues that are unique to post-conflict
                                                                        6.0%                 9.0%
 countries
 Inadequate number of World Bank Group staff members
                                                                        1.0%                12.0%
 located in the country*
 Other                                                                 4.0%                 5.0%
 Don’t know*                                                           28.0%                12.0%
*Significantly different between genders

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Sudan?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                  Female               Male
 Knowledge products/services                                            20.0%               20.5%
 Technical assistance*                                                  17.1%               29.5%
 Capacity development                                                   51.4%               59.5%
 Trust Fund management                                                  18.6%               11.1%
 Multi-sectoral approaches                                              4.3%                8.4%
 Co-financing arrangements                                              35.7%               35.3%
 Sector-wide approaches*                                                1.4%                8.4%
 Emergency Recovery lending                                             14.3%               11.1%
 Other                                                                  1.4%                3.2%
 Don’t know*                                                            12.9%               5.3%
*Significantly different between genders

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group's work and support help the poorest in Sudan?
  (Select only ONE response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Female               Male
 To a fully sufficient degree                                           2.9%                4.0%
 To a somewhat sufficient degree                                        38.2%               23.2%
 To a somewhat insufficient degree                                      16.2%               36.7%
 To a very insufficient degree                                          22.1%               22.6%
 Don’t know                                                             20.6%               13.6%



                                                               148
The World Bank Group                                                Sudan                                           Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank
Group collaborate with more in your country? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                             Female                    Male
 Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                          27.5%                    30.0%
 Donor community                                                                   15.9%                    14.2%
 Media                                                                             15.9%                    12.6%
 Local government                                                                  15.9%                    16.8%
 Private sector                                                                    17.4%                    21.1%
 Parliament                                                                        0.0%                     2.1%
 NGOs/CBOs                                                                         37.7%                    33.7%
 Youth/university groups                                                           11.6%                    9.5%
 Beneficiaries                                                                     20.3%                    31.1%
 Foundations                                                                       7.2%                     7.9%
 UN and regional peace keeping forces                                              0.0%                     2.6%
 Emerging donors                                                                   2.9%                     2.1%
 UN agencies                                                                       4.3%                     9.5%
 Regional organizations                                                            4.3%                     1.6%
 Other                                                                             0.0%                     0.5%
 Don’t know*                                                                       8.7%                     1.6%
*Significantly different between genders

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Sudan?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                  Females                    Males
                                                                                             N     Mean      SD        N     Mean       SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development in Sudan*        50    7.68     2.07      161     5.35      3.01
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities for
                                                                                             54    7.50     2.22      152     5.76      3.07
Sudan*
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Sudan*          49    7.65     1.84      152     5.73      2.90

The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Sudan with respect*                  54    9.22     1.09      143     7.50      2.82
*Significantly different between genders




                                                                     149
The World Bank Group                                                 Sudan                                         Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Sudan in terms of each of the following?
                                                                                                Females                     Males
                                                                                           N     Mean       SD        N     Mean       SD
Responsiveness to needs*                                                                  47        6.91   2.47      153     5.41      2.80
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*                        46        6.96   2.29      142     5.46      2.59
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                                 40        6.68   2.65      142     5.44      2.84
Being inclusive                                                                           46        6.00   2.59      131     5.85      2.57
Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                            45        6.98   2.82      138     6.06      2.57
Staff accessibility*                                                                      45        7.47   2.87      149     5.98      2.83
Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                          38        8.79   1.82      137     7.69      2.43
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making decisions important
                                                                                          43        7.30   2.76      150     5.34      2.99
to my work*
Collaboration with civil society*                                                         44        7.25   2.68      154     5.97      2.84
Collaboration with the UN                                                                 33        8.24   2.37      127     7.68      2.42
Collaboration with the Government*                                                        50        7.96   2.02      152     7.07      2.57
Collaboration with other donors and development partners                                  35        7.34   1.92      133     7.17      2.35
Collaboration with the private sector*                                                    36        6.69   2.88      126     4.95      2.59
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                             45        7.13   2.66      150     5.89      2.71
Being a long-term partner*                                                                44        8.16   2.24      141     6.91      3.08
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between genders

To be more effective development partner in Sudan, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?
(Select only ONE response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      Female                     Male
 More local presence                                                             87.1%                     89.5%
 The current level of local presence is adequate                                 8.6%                      5.8%
 Less local presence                                                             1.4%                      1.6%
 Don't know                                                                      2.9%                      3.2%

In the past year, have you seen more, less, or just about the same level of effective collaboration between the UN and the
World Bank Group in your country? (Select only ONE response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      Female                     Male
 More effective collaboration                                                    17.4%                     14.3%
 The same level of effective collaboration                                       17.4%                     21.2%
 Less effective collaboration                                                    5.8%                      23.8%
 Don't know                                                                      59.4%                     40.7%




                                                                     150
The World Bank Group                                         Sudan                                   Country Opinion Survey 2015




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which THREE of the following would you
 attribute this to? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                 Female                  Male
 The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow
                                                                       13.2%                 19.6%
 through/follow-up
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society
                                                                       47.1%                 50.3%
 participation
 The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to
                                                                       17.6%                 21.2%
 political/social realities on the ground
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                   26.5%                 27.0%
 Poor donor coordination                                               13.2%                 19.0%
 The World Bank Group works too slowly*                                2.9%                  12.2%
 The Government works inefficiently                                    26.5%                 20.6%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                     35.3%                 31.7%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges       19.1%                 18.0%
 Ongoing conflict and instability                                      39.7%                 35.4%
 Inadequate funding                                                    32.4%                 27.0%
 Other                                                                 1.5%                  2.6%
*Significantly different between genders




                                                             151
The World Bank Group                                      Sudan                                       Country Opinion Survey 2015




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Sudan? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                     Females                   Males
                                                                                N     Mean     SD        N     Mean       SD
Crime and violence*                                                             46    7.11     3.01     127     5.50      3.45
Financial markets*                                                              46    8.48     2.37     148     7.12      2.86
Transport                                                                       52    7.73     2.49     156     7.90      2.78
Anti-corruption                                                                 52    8.27     2.61     146     7.88      2.80
Regional conflict and tensions                                                  49    7.67     2.72     147     7.26      2.98
Law and justice                                                                 49    6.27     3.19     136     5.83      3.25
Urban development                                                               53    8.04     2.20     158     7.61      2.64
Environmental sustainability                                                    57    8.19     2.52     151     8.11      2.38
Regulatory framework                                                            52    7.33     2.81     148     7.03      2.55
Information and communications technology                                       59    7.68     2.58     150     7.50      2.78
Poverty reduction                                                               60    9.23     1.47     166     8.80      2.13
Gender equity*                                                                  51    7.96     2.62     150     6.34      3.09
Private sector development                                                      53    7.79     2.87     155     7.39      2.88
Foreign direct investment                                                       53    8.26     2.59     149     7.64      2.85
Local governance and institutions                                               50    6.58     2.76     149     6.76      2.81
Water and sanitation                                                            61    7.98     2.45     159     8.09      2.35
Trade and exports                                                               46    7.67     2.79     142     7.45      2.85
Economic growth                                                                 59    8.69     1.74     150     8.49      2.28
Energy                                                                          53    7.91     2.59     150     7.74      2.72
Disaster management                                                             59    7.90     2.39     151     7.82      2.62
Public sector governance/reform                                                 55    7.33     2.66     155     7.81      2.89
Job creation/employment                                                         55    7.91     2.32     157     7.76      2.86
Social cohesion                                                                 54    6.70     3.01     150     6.05      3.46
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                          56    7.54     2.83     147     7.02      2.94
Equality of opportunity                                                         51    7.94     2.62     150     7.37      2.78
Health                                                                          64    8.03     2.53     165     8.25      2.30
Rural development                                                               56    8.63     2.29     164     8.66      2.08
Global/regional integration                                                     54    7.94     2.45     145     7.87      2.32
Food security                                                                   56    8.79     2.04     156     8.46      2.21
Natural resource management                                                     50    7.74     2.89     147     7.42      3.00
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                           60    8.52     1.89     161     8.01      2.78
Social protection                                                               54    6.76     2.90     149     6.68      2.89
Climate change                                                                  54    7.13     3.23     149     7.44      2.82
Agricultural development                                                        59    8.75     1.90     160     8.61      2.23
Education                                                                       63    8.30     2.67     162     8.49      2.28
Debt relief and access to finance                                               57    8.65     2.45     159     8.66      2.51
*Significantly different between genders




                                                           152
The World Bank Group                                      Sudan                                       Country Opinion Survey 2015




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Sudan? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                     Females                   Males
                                                                                 N    Mean     SD        N     Mean       SD
Anti-corruption*                                                                25     5.80    3.11     86      4.26      2.90
Information and communications technology*                                      30     7.23    2.81     98      4.76      2.95
Transport*                                                                      25     6.80    3.00     102     4.33      2.71
Crime and violence*                                                             20     6.05    2.42     89      3.56      2.64
Regional conflict and tensions*                                                 24     6.79    2.90     101     4.71      3.14
Law and justice*                                                                21     5.10    3.05     89      3.70      2.57
Urban development*                                                              33     6.76    2.87     107     5.27      3.06
Environmental sustainability*                                                   37     7.27    2.76     115     5.63      2.87
Regulatory framework*                                                           28     6.79    2.83     96      5.30      2.96
Communicable/non-communicable diseases*                                         29     6.41    3.02     103     5.06      2.76
Poverty reduction*                                                              43     7.93    2.09     132     6.13      2.89
Gender equity                                                                   30     6.80    2.20     109     5.90      2.89
Private sector development*                                                     31     7.10    2.75     101     4.84      2.76
Foreign direct investment                                                       31     5.84    3.35     100     4.95      3.19
Local governance and institutions*                                              29     6.03    2.61     93      4.51      2.56
Water and sanitation*                                                           42     7.10    2.36     122     5.80      2.72
Trade and exports*                                                              30     6.03    2.61     99      4.73      2.90
Economic growth*                                                                38     6.97    2.42     117     5.63      2.69
Energy*                                                                         24     6.50    2.87     95      4.43      2.59
Disaster management                                                             28     5.93    2.94     102     5.57      2.94
Public sector governance/reform                                                 32     6.25    2.45     96      5.40      2.97
Job creation/employment*                                                        33     5.70    2.59     119     4.31      2.99
Social cohesion*                                                                32     5.41    2.72     104     3.77      2.72
Financial markets*                                                              21     6.29    2.80     92      4.48      2.80
Equality of opportunity                                                         32     5.84    2.84     111     5.22      3.22
Health                                                                          40     6.58    2.59     125     5.81      2.84
Rural development*                                                              43     7.42    2.45     133     6.17      2.90
Global/regional integration*                                                    30     6.83    2.56     102     4.80      2.84
Food security*                                                                  37     6.95    2.68     117     5.44      2.85
Education                                                                       42     6.62    2.72     127     5.70      2.84
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                           40     6.20    2.81     118     5.40      3.04
Social protection*                                                              26     6.15    3.07     91      3.76      2.40
Climate change                                                                  29     6.28    2.69     110     5.20      2.92
Agricultural development*                                                       32     7.47    2.53     123     5.24      2.85
Natural resource management*                                                    25     6.84    3.30     101     4.21      2.74
Debt relief and access to finance*                                              36     6.06    3.51     110     4.73      3.15
*Significantly different between genders




                                                           153
The World Bank Group                                                Sudan                                             Country Opinion Survey 2015




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Sudan?*
(Select only ONE response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                  Female                           Male
 At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                                    30.0%                           49.7%
 In the country                                                                              21.4%                           10.6%
 Don't know                                                                                  48.6%                           39.7%
*Significantly different between genders


                                                                                                     Females                    Males
                                                                                               N      Mean     SD        N      Mean      SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in
                                                                                              55      7.07     2.36     163     6.36      2.99
Sudan?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)


                                                                                                     Females                    Males
                                                                                               N      Mean     SD        N      Mean      SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group help to build/strengthen existing country
                                                                                              41      7.29     2.57     143     6.62      3.04
systems in Sudan?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Sudan?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                     Females                    Males
                                                                                               N      Mean     SD        N      Mean      SD
The World Bank Group’s program of managing trust funds and partnerships meets the
                                                                                              44      5.45     3.05     139     4.56      2.94
needs of Sudan
The World Bank Group meets Sudan’s needs for knowledge services                               47      6.04     2.98     130     5.34      3.04



                                                                                                     Females                    Males
                                                                                               N      Mean     SD        N      Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its work in real
                                                                                              34      8.09     1.80     131     5.63      2.79
time in Sudan?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between genders


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?
(Select only ONE response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                               Female                           Male
 Weekly                                                                                   4.4%                            5.9%
 Monthly                                                                                  14.7%                           11.2%
 A few times a year                                                                       33.8%                           26.1%
 Rarely                                                                                   23.5%                           24.5%
 Never                                                                                    23.5%                           32.4%




                                                                    154
The World Bank Group                                                 Sudan                                             Country Opinion Survey 2015




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Sudan, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                                                                    Females                     Males
                                                                                              N      Mean       SD        N     Mean       SD
Are timely*                                                                                   45      7.07      2.39     132     5.58      2.74
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation*                      44      7.23      2.48     139     6.02      2.70
Lead to practical solutions*                                                                  50      7.54      1.98     150     6.14      2.51
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)*                                         51      7.73      2.33     143     6.59      2.64
Are source of relevant information on global good practices*                                  48      8.19      2.08     143     7.27      2.41
Are adequately disseminated*                                                                  52      6.85      2.55     143     5.93      2.67
Are translated enough into local language*                                                    48      7.29      2.63     144     5.81      2.80
Are adaptable to Sudan’s specific development challenges and country circumstances*           48      8.31      2.03     140     6.92      2.69
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between genders


                                                                                                    Females                     Males
                                                                                              N      Mean       SD        N     Mean       SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the WBG's knowledge work and
                                                                                              60      8.17      2.15     165     8.07      2.24
activities make to development results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge
                                                                                              55      8.02      2.19     154     7.43      2.44
work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)



E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                    Females                     Males
                                                                                              N      Mean       SD        N     Mean       SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly*                                                35      6.71      2.88     138     4.67      3.03
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
                                                                                              54      8.50      1.61     161     7.50      2.42
supports*
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion*                    50      7.28      2.41     145     6.02      2.62
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable                         34      6.53      2.73     129     6.44      2.51
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Sudan*                                        40      6.00      2.86     133     4.70      2.66
Working with the World Bank Group increases Sudan’s institutional capacity*                   58      8.76      1.74     160     7.96      2.35
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes appropriate use of
                                                                                              46      8.26      2.44     128     7.45      2.56
them
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support*                               53      8.25      1.85     150     7.21      2.47
*Significantly different between genders


                                                                                                    Females                     Males
                                                                                              N      Mean       SD        N     Mean       SD
To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find solutions that
                                                                                              50      7.44      2.56     131     6.63      2.64
promote private public partnerships in Sudan?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                     155
The World Bank Group                                               Sudan                                          Country Opinion Survey 2015




E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Sudan? (Select only ONE response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                            Female                          Male
 The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Sudan                                     1.4%                           4.8%
 The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Sudan                               17.1%                          16.0%
 The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                                32.9%                          37.2%
 Don't know                                                                            48.6%                          42.0%

Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in Sudan? (Select only ONE response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                            Female                          Male
 The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses on the
                                                                                       46.4%                          38.1%
 most important development challenges in Sudan
 The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in Sudan, and it
                                                                                       18.8%                          25.9%
 is involved in too many areas of development
 Don’t know                                                                            34.8%                          36.0%

                                                                                                Females                    Males
                                                                                           N     Mean      SD        N     Mean       SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group is adequately staffed in Sudan?*       36        6.53   2.56     123      4.66     2.66
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between genders

F. The Multi Partner/Donor Trust Fund in Sudan as Managed by the World Bank
Which of the following best describe what you consider the greatest STRENGTHS of the Multi Donor Trust Fund in Sudan?
(Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                                 Female                          Male
 The donors worked collaboratively with the government                                 20.0%                          24.5%
 The donors were well coordinated                                                      17.1%                          15.4%
 There was an adequate level of communication and sharing of
                                                                                       25.7%                          30.3%
 results amongst all players
 The Trust Fund's development priorities were aligned with country
                                                                                       14.3%                          21.3%
 development priorities
 The level of resources distributed was sufficient                                     8.6%                           5.3%
 The Trust Fund was adequately staffed                                                 4.3%                           4.8%
 The Trust Fund adequately took into consideration voices from
                                                                                       2.9%                           11.2%
 outside of government*
 Don’t know                                                                            50.0%                          39.4%
 Other                                                                                 0.0%                           2.7%
*Significantly different between genders

Which of the following best describe what you consider the greatest WEAKNESSES of the Multi Donor Trust Fund in Sudan?
(Choose no more than TWO) *Significantly different between genders
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                                 Female                          Male
 The Trust Fund was not adequately staffed                                             2.9%                           7.9%
 The level of resources distributed was too low                                        24.3%                          26.7%
 There was an inadequate level of communication and sharing of
                                                                                       4.3%                           3.1%
 results amongst all players
 The Trust Fund's development priorities were not aligned with
                                                                                       10.0%                          7.9%
 country development priorities
 The donors were not well coordinated                                                  8.6%                           6.8%
 The donors did not work collaboratively with the government                           10.0%                          4.7%
 The Trust Fund did not adequately take into consideration voices
                                                                                       2.9%                           12.6%
 from outside of government*
 Don’t know                                                                            54.3%                          41.9%
 Other                                                                                 0.0%                           3.1%



                                                                    156
The World Bank Group                                         Sudan                                   Country Opinion Survey 2015




G. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Sudan
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Sudan?
(Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                        Female                      Male
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on
                                                                              22.9%                      29.8%
 Sudan’s economy
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                       2.9%                       8.0%
 Offer more innovative financial (non-lending) products                       14.3%                      7.4%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets             2.9%                       8.5%
 Reach out more to groups outside of Government                               24.3%                      18.1%
 Mobilize third party financial resources                                     24.3%                      17.0%
 Work faster                                                                  17.1%                      13.3%
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Sudan’s specific
                                                                              7.1%                       9.0%
 challenges
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                     5.7%                       8.0%
 Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                         17.1%                      12.2%
 Increase the level of capacity development in the country                    35.7%                      31.4%
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing*               14.3%                      27.7%
 Increase availability of Fee-Based services                                  2.9%                       1.6%
 Increase the level of World Bank Group staffing in Sudan’s office            0.0%                       2.7%
 Other                                                                        2.9%                       2.7%
*Significantly different between genders

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Sudan, and taking into account its limited
level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in Sudan?
(Select only ONE response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                   Female                      Male
 Leveraging more resources from trust funds                                   59.7%                      64.4%
 Knowledge products                                                           11.9%                      13.9%
 Convening services                                                           4.5%                       4.4%
 None of the above                                                            4.5%                       3.3%
 The combination is appropriate for Sudan                                     4.5%                       2.8%
 Don't know                                                                   14.9%                      11.1%



H. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Sudan?
(Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                        Female                     Male
 Periodicals                                                                  15.2%                     24.7%
 International newspapers*                                                    0.0%                      7.9%
 Local radio*                                                                 6.1%                      17.9%
 International radio                                                          3.0%                      5.3%
 Local television                                                             10.6%                     14.7%
 International television                                                     10.6%                     14.7%
 Local newspapers                                                             37.9%                     25.8%
 Internet                                                                     69.7%                     61.1%
 Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)*                    27.3%                     15.8%
 Other*                                                                       9.1%                      2.6%
*Significantly different between genders




                                                             157
The World Bank Group                                       Sudan                                   Country Opinion Survey 2015




H. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                       Female                    Male
 Direct contact with World Bank Group                                        39.1%                    29.6%
 e-Newsletters                                                               29.0%                    30.2%
 World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/ conferences                          29.0%                    31.7%
 World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials                 27.5%                    34.9%
 World Bank Group’s website                                                  37.7%                    38.6%
 Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                    10.1%                    10.6%
 Mobile phones                                                               11.6%                    6.9%
 The World Bank’s Information Center for Development located at
                                                                              4.3%                     5.8%
 the University of Khartoum
 Other                                                                        0.0%                     0.5%

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any
information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                  Female                    Male
 Yes                                                                         21.9%                    20.9%
 No                                                                          78.1%                    79.1%

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                  Female                    Male
 Yes                                                                         25.0%                    15.2%
 No                                                                          75.0%                    84.8%

Were you able to obtain this information?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                  Female                    Male
 Yes                                                                         60.0%                    56.7%
 No                                                                          40.0%                    43.3%

Do you have access to the Internet?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                  Female                    Male
 Yes                                                                         88.9%                    88.2%
 No                                                                          11.1%                    11.8%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*
 Percentage of Respondents                                                  Female                    Male
 Yes                                                                         47.0%                    63.1%
 No                                                                          53.0%                    36.9%
*Significantly different between genders

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                  Female                    Male
 High speed/WiFi                                                             61.0%                    56.3%
 Dial-up                                                                     39.0%                    43.7%




                                                           158
The World Bank Group                                                Sudan                                          Country Opinion Survey 2015




H. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                  Females                   Males
                                                                                            N      Mean     SD        N     Mean       SD
I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.                                    40     7.48     2.62     123     7.44      2.46
I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.                           37     7.84     2.44     115     7.64      1.98
The World Bank Group’s social media channels are valuable sources of information about
                                                                                            31     7.97     2.21     105     6.77      2.44
the institution*
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it*                    46     7.89     2.74     133     6.77      2.93
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and inquiries*                38     7.89     2.36     105     6.58      2.49
*Significantly different between genders


I. Background Information
Which one of the following best describes your level of interaction with the World Bank Group in your country? (Select only
ONE response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                               Female                        Male
 I currently collaborate with the World Bank Group                                        11.4%                        16.4%
 I have previously collaborated with the World Bank Group                                 27.1%                        21.2%
 Both of the above (I currently collaborate and previously have
                                                                                         22.9%                         15.9%
 collaborated with the World Bank Group)
 I have never collaborated with the World Bank Group                                     38.6%                         46.6%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                                    Female                        Male
 Observer                                                                                 22.1%                        24.0%
 Use World Bank Group reports/data*                                                       29.4%                        15.3%
 Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                           39.7%                        32.8%
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                            58.8%                        60.1%
 Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research,
                                                                                         14.7%                         26.8%
 etc.*
*Significantly different between genders




                                                                    159
The World Bank Group                                                   Sudan                                        Country Opinion Survey 2015




Appendix F: Responses to Questions across Country Surveys
Comparing responses across country surveys reflect changes in attitudes over time, but also changes in
respondent samples and changes to the survey instrument itself. To reduce the influence of the latter
factor, only those questions with similar response scales/options were analyzed. Although the FY12
and FY14 samples were fairly similar, the unique samples from both years made it impractical to
weight the samples to have equivalent stakeholder groups.

FY12 N=152            FY15 N=273

Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                                            FY12                FY15
                                                                                                      N     Mean   SD      N    Mean     SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Sudan?*                                 149   6.67   2.38   268    5.99   2.95
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between country surveys


                                                                                                            FY12                FY15
                                                                                                      N     Mean   SD      N    Mean     SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Sudan.                127   6.13   2.21   221    6.03   2.92
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


                                                                                                            FY12                FY15
                                                                                                      N     Mean   SD      N    Mean     SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared to help Sudan solve its
                                                                                                      122   7.49   1.96   219    7.12   2.86
most complicated development challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Sudan?
                                                                                                            FY12                FY15
                                                                                                      N     Mean   SD      N    Mean     SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development in Sudan                  131   5.93   2.69   221    5.80   2.97

The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities for Sudan*     127   5.51   2.58   215    6.14   2.96

The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Sudan*                   125   5.27   2.67   211    6.18   2.80

The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Sudan with respect                            112   7.72   2.36   205    7.94   2.64
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between country surveys




                                                                       160
The World Bank Group                                                  Sudan                                             Country Opinion Survey 2015




Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Sudan, in terms of each of the following?
                                                                                                                FY12                FY15
                                                                                                            N   Mean   SD      N    Mean     SD
Responsiveness to needs                                                                                 122     5.20   2.46   210    5.70   2.80
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*                                      114     5.04   2.35   195    5.79   2.63
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                                               119     4.97   2.41   191    5.68   2.85
Being inclusive*                                                                                        120     4.74   2.69   186    5.78   2.59
Openness (sharing data and other information)                                                           122     6.48   2.87   192    6.22   2.70
Staff accessibility                                                                                     119     6.05   2.72   202    6.26   2.93
Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                                        106     7.19   2.58   184    7.84   2.47
Collaboration with civil society                                                                        109     5.85   2.78   205    6.23   2.87
Collaboration with the Government*                                                                      120     6.58   2.71   210    7.18   2.54
Collaboration with other donors and development partners                                                103     7.02   2.49   174    7.16   2.32
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between country surveys




                                                                       161
The World Bank Group                                                  Sudan                                              Country Opinion Survey 2015




World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Sudan? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

                                                                                                                 FY12                FY15
                                                                                                            N    Mean   SD      N    Mean     SD
Information and communications technology                                                                   83   4.58   2.77   132    5.23   3.10
Regional conflict and tensions*                                                                             79   4.01   2.58   128    5.03   3.20
Environmental sustainability*                                                                               96   5.23   2.85   155    6.05   2.90
Poverty reduction*                                                                                      106      5.17   2.80   180    6.52   2.82
Gender equity*                                                                                              90   5.02   2.69   143    5.99   2.81
Private sector development*                                                                                 87   4.10   2.65   137    5.34   2.91
Foreign direct investment*                                                                                  82   3.40   2.43   136    5.15   3.25
Local governance and institutions*                                                                          82   4.02   2.65   127    4.84   2.67
Water and sanitation*                                                                                       92   4.49   2.70   168    6.07   2.73
Trade and exports*                                                                                          78   3.87   2.40   133    4.95   2.87
Economic growth*                                                                                            95   4.56   2.76   158    5.94   2.67
Energy                                                                                                      82   4.30   2.49   122    4.76   2.79
Disaster management*                                                                                        82   4.56   2.56   134    5.57   2.96
Job creation/employment                                                                                     95   3.85   2.59   155    4.57   2.96
Social cohesion                                                                                             83   3.65   2.65   140    4.11   2.79
Financial markets                                                                                           77   4.65   2.80   117    4.72   2.89
Health                                                                                                  111      5.73   2.65   169    5.99   2.77
Rural development*                                                                                      104      5.35   2.72   181    6.41   2.86
Food security                                                                                               97   5.07   2.78   158    5.74   2.90
Education                                                                                               106      5.44   2.78   174    5.90   2.81
Security/stabilization/reconstruction*                                                                      91   4.09   2.62   163    5.55   3.00
Social protection*                                                                                          79   3.38   2.35   121    4.21   2.74
Agricultural development                                                                                103      5.20   2.73   160    5.71   2.92
Natural resource management*                                                                                81   3.69   2.50   131    4.66   3.02
*Significantly different between country surveys


                                                                                                                 FY12                FY15
                                                                                                            N    Mean   SD      N    Mean     SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in Sudan?*          131      5.45   2.22   225    6.52   2.84
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between country surveys

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Sudan?
                                                                                                                 FY12                FY15
                                                                                                            N    Mean   SD      N    Mean     SD
The World Bank Group’s program of managing trust funds and partnerships meets the needs of
                                                                                                        132      3.85   2.27   187    4.70   3.00
Sudan*
The World Bank Group meets Sudan’s needs for knowledge services                                         136      5.00   2.48   181    5.51   3.03
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between country surveys




                                                                       162
The World Bank Group                                                  Sudan                                              Country Opinion Survey 2015




The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

In Sudan, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                                                                                 FY12                FY15
                                                                                                            N    Mean   SD      N    Mean     SD
Are timely*                                                                                             111      6.86   2.40   182    5.98   2.72
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation                                 111      6.44   2.25   188    6.31   2.68
Lead to practical solutions*                                                                            119      7.28   2.05   205    6.49   2.48
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                                    122      6.81   2.58   197    6.87   2.61
Are source of relevant information on global good practices                                             124      7.81   2.04   195    7.49   2.35
Are adequately disseminated                                                                             119      6.19   2.56   199    6.14   2.66
Are translated enough into local language*                                                              112      6.94   2.38   196    6.16   2.83
Are adaptable to Sudan’s specific development challenges and country circumstances*                     119      6.24   2.31   192    7.24   2.62
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between country surveys


                                                                                                                 FY12                FY15
                                                                                                            N    Mean   SD      N    Mean     SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and
                                                                                                        120      7.03   2.10   230    8.07   2.23
activities make to development results in your country?*
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge work and
                                                                                                        128      7.84   1.77   215    7.58   2.38
activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
*Significantly different between country surveys


Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                                                                                 FY12                FY15
                                                                                                            N    Mean   SD      N    Mean     SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly*                                                          105      4.15   2.74   177    5.06   3.10
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it supports*          123      7.11   2.47   219    7.77   2.28
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion*                              120      5.27   2.55   199    6.36   2.61
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable                                   102      6.23   2.36   166    6.46   2.53
Working with the World Bank Group increases Sudan’s institutional capacity*                             126      7.45   2.54   222    8.19   2.22
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes appropriate use of them*                     97   6.82   2.60   178    7.63   2.55
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support*                                         111      6.53   2.63   207    7.48   2.36
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between country surveys


                                                                                                                 FY12                FY15
                                                                                                            N    Mean   SD      N    Mean     SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group is adequately staffed in Sudan?*                     107      6.35   2.20   164    5.17   2.77
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between country surveys




                                                                       163
The World Bank Group                                                Sudan                                 Country Opinion Survey 2015




Communication and Information Sharing

Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any
information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                   FY12          FY15
Yes                                                                         11.5%         21.0%
No                                                                          88.5%         79.0%
*Significantly different between country surveys

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?

Percentage of Respondents                                                     FY12         FY15
Yes                                                                         20.3%         17.8%
No                                                                          79.7%         82.2%

Were you able to obtain this information?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                   FY12          FY15
Yes                                                                         90.0%         57.8%
No                                                                          10.0%         42.2%
*Significantly different between country surveys

Do you have access to the Internet?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                   FY12          FY15
Yes                                                                         94.8%         88.7%
No                                                                          5.2%          11.3%
*Significantly different between country surveys

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?

Percentage of Respondents                                                   FY12          FY15
Yes                                                                         65.4%         58.7%
No                                                                          34.6%         41.3%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                  FY12                FY15
                                                                                            N     Mean   SD      N    Mean     SD
I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.                                    89    7.29   2.24   167    7.47   2.47
I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.                           91    7.74   2.38   156    7.70   2.09
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it                    112    7.12   2.59   184    7.09   2.91
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and inquiries                 85    7.25   2.60   148    6.98   2.50




                                                                    164
         The World Bank Group                                                                                                    Sudan                                                                                Country Opinion Survey 2015



         Appendix G: Responses to Key Questions by Respondents’ Specializations/Sectors
         C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

         In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Sudan?
         (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important) *Significantly different between sectors


                                                                    Environment                    Health,       Macroeconomics                                  Urban, rural,                                                    Generalist
                                                Social protection    and natural                nutrition, and      and fiscal     Finance and   Transport and    and social                                                    (specialized in
                                     Water          and labor         resources    Education     population       management         markets          ICT        development     Governance        Jobs          Agriculture   multiple sectors)        Other
                                 N      Mean       N      Mean       N     Mean    N     Mean    N      Mean       N     Mean      N      Mean    N      Mean     N      Mean    N     Mean    N      Mean       N      Mean      N      Mean      N        Mean
Crime and violence*              5       8.00      7      5.57       5     10.00   15    3.67    26      6.23      13     7.69     22     8.50    19     6.16     27     6.93    31     6.26   7          9.43   11     7.55     40       8.00     26       8.42
Financial markets                5      10.00      7      9.71       5      7.00   15    8.60    26      7.62      12     8.25     18     7.89    19     5.89     22     7.23    31     7.48   7          9.57   11     8.18     39       8.23     29       7.90
Transport                        5      10.00      7      9.57       5     10.00   15    9.20    32      9.31      13     6.62     22     7.64    19     7.16     27     8.44    31     7.45   7          9.43   11     6.82     36       9.39     31       7.39
Anti-corruption                  5       8.00      7      1.86       5      7.00   15    2.47    26      3.88      13     5.62     21     5.71    19     4.74     27     5.07    31     4.90   7          8.71   11     5.73     36       4.86     29       5.41
Regional conflict and tension*   5       9.00      7      5.71       5      7.00   15    6.73    26      5.46      13     7.54     23     7.22    19     4.63     22     6.50    31     5.68   7          9.14   11     6.18     39       5.92     31       6.94
Law and justice                  5       9.00      7      9.57       5      8.00   14    6.29    26      8.38      13     8.00     22     7.86    19     8.42     27     8.26    31     7.68   7          9.43   11     7.36     35       8.34     24       8.29
Urban development*               5      10.00      7      9.57       5     10.00   14    6.93    26      8.77      13     7.92     23     8.43    19     8.68     27     8.30    31     7.87   7          9.43   11     7.09     35       9.00     31       7.68
Environmental sustainability*    5      10.00      7      9.43       5     10.00   15    7.13    26      7.81      13     7.46     23     7.26    19     5.68     27     6.59    31     6.55   7          9.57   11     7.18     40       8.40     31       7.90
Regulatory framework             5       9.00      7      9.00       5     10.00   15    7.67    21      7.95      13     5.69     23     7.65    19     5.89     27     7.48    30     6.47   7          8.43   11     7.36     40       7.50     29       5.97
Information and
                                 5       9.00      7      9.57       5     10.00   15    8.20    26      9.04      13     7.85     23     9.17    19     9.53     27     8.67    31     8.58   7          9.57   11     8.55     36       9.69     29       9.00
communications technology
Poverty reduction*               5       9.00      7      6.00       5     10.00   15    5.60    26      8.08      13     8.62     23     6.57    19     9.74     27     6.56    31     7.58   7          8.57   11     6.55     36       8.14     29       7.86
Gender equity                    5      10.00      7      6.43       5     10.00   15    9.33    32      8.25      13     9.08     23     9.39    19     8.16     27     7.96    31     8.58   7          9.71   11     9.00     38       9.29     31       8.87
Private sector development*      5       9.00      7      6.43       5     10.00   15    8.80    26      6.27      13     8.15     23     8.96    19     8.16     27     8.44    31     8.16   7          9.29   11     7.45     40       7.98     31       7.42
Foreign direct investment*       5       9.00      7      7.71       5     10.00   14    7.71    32      8.84      13     7.54     23     8.35    19     9.00     27     9.00    31     8.65   7          9.29   11     7.18     35       8.97     31       7.58
Local governance and
                                 5      10.00      7      10.00      5     10.00   15    9.27    26      6.85      13     8.00     23     7.57    19     8.00     27     8.07    31     7.61   7          9.71   11     8.27     38       8.21     29       6.45
institutions*
Water and sanitation*            5       9.00      7      6.00       5     10.00   15    5.60    26      8.08      13     8.62     23     6.57    19     9.74     27     6.56    31     7.58   7          8.57   11     6.55     36       8.14     29       7.86
Trade and exports                5      10.00      7      6.43       5     10.00   15    9.33    32      8.25      13     9.08     23     9.39    19     8.16     27     7.96    31     8.58   7          9.71   11     9.00     38       9.29     31       8.87
Economic growth*                 5       9.00      7      6.43       5     10.00   15    8.80    26      6.27      13     8.15     23     8.96    19     8.16     27     8.44    31     8.16   7          9.29   11     7.45     40       7.98     31       7.42
Energy                           5       9.00      7      7.71       5     10.00   14    7.71    32      8.84      13     7.54     23     8.35    19     9.00     27     9.00    31     8.65   7          9.29   11     7.18     35       8.97     31       7.58
Disaster management              5      10.00      7      10.00      5     10.00   15    9.27    26      6.85      13     8.00     23     7.57    19     8.00     27     8.07    31     7.61   7          9.71   11     8.27     38       8.21     29       6.45
Public sector
                                 5      10.00      7      10.00      5     10.00   15    9.67    26      8.23      13     9.46     23     9.04    19     9.26     27     8.70    31     7.84   7          9.71   11     8.36     36       8.89     31       8.68
governance/reform*
Job creation/employment*         5       9.00      7      9.71       5     10.00   15    9.60    32      9.34      13     8.23     23     8.96    19     8.68     27     8.67    31     8.32   7          9.29   11     7.18     40       9.63     31       8.29
Social cohesion                  5       8.00      7      2.86       5      7.00   15    7.67    26      7.23      13     6.15     23     6.83    19     7.63     27     7.59    31     7.23   7          9.29   11     6.64     36       6.92     29       7.24
Communicable/non-
                                 5      10.00      7      5.86       5     10.00   15    6.20    26      9.15      13     9.00     23     8.35    19     9.05     27     7.37    31     8.16   7          9.71   11     8.91     40       8.95     31       8.71
communicable diseases*
Equality of opportunity*         5      10.00      7      9.43       5     10.00   15    8.87    32      9.22      13     8.85     23     8.43    19     6.11     27     8.15    31     8.68   7          9.14   11     7.27     40       9.18     29       8.17
Health                           5       9.00      7      7.43       5      7.00   15    6.87    26      7.62      8      9.13     23     8.13    19     7.63     27     6.37    31     8.58   7          9.57   10     8.80     40       8.38     23       7.91
Rural development*               5      10.00      7      4.00       5     10.00   15    5.33    26      8.04      13     9.38     23     8.13    19     9.00     22     6.95    31     7.10   7          9.14   11     6.55     39       8.38     29       8.59
Global/regional integration      5      10.00      7      9.29       5     10.00   15    8.20    32      8.38      13     7.77     23     8.13    19     9.05     27     8.85    31     9.10   7          9.43   11     7.91     40       8.15     29       8.48
Food security*                   5      10.00      7      9.29       5     10.00   15    9.60    32     10.00      13     8.62     23     9.13    19     9.53     27     8.85    31     8.81   7          9.71   11     9.55     40       9.83     31       9.26
Natural resource management      5      10.00      7      4.43       5      9.00   15    8.80    26      7.46      13     9.08     23     7.87    19     8.47     27     7.81    31     7.45   7          9.14   11     6.73     36       7.97     29       7.52
Security/stabilization/
                                 5      10.00      7      9.14       5     10.00   15    7.13    26      9.15      13     7.77     23     8.61    19     9.47     27     8.63    31     7.55   7          9.57   11     8.09     36       8.81     29       8.41
reconstruction*
Social protection                5      10.00      7      9.29       5     10.00   15    8.13    32      9.47      13     9.15     23     8.35    19     8.95     27     9.19    31     7.87   7          9.57   11     7.91     40       8.75     29       8.34
Climate change*                  5      10.00      7      9.29       5      8.00   15    4.73    26      8.19      13     6.92     23     8.22    19     6.74     22     6.77    31     7.55   7          9.57   11     7.73     39       7.51     29       7.93
Agricultural development*        5      10.00      7      5.00       5     10.00   15    7.60    32      8.59      13     8.08     23     8.26    19     8.68     27     8.44    31     7.74   6          9.67   6      6.67     40       8.78     31       8.10
Education*                       5       9.00      7      9.43       5     10.00   15    9.53    32      9.69      13     8.54     23     9.00    19     9.74     27     8.96    31     8.71   7          9.71   11     9.27     40       9.88     31       8.65
Debt relief and access to
                                 5      10.00      7      6.71       5     10.00   15    7.67    26      7.85      13     7.38     23     7.70    19     8.21     27     6.96    31     7.42   7          9.71   11     8.64     40       9.13     31       8.35
finance*

                                                                                                                                  165
         The World Bank Group                                                                                                    Sudan                                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2015


         C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)

         How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Sudan?
         (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between sectors


                                                                    Environment                    Health,       Macroeconomics                                  Urban, rural,                                                    Generalist
                                                Social protection    and natural                nutrition, and      and fiscal     Finance and   Transport and    and social                                                    (specialized in
                                     Water          and labor         resources    Education     population       management         markets          ICT        development     Governance        Jobs          Agriculture   multiple sectors)        Other
                                 N      Mean       N      Mean       N     Mean    N     Mean    N      Mean       N     Mean      N      Mean    N      Mean     N      Mean    N     Mean    N      Mean       N      Mean      N      Mean      N        Mean
Anti-corruption                  1       2.00      6      3.17      11      3.64   14    4.43     4      6.00      15     5.20     2      1.00    5      4.20     4      3.00                  1          2.00   5      6.20     22       5.64     23       4.22
Information and
                                 2       4.00      6      6.67      12      5.17   13    3.92     4      5.25      14     5.79     3      2.33    7      2.43     3      4.00                  2          3.00   9      5.44     27       5.85     28       6.21
communications technology
Transport                        2       2.50      6      2.67      10      3.70   11    4.82     4      5.50      16     5.88     3      2.00    5      3.00     4      3.75                  3          4.33   11     4.91     23       4.57     30       5.83
Crime and violence               2       3.50      7      2.57       9      4.22   10    4.90     1      5.00      16     3.06     2      1.50    7      6.14     4      3.00                  1          5.00   5      2.00     21       4.05     24       4.04
Regional conflict and tensions   1       3.00      7      2.57      11      4.73   13    5.46     1      5.00      16     3.75     3      1.67    9      5.78     7      7.00                  2          3.00   9      6.11     20       5.10     26       5.58
Law and justice                  1       3.00      6      3.00       9      4.00   14    4.07     2      4.00      15     3.40     3      1.67    6      1.67     4      2.50                  1          3.00   6      3.83     18       4.33     24       4.79
Urban development                3       6.33      6      5.50      11      6.27   13    4.85     4      6.00      14     5.36     4      3.75    7      6.14     6      6.67                  2          2.50   14     4.86     22       5.09     33       6.21
Environmental sustainability     3       7.00      6      6.17      15      6.67   17    6.00     3      5.67      14     5.21     4      3.50    5      2.80     8      6.63                  1          6.00   15     7.27     26       5.81     36       6.31
Regulatory framework             1       4.00      4      4.00      12      6.25   14    5.64     4      5.75      17     5.06     5      3.40    5      3.00     7      5.57                  1          2.00   10     7.70     23       5.52     24       6.54
Communicable/non-
                                 2       4.50      4      4.00      12      5.08   13    5.85    10      6.70      15     6.00     4      3.00    5      2.80     4      4.00                  2          4.00   7      5.14     23       4.78     30       6.10
communicable diseases
Poverty reduction*               3       7.67      6      5.00      15      6.53   17    5.71     6      7.67      16     4.81     5      3.20    8      6.50     7      7.14                  2          4.50   16     7.06     35       7.17     40       6.95
Gender equity                    3       5.33      6      5.67      12      6.67   14    6.57     5      7.00      16     4.75     5      3.80    6      4.00     8      5.63                  1          8.00   12     7.50     24       6.63     28       5.64
Private sector development       2       1.50      6      5.00       9      3.78   10    5.80     2      4.50      17     5.82     5      3.00    4      4.00     6      6.83                  2          2.50   10     5.10     27       5.85     35       5.83
Foreign direct investment*       1       1.00      6      5.00       9      3.44   10    5.30     2      5.00      19     5.21     5      2.80    7      5.00     6      6.00                  2          3.50   5      3.60     30       7.10     30       3.87
Local governance and
                                 2       3.50      6      4.00       9      5.56   11    5.45     4      6.75      18     3.83     5      2.00    5      2.60     5      4.20                  1          2.00   5      6.00     19       5.42     34       5.12
institutions
Water and sanitation*            3       6.33      6      5.67      10      5.70   17    6.47     8      7.13      18     4.33     5      3.00    6      4.17     8      6.25                  3          5.67   12     6.58     30       7.07     40       6.50
Trade and exports                1       3.00      6      5.33       9      4.78   11    5.09     2      7.50      15     4.27     5      1.80    7      4.86     6      6.33                  2          4.50   5      6.00     27       5.81     33       4.24
Economic growth*                 2       5.00      6      5.00      10      6.10   15    5.53     6      6.00      17     5.65     5      3.00    4      3.00     7      7.00                  2          1.50   13     6.77     31       6.10     36       6.42
Energy                           2       4.00      6      3.67      10      4.80   9     5.00     1      3.00      13     3.92     4      1.75    7      5.00     4      4.25                  2          4.00   6      4.83     23       5.43     31       5.03
Disaster management*             2       6.00      6      5.33      11      5.91   15    5.33     4      6.75      16     4.69     5      3.40    5      2.60     7      7.71                  2          4.50   10     6.70     19       4.47     28       6.43
Public sector
                                                   7      5.71      10      4.90   14    4.86     4      5.50      20     5.90     4      1.75    7      6.14     5      5.40                                    8      6.75     21       4.86     29       6.28
governance/reform
Job creation/employment          2       6.00      6      2.83      12      4.75   12    3.83     5      6.60      20     3.85     4      2.75    8      5.25     6      6.33                  2          3.50   14     4.00     28       4.89     32       4.72
Social cohesion                  1       3.00      7      3.57      10      3.80   13    3.62     4      5.50      17     3.29     5      2.20    5      2.40     5      4.20                  1          3.00   11     4.64     25       4.40     33       4.73
Financial markets                                  6      6.00       9      5.44   9     5.67     2      5.00      14     4.29     4      1.25    5      2.60     6      6.67                  2          4.50   6      3.33     25       5.12     27       4.67
Equality of opportunity          3       6.00      7      5.29      13      5.38   12    4.92     4      6.50      18     4.06     5      3.20    7      5.00     8      5.75                  1          3.00   12     5.75     25       6.56     29       4.69
Health                           2       6.50      7      6.71      12      6.67   20    6.55    10      7.10      17     5.41     4      3.00    6      4.33     6      6.33                  2          1.50   13     5.23     29       5.76     37       6.27
Rural development*               3       7.33      7      6.00      14      6.71   18    5.89     6      7.67      19     4.95     5      3.20    6      5.00     8      7.25    1     10.00   2          4.50   15     7.20     30       6.23     43       7.09
Global/regional integration      3       6.33      6      6.00      11      6.09   14    5.79     5      7.40      18     4.67     3      2.00    5      2.60     4      5.00                  1          2.00   9      7.22     23       4.70     32       5.13
Food security*                   3       6.00      6      3.83      15      6.07   12    4.67     5      6.40      17     5.00     5      2.40    5      2.80     8      7.50                  1          4.00   15     7.07     27       6.11     35       6.00
Education                        2       5.50      7      5.14      14      5.29   19    6.68     5      6.80      18     5.83     5      2.60    7      4.57     6      6.83                  2          2.50   16     5.38     32       6.50     37       5.95
Security/stabilization/
                                 3       5.00      7      5.43      12      5.08   15    5.93     7      5.57      15     4.67     5      3.60    7      5.14     8      6.00    1     10.00   1          4.00   12     5.25     30       6.43     36       5.28
reconstruction
Social protection                1       8.00      7      4.43       9      3.89   10    4.70     5      5.00      17     4.71     4      1.75    5      2.20     4      3.00                                    7      2.71     21       4.48     28       4.29
Climate change*                  3       6.33      6      5.67      15      6.13   12    4.50     4      8.00      18     5.00     4      2.25    5      3.00     7      7.29                                    13     6.38     20       4.25     31       5.39
Agricultural development         3       7.33      7      3.86      11      6.36   13    5.08     4      6.50      18     5.44     5      3.80    10     6.30     6      7.17                  2          1.50   16     6.31     29       6.07     32       5.28
Natural resource management      3       7.00      7      3.43       9      5.56   10    4.10     4      6.00      18     4.17     5      2.60    5      2.60     4      5.00                  3          6.33   5      3.80     28       5.71     26       4.08
Debt relief and access to
                                 1       3.00      6      5.50       9      5.00   15    4.80     4      5.50      20     5.10     5      1.60    9      4.78     7      5.14    1     10.00   2          2.00   8      3.38     32       5.81     32       4.78
finance




                                                                                                                                  166
The World Bank Group                                       Sudan




In instances where more than 10% of respondents come from a specific sector, additional analyses are
conducted to further examine their perceptions as opposed to those from other sectors. In the case of
Sudan, there were 16% of respondents from the Generalist sector and 11% of respondents from the
Macroeconomics and fiscal management sector.


Generalist Sector vs. Others
Generalist Sector N=42               All Others N=222

A. General Issues Facing Sudan

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Sudan. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Sudan. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Generalist Sector           All Others
Social protection                                                       2.4%                      6.8%
Food security                                                          23.8%                     24.7%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction*                                 23.8%                     42.9%
Public sector governance/reform                                         9.5%                     13.7%
Global/regional integration                                             2.4%                      4.6%
Gender equity                                                           0.0%                      0.0%
Private sector development                                              4.8%                      6.8%
Foreign direct investment                                               7.1%                      8.7%
Water and sanitation                                                    9.5%                      5.5%
Energy                                                                  2.4%                      2.3%
Regional conflict and tensions*                                        11.9%                      3.7%
Job creation/employment                                                 9.5%                      6.8%
Rural development                                                      16.7%                     16.4%
Financial markets                                                       0.0%                      2.3%
Urban development                                                       0.0%                      0.9%
Environmental sustainability                                            0.0%                      3.7%
Equality of opportunity                                                 0.0%                      7.3%
Health                                                                 11.9%                      9.6%
Education                                                              31.0%                     27.4%
Poverty reduction*                                                     38.1%                     19.6%
Transport                                                              11.9%                      6.4%
Social cohesion*                                                        7.1%                      1.4%
Climate change                                                          0.0%                      1.4%
Agricultural development                                               21.4%                     18.3%
Trade and exports                                                       2.4%                      1.8%
Crime and violence                                                      0.0%                      0.0%
Economic growth                                                        11.9%                      6.8%
Law and justice                                                         0.0%                      2.7%
Regulatory framework*                                                   2.4%                      0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                  0.0%                      0.0%
Local governance and institutions                                       0.0%                      2.7%
Natural resource management*                                           11.9%                      3.7%
Anti-corruption                                                        23.8%                     17.8%
Disaster management                                                     0.0%                      1.8%
Information and communications technology                               0.0%                      1.4%
Debt relief and access to finance*                                      2.4%                     16.4%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            167
The World Bank Group                                     Sudan




A. General Issues Facing Sudan (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Sudan? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                             Generalist Sector           All Others
Water and sanitation                                                 11.9%                      6.8%
Equality of opportunity*                                              0.0%                     13.7%
Economic growth                                                      31.0%                     28.8%
Climate change                                                        0.0%                      3.2%
Regional conflict and tensions                                        0.0%                      4.6%
Global/regional integration                                           2.4%                      4.6%
Gender equity                                                         0.0%                      1.8%
Rural development                                                    31.0%                     32.4%
Urban development                                                     2.4%                      2.7%
Regulatory framework                                                  0.0%                      0.5%
Local governance and institutions                                     2.4%                      1.8%
Social protection                                                     0.0%                      5.0%
Law and justice                                                       0.0%                      2.7%
Transport                                                             2.4%                      5.9%
Crime and violence*                                                   4.8%                      0.5%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                0.0%                      0.0%
Information and communications technology                             0.0%                      0.9%
Debt relief and access to finance                                    19.0%                     13.7%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction*                               19.0%                     35.6%
Anti-corruption                                                       9.5%                     11.0%
Private sector development*                                          14.3%                      5.5%
Foreign direct investment                                             7.1%                      3.7%
Energy*                                                               2.4%                      0.0%
Public sector governance/reform                                       4.8%                     11.9%
Social cohesion*                                                      2.4%                      0.0%
Education                                                            26.2%                     23.3%
Natural resource management                                           7.1%                      5.0%
Environmental sustainability                                          0.0%                      1.8%
Health*                                                              23.8%                      8.2%
Agricultural development                                             35.7%                     24.2%
Disaster management                                                   0.0%                      0.0%
Job creation/employment                                              23.8%                     17.8%
Financial markets                                                     2.4%                      1.4%
Trade and exports*                                                   14.3%                      4.1%
Food security*                                                        0.0%                     14.6%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                          168
The World Bank Group                                       Sudan




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Sudan, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in
Sudan? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                Generalist Sector           All Others
Social protection                                                        2.4%                      5.4%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                   33.3%                     36.9%
Crime and violence                                                       0.0%                      2.7%
Transport                                                                9.5%                      9.9%
Agricultural development                                                35.7%                     36.0%
Global/regional integration                                              2.4%                      3.6%
Gender equity                                                            0.0%                      0.0%
Public sector governance/reform*                                         0.0%                     14.0%
Health                                                                  16.7%                     15.3%
Rural development                                                       19.0%                     21.6%
Foreign direct investment                                               14.3%                      9.0%
Education                                                               23.8%                     21.2%
Energy                                                                   0.0%                      1.8%
Social cohesion                                                          0.0%                      0.0%
Job creation/employment                                                  9.5%                      9.9%
Financial markets                                                        4.8%                      2.3%
Urban development                                                        0.0%                      1.4%
Environmental sustainability                                             0.0%                      5.4%
Equality of opportunity                                                  4.8%                      3.2%
Regional conflict and tensions                                           2.4%                      2.3%
Private sector development                                              11.9%                      6.3%
Water and sanitation                                                     7.1%                      5.4%
Food security*                                                          21.4%                      8.6%
Climate change                                                           0.0%                      3.2%
Poverty reduction*                                                      33.3%                     14.9%
Trade and exports*                                                       7.1%                      0.9%
Economic growth                                                         21.4%                     13.1%
Law and justice                                                          0.0%                      2.7%
Local governance and institutions                                        0.0%                      1.4%
Regulatory framework                                                     0.0%                      0.5%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                   0.0%                      0.0%
Natural resource management*                                             0.0%                      9.0%
Information and communications technology                                0.0%                      1.8%
Anti-corruption                                                          7.1%                      5.9%
Disaster management                                                      0.0%                      0.5%
Debt relief and access to finance                                       11.9%                     20.7%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            169
The World Bank Group                                      Sudan




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of
development in Sudan? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)

                                                                                 Generalist Sector             All Others
                                                                                 N     Mean     SD       N       Mean       SD
Crime and violence*                                                              25    7.44    2.89      151     5.62       3.49
Financial markets                                                                33    8.18    2.46      163     7.21       2.96
Transport                                                                        35    8.09    2.59      179     7.79       2.80
Anti-corruption                                                                  31    7.58    3.26      173     7.86       2.86
Regional conflict and tensions                                                   29    8.03    2.81      171     7.06       3.07
Law and justice                                                                  30    6.47    3.55      160     5.73       3.26
Urban development                                                                37    7.92    2.63      179     7.63       2.62
Environmental sustainability                                                     32    8.28    2.79      180     8.03       2.45
Regulatory framework                                                             38    7.37    2.48      166     6.99       2.65
Information and communications technology                                        39    7.90    2.36      175     7.42       2.84
Poverty reduction                                                                40    9.20    2.14      191     8.75       2.09
Gender equity                                                                    30    7.37    3.38      175     6.51       3.07
Private sector development*                                                      38    8.55    2.66      175     7.19       2.92
Foreign direct investment*                                                       38    8.79    2.30      168     7.51       2.90
Local governance and institutions*                                               37    7.81    2.37      166     6.39       2.85
Water and sanitation                                                             33    8.73    2.20      192     7.91       2.47
Trade and exports*                                                               34    8.50    2.42      159     7.26       2.98
Economic growth*                                                                 37    9.24    1.67      177     8.32       2.31
Energy                                                                           36    7.78    2.72      171     7.74       2.75
Disaster management                                                              37    8.05    2.55      178     7.71       2.66
Public sector governance/reform                                                  34    8.18    2.76      180     7.46       2.92
Job creation/employment                                                          37    8.35    2.73      180     7.66       2.81
Social cohesion*                                                                 37    7.51    3.28      172     5.90       3.33
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                           35    8.34    2.56      173     6.89       2.97
Equality of opportunity                                                          37    7.62    2.71      167     7.44       2.83
Health                                                                           40    8.55    2.48      191     8.01       2.44
Rural development                                                                39    9.15    1.94      186     8.48       2.27
Global/regional integration                                                      35    8.29    2.07      168     7.77       2.49
Food security                                                                    39    9.08    1.94      178     8.38       2.32
Natural resource management                                                      36    8.00    2.67      164     7.32       3.10
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                            36    8.44    2.58      190     8.03       2.66
Social protection*                                                               38    7.66    2.99      168     6.36       2.91
Climate change                                                                   32    7.53    3.27      176     7.25       2.96
Agricultural development*                                                        38    9.32    1.74      186     8.46       2.31
Education*                                                                       40    9.20    2.20      188     8.22       2.51
Debt relief and access to finance                                                38    8.97    2.46      181     8.57       2.51
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                           170
The World Bank Group                                       Sudan




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of
development in Sudan? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

                                                                                  Generalist Sector           All Others
                                                                                 N     Mean      SD    N        Mean       SD
Anti-corruption                                                                  22     5.64    3.46   91       4.29       2.84
Information and communications technology                                        27     5.85    3.12   103      5.13       3.09
Transport                                                                        23     4.57    3.29   105      4.81       2.85
Crime and violence                                                               21     4.05    2.66   88       3.82       2.67
Regional conflict and tensions                                                   20     5.10    2.94   105      4.96       3.21
Law and justice                                                                  18     4.33    2.85   91       3.73       2.56
Urban development                                                                22     5.09    2.78   117      5.63       3.08
Environmental sustainability                                                     26     5.81    2.43   127      6.09       3.00
Regulatory framework                                                             23     5.52    3.22   104      5.67       2.92
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                           23     4.78    2.54   108      5.44       2.91
Poverty reduction                                                                35     7.17    2.88   141      6.30       2.78
Gender equity                                                                    24     6.63    2.93   116      5.84       2.73
Private sector development                                                       27     5.85    3.02   108      5.23       2.90
Foreign direct investment*                                                       30     7.10    2.31   102      4.41       3.20
Local governance and institutions                                                19     5.42    2.29   105      4.64       2.66
Water and sanitation*                                                            30     7.07    2.30   136      5.89       2.76
Trade and exports                                                                27     5.81    2.51   102      4.64       2.89
Economic growth                                                                  31     6.10    1.90   123      5.80       2.80
Energy                                                                           23     5.43    2.39   95       4.52       2.78
Disaster management                                                              19     4.47    2.37   111      5.68       2.96
Public sector governance/reform                                                  21     4.86    2.41   108      5.65       2.93
Job creation/employment                                                          28     4.89    2.83   123      4.45       2.94
Social cohesion                                                                  25     4.40    2.83   112      3.97       2.70
Financial markets                                                                25     5.12    2.32   90       4.66       3.04
Equality of opportunity*                                                         25     6.56    3.70   119      4.94       2.88
Health                                                                           29     5.76    2.52   136      5.98       2.80
Rural development                                                                30     6.23    2.97   147      6.39       2.82
Global/regional integration                                                      23     4.70    2.77   111      5.35       2.92
Food security                                                                    27     6.11    2.61   127      5.60       2.90
Education                                                                        32     6.50    2.40   138      5.68       2.86
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                            30     6.43    2.90   129      5.28       2.94
Social protection                                                                21     4.48    2.18   97       4.07       2.75
Climate change                                                                   20     4.25    1.94   118      5.47       2.96
Agricultural development                                                         29     6.07    2.74   127      5.57       2.95
Natural resource management*                                                     28     5.71    2.57   99       4.29       3.02
Debt relief and access to finance                                                32     5.81    3.25   119      4.69       3.28
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                           171
The World Bank Group                                       Sudan




Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Sector vs. Others
Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Sector N=29                      All Others N=235

A. General Issues Facing Sudan

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Sudan. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Sudan. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                                         Macroeconomics and
(Responses Combined)                                               Fiscal Management             All Others
Social protection                                                          6.9%                     6.0%
Food security                                                             24.1%                    24.6%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                     41.4%                    39.7%
Public sector governance/reform                                           10.3%                    13.4%
Global/regional integration                                                0.0%                     4.7%
Gender equity                                                              0.0%                     0.0%
Private sector development*                                               27.6%                     3.9%
Foreign direct investment                                                 17.2%                     7.3%
Water and sanitation                                                       6.9%                     6.0%
Energy                                                                     0.0%                     2.6%
Regional conflict and tensions                                             6.9%                     4.7%
Job creation/employment                                                    0.0%                     8.2%
Rural development                                                         13.8%                    16.8%
Financial markets                                                          0.0%                     2.2%
Urban development                                                          0.0%                     0.9%
Environmental sustainability                                               0.0%                     3.4%
Equality of opportunity                                                    0.0%                     6.9%
Health                                                                     0.0%                    11.2%
Education*                                                                 6.9%                    30.6%
Poverty reduction*                                                        37.9%                    20.7%
Transport                                                                  0.0%                     8.2%
Social cohesion                                                            0.0%                     2.6%
Climate change                                                             0.0%                     1.3%
Agricultural development                                                  13.8%                    19.4%
Trade and exports                                                          3.4%                     1.7%
Crime and violence                                                         0.0%                     0.0%
Economic growth*                                                          24.1%                     5.6%
Law and justice                                                            3.4%                     2.2%
Regulatory framework                                                       0.0%                     0.4%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                     0.0%                     0.0%
Local governance and institutions                                          6.9%                     1.7%
Natural resource management                                                3.4%                     5.2%
Anti-corruption                                                           10.3%                    19.8%
Disaster management                                                        0.0%                     1.7%
Information and communications technology                                  3.4%                     0.9%
Debt relief and access to finance                                         24.1%                    12.9%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            172
The World Bank Group                                     Sudan




A. General Issues Facing Sudan (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Sudan? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                                       Macroeconomics and
(Responses Combined)                                             Fiscal Management             All Others
Water and sanitation*                                                   17.2%                     6.5%
Equality of opportunity                                                  3.4%                    12.5%
Economic growth                                                         17.2%                    30.6%
Climate change                                                           0.0%                     3.0%
Regional conflict and tensions                                           6.9%                     3.4%
Global/regional integration                                              3.4%                     4.3%
Gender equity*                                                           6.9%                     0.9%
Rural development                                                       31.0%                    32.3%
Urban development                                                        0.0%                     3.0%
Regulatory framework*                                                    3.4%                     0.0%
Local governance and institutions                                        0.0%                     2.2%
Social protection*                                                      13.8%                     3.0%
Law and justice                                                          3.4%                     2.2%
Transport                                                               10.3%                     4.7%
Crime and violence                                                       3.4%                     0.9%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                   0.0%                     0.0%
Information and communications technology                                0.0%                     0.9%
Debt relief and access to finance                                       20.7%                    13.8%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                   17.2%                    34.9%
Anti-corruption*                                                         0.0%                    12.1%
Private sector development                                              13.8%                     6.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                6.9%                     3.9%
Energy                                                                   0.0%                     0.4%
Public sector governance/reform                                         20.7%                     9.5%
Social cohesion                                                          0.0%                     0.4%
Education                                                               20.7%                    24.1%
Natural resource management                                              3.4%                     5.6%
Environmental sustainability                                             0.0%                     1.7%
Health                                                                  20.7%                     9.5%
Agricultural development*                                               10.3%                    28.0%
Disaster management                                                      0.0%                     0.0%
Job creation/employment                                                 20.7%                    18.5%
Financial markets                                                        0.0%                     1.7%
Trade and exports                                                        6.9%                     5.6%
Food security                                                           17.2%                    11.6%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                          173
The World Bank Group                                       Sudan




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Sudan, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in
Sudan? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                                       Macroeconomics and
(Responses Combined)                                             Fiscal Management               All Others
Social protection                                                        6.9%                       4.7%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                   48.3%                      34.9%
Crime and violence                                                       0.0%                       2.6%
Transport                                                               17.2%                       8.9%
Agricultural development                                                37.9%                      35.7%
Global/regional integration                                              0.0%                       3.8%
Gender equity                                                            0.0%                       0.0%
Public sector governance/reform                                          3.4%                      12.8%
Health                                                                   6.9%                      16.6%
Rural development                                                       24.1%                      20.9%
Foreign direct investment                                                6.9%                      10.2%
Education*                                                               6.9%                      23.4%
Energy                                                                   0.0%                       1.7%
Social cohesion                                                          0.0%                       0.0%
Job creation/employment                                                 13.8%                       9.4%
Financial markets                                                        6.9%                       2.1%
Urban development                                                        0.0%                       1.3%
Environmental sustainability                                             0.0%                       5.1%
Equality of opportunity                                                  0.0%                       3.8%
Regional conflict and tensions                                           0.0%                       2.6%
Private sector development*                                             20.7%                       5.5%
Water and sanitation                                                     3.4%                       6.0%
Food security                                                           10.3%                      10.6%
Climate change                                                           3.4%                       2.6%
Poverty reduction                                                       17.2%                      17.9%
Trade and exports*                                                       6.9%                       1.3%
Economic growth                                                         10.3%                      14.9%
Law and justice                                                          3.4%                       2.1%
Local governance and institutions*                                       6.9%                       0.4%
Regulatory framework                                                     0.0%                       0.4%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                   0.0%                       0.0%
Natural resource management                                             10.3%                       7.2%
Information and communications technology                                3.4%                       1.3%
Anti-corruption                                                          0.0%                       6.8%
Disaster management*                                                     3.4%                       0.0%
Debt relief and access to finance                                       17.2%                      19.6%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            174
The World Bank Group                                      Sudan




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of
development in Sudan? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                Macroeconomics and
                                                                                 Fiscal Management             All Others
                                                                                 N     Mean    SD        N       Mean       SD
Crime and violence                                                               23    4.65    2.98      153     6.06       3.50
Financial markets                                                                25    6.72    2.61      171     7.47       2.93
Transport                                                                        25    8.12    2.11      189     7.80       2.84
Anti-corruption                                                                  24    7.71    2.76      180     7.83       2.94
Regional conflict and tensions                                                   24    6.08    3.61      176     7.36       2.94
Law and justice                                                                  24    5.67    3.56      166     5.87       3.28
Urban development                                                                25    7.32    2.64      191     7.72       2.61
Environmental sustainability                                                     25    7.84    2.12      187     8.10       2.55
Regulatory framework                                                             22    7.36    1.59      182     7.02       2.72
Information and communications technology                                        23    8.30    2.18      191     7.41       2.81
Poverty reduction                                                                26    8.85    1.80      205     8.83       2.14
Gender equity                                                                    22    6.55    3.20      183     6.64       3.12
Private sector development                                                       25    8.32    2.06      188     7.32       3.00
Foreign direct investment                                                        26    8.15    1.91      180     7.68       2.95
Local governance and institutions                                                22    6.41    2.65      181     6.68       2.84
Water and sanitation                                                             26    7.88    2.16      199     8.05       2.49
Trade and exports                                                                23    8.04    1.94      170     7.41       3.03
Economic growth                                                                  23    8.43    1.44      191     8.48       2.32
Energy                                                                           25    7.88    2.22      182     7.73       2.81
Disaster management                                                              25    7.08    2.83      190     7.86       2.61
Public sector governance/reform                                                  25    8.56    1.36      189     7.44       3.02
Job creation/employment                                                          23    7.30    2.34      194     7.83       2.86
Social cohesion                                                                  25    6.24    2.68      184     6.18       3.46
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                           24    6.46    2.99      184     7.22       2.94
Equality of opportunity                                                          22    6.82    2.54      182     7.55       2.83
Health                                                                           26    7.23    2.54      205     8.21       2.42
Rural development                                                                23    8.17    2.19      202     8.64       2.23
Global/regional integration                                                      25    8.44    1.83      178     7.78       2.49
Food security                                                                    25    8.68    1.70      192     8.48       2.33
Natural resource management                                                      25    8.32    2.34      175     7.31       3.10
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                            26    8.81    1.65      200     8.01       2.74
Social protection                                                                24    6.29    2.53      182     6.64       3.02
Climate change                                                                   25    6.24    2.89      183     7.44       3.00
Agricultural development                                                         25    8.48    1.76      199     8.62       2.30
Education                                                                        25    8.04    2.25      203     8.43       2.51
Debt relief and access to finance                                                28    8.43    2.76      191     8.68       2.47




                                                           175
The World Bank Group                                       Sudan




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of
development in Sudan? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                Macroeconomics and
                                                                                 Fiscal Management            All Others
                                                                                 N     Mean     SD      N       Mean       SD
Anti-corruption                                                                  15    5.20    2.40    98       4.45       3.08
Information and communications technology                                        14    5.79    2.72    116      5.22       3.15
Transport                                                                        16    5.88    2.50    112      4.61       2.95
Crime and violence                                                               16    3.06    2.08    93       4.00       2.73
Regional conflict and tensions                                                   16    3.75    2.30    109      5.17       3.23
Law and justice                                                                  15    3.40    1.99    94       3.89       2.69
Urban development                                                                14    5.36    2.21    125      5.57       3.11
Environmental sustainability                                                     14    5.21    2.39    139      6.12       2.95
Regulatory framework                                                             17    5.06    2.41    110      5.74       3.04
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                           15    6.00    2.67    116      5.24       2.87
Poverty reduction*                                                               16    4.81    2.97    160      6.64       2.75
Gender equity                                                                    16    4.75    2.70    124      6.13       2.75
Private sector development                                                       17    5.82    2.90    118      5.29       2.94
Foreign direct investment                                                        19    5.21    3.05    113      4.99       3.25
Local governance and institutions                                                18    3.83    2.18    106      4.92       2.66
Water and sanitation*                                                            18    4.33    2.77    148      6.32       2.64
Trade and exports                                                                15    4.27    2.09    114      4.96       2.93
Economic growth                                                                  17    5.65    2.52    137      5.89       2.66
Energy                                                                           13    3.92    2.33    105      4.79       2.77
Disaster management                                                              16    4.69    2.94    114      5.62       2.89
Public sector governance/reform                                                  20    5.90    2.05    109      5.45       2.99
Job creation/employment                                                          20    3.85    2.18    131      4.63       3.00
Social cohesion                                                                  17    3.29    1.99    120      4.16       2.80
Financial markets                                                                14    4.29    2.13    101      4.82       2.99
Equality of opportunity                                                          18    4.06    2.13    126      5.39       3.17
Health                                                                           17    5.41    2.81    148      6.00       2.74
Rural development*                                                               19    4.95    3.08    158      6.54       2.77
Global/regional integration                                                      18    4.67    2.00    116      5.33       3.00
Food security                                                                    17    5.00    2.76    137      5.77       2.86
Education                                                                        18    5.83    2.83    152      5.84       2.80
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                            15    4.67    3.44    144      5.58       2.91
Social protection                                                                17    4.71    2.62    101      4.05       2.66
Climate change                                                                   18    5.00    2.40    120      5.34       2.93
Agricultural development                                                         18    5.44    2.90    138      5.69       2.92
Natural resource management                                                      18    4.17    2.55    109      4.68       3.05
Debt relief and access to finance                                                20    5.10    3.24    131      4.90       3.32
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                           176
The World Bank Group                                                                                                       Sudan                                                                                  Country Opinion Survey 2015

Appendix H: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the WBG
                                                                     Which one of the following best
                                                                                                                    Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                  describes your level of interaction with
                                                                         the WBG in your country?                       Observer          Use WBG reports/data   Engage in WBG activities       Collaborate         Use WBG website
                                                                   Currently       Previously       Never
                                                                                                                No Mean       Yes Mean    No Mean     Yes Mean   No Mean       Yes Mean     No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean    Yes Mean
        Indicator Question                                        Collaborating   Collaborated   Collaborated
        Overall, please rate your impression of the World
                                                                      6.85           6.16           5.20         6.11              6.15    6.15         6.00       5.92           6.43       5.95         6.22      6.22       5.80
        Bank Group’s effectiveness in Sudan.
        Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
                                                                      6.61           6.36           4.64         6.09              5.29    5.82         6.37       5.64           6.38       5.34         6.29      6.25       4.94
        relevant role in development in Sudan
        The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
                                                                      7.20           6.40           4.90         6.60              4.66    6.05         6.83       5.61           7.21       5.76         6.46      6.45       5.46
        consider the development priorities for Sudan
        Responsiveness to needs                                       6.32           6.34           4.65         5.93              5.28    5.78         5.80       5.51           6.23       5.19         6.13      5.99       5.05
        Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
                                                                      6.15           6.91           4.67         6.02              4.92    5.81         5.70       5.46           6.27       5.17         6.18      5.91       5.35
        services)
        Flexibility (in terms of changing country
                                                                      6.33           6.40           4.46         6.10              4.47    5.81         5.32       5.22           6.53       5.11         6.11      5.80       5.39
        circumstances)
        Being inclusive                                               5.99           6.27           5.28         6.28              4.59    5.91         5.89       5.52           6.46       5.76         5.99      5.86       6.05
        Openness (sharing data and other information)                 6.45           6.20           5.97         6.51              5.60    6.20         6.67       6.21           6.42       6.15         6.39      6.26       6.44
        Staff accessibility                                           6.91           6.50           5.34         6.48              5.63    6.37         5.95       5.83           6.96       5.78         6.59      6.50       5.46
        Straightforwardness and honesty                               8.45           8.02           6.92         8.29              6.66    7.88         8.12       7.34           8.74       7.52         8.18      7.96       7.82
        Ease of access to the people at the WBG who are
                                                                      6.96           6.24           4.16         6.01              5.09    5.88         5.44       5.23           6.72       5.49         5.96      5.93       5.21
        making decisions important to my work
        Collaboration with civil society                              6.80           6.40           5.54         6.36              6.00    6.36         5.93       6.11           6.53       5.48         6.78      6.43       5.66
        Collaboration with the Government                             7.71           7.49           6.49         7.41              6.84    7.37         6.95       6.98           7.81       7.04         7.42      7.43       6.75
        Collaboration with other donors and development
                                                                      7.54           6.95           6.92         7.37              6.78    7.11         7.64       7.30           7.05       7.09         7.29      7.32       6.86
        partners
        Collaboration with the private sector                         5.72           5.90           4.51         5.47              4.98    5.19         5.94       5.26           5.51       5.48         5.27      5.46       4.97
        The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
                                                                      6.56           6.38           5.49         6.44              5.30    6.10         6.53       5.79           6.82       5.83         6.38      6.29       5.78
        the ground
        Being a long-term partner                                     7.19           7.35           6.91         7.23              6.95    7.01         7.81       6.92           7.61       7.02         7.26      7.25       6.90
        To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work
                                                                      6.84           6.87           5.93         6.49              6.63    6.64         6.07       6.21           7.03       6.16         6.78      6.77       5.71
        help to achieve development results in Sudan?
        The World Bank Group’s program of managing trust
                                                                      5.06           4.68           4.36         4.93              4.41    4.84         4.68       4.64           5.10       4.44         5.06      5.25       3.31
        funds and partnerships meets the needs of Sudan
        The World Bank Group meets Sudan’s needs for
                                                                      5.58           5.87           5.21         5.51              5.79    5.66         5.29       5.71           5.37       5.46         5.65      5.81       4.70
        knowledge services
        Are adaptable to Sudan’s specific development
                                                                      6.94           7.77           7.08         7.33              7.09    7.31         7.17       7.32           7.19       7.44         7.16      7.18       7.56
        challenges and country circumstances
        Overall, how significant a contribution do you
        believe the WBG’s knowledge work and activities               8.01           7.74           8.25         8.10              8.00    8.22         7.52       8.17           7.91       7.85         8.23      8.04       8.21
        make to development results in your country?
        Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of
                                                                      7.90           7.69           7.19         7.58              7.53    7.56         7.61       7.32           7.99       7.65         7.52      7.54       7.69
        the WBG's knowledge work and activities?
        Where country systems are adequate, the World
                                                                      7.58           7.29           7.80         7.64              7.67    7.62         7.76       7.48           7.95       7.90         7.48      7.48       8.21
        Bank Group makes appropriate use of them

        Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean.

                                                                                                                            177
The World Bank Group                                                                                                        Sudan                                                                                         Country Opinion Survey 2015

Appendix I: Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Group

                                                      Employee of a      PMU/ Consultant                          Bilateral/                           Financial Sector/
                                                        Ministry         on WBG Program     Local Government Multilateral Agency    Private Sector       Private Bank           NGO/CBO               Media               Academia               Other
                                                      N    Mean   SD      N   Mean   SD      N   Mean    SD     N   Mean    SD      N    Mean   SD     N    Mean     SD    N     Mean     SD     N    Mean    SD     N     Mean      SD     N    Mean    SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the
                                                      44   7.07   2.57   31   6.13   2.84    8    7.25   2.71   5    5.20   1.30    14   4.29   3.20    4    6.25   1.50   30     6.40    3.02   45   6.00    3.22   17     5.24     2.66   19   4.89    2.87
World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Sudan.*
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
                                                      50   6.96   3.19   31   6.16   2.62    7    6.43   3.31   5    4.80   1.79    15   5.07   2.92    3    6.67   3.22   35     5.03    2.84   36   5.97    3.19   16     4.75     2.44   19   4.79    2.76
relevant role in development in Sudan
The WBG’s work is aligned with what I consider
                                                      46   7.09   2.87   31   7.03   2.06    5    7.20   1.30   5    4.20   1.79    15   5.47   3.04    3    6.33   3.06   34     5.06    2.91   38   6.61    3.37   16     4.50     3.03   18   5.89    3.20
the development priorities for Sudan*
Responsiveness to needs*                              44   7.09   2.37   32   6.16   2.20    5    5.00   2.35   5    3.00   1.73    15   5.73   3.13    2    3.50   3.54   32     5.28    2.88   36   5.42    3.20   17     4.47     2.55   18   4.89    2.78
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products
                                                      41   6.61   2.25   32   6.41   1.86    7    6.29   3.35   5    3.60   1.34    12   5.58   3.03    3    3.67   3.79   25     5.56    2.76   32   5.78    3.19   16     4.63     1.82   18   4.78    2.76
and services)*
Flexibility (in terms of changing country
                                                      42   7.05   2.25   31   6.13   2.22    5    5.40   3.36   5    4.00   1.41    15   6.07   3.20    2    3.50   2.12   17     5.24    3.15   35   5.40    3.37   16     4.13     2.45   19   4.58    2.80
circumstances)*
Being inclusive*                                      40   7.08   2.62   29   5.41   2.04    5    5.00   2.74   5    4.60   1.34    15   5.93   2.71    2    2.50   2.12   28     5.00    2.52   26   6.04    2.96   15     5.07     2.02   17   5.88    2.71
Openness (sharing data and other information)         39   6.72   2.32   29   6.55   2.21    5    5.60   2.19   5    7.00   2.24    14   6.07   2.06    3    5.00   4.00   27     5.93    2.54   34   6.62    3.43   13     4.77     3.14   19   5.58    2.91
Staff accessibility                                   43   7.09   2.61   32   6.75   2.21    6    8.17   1.47   5    6.20   1.10    13   5.00   2.97    2    7.50   2.12   31     5.16    3.08   34   6.38    3.68   14     5.50     2.65   19   5.47    3.10
Straightforwardness and honesty*                      41   8.15   2.21   33   8.52   1.97    5    9.20   0.45   5    6.40   1.95    13   7.23   2.46    4    6.25   4.11   23     8.09    1.68   30   8.20    2.61   11     5.91     3.39   15   6.33    3.11
Ease of access to the people at the WBG who
                                                      45   6.89   2.56   31   6.16   2.78    5    6.80   3.49   5    4.40   2.19    13   5.23   3.37    3    2.67   2.89   28     5.54    3.25   36   5.03    3.44   14     4.79     2.67   18   5.50    3.00
are making decisions important to my work
Collaboration with civil society                      44   6.93   2.24   29   5.90   2.41    7    8.71   1.80   4    5.25   1.50    13   5.23   3.37    3    4.67   3.51   32     5.81    2.87   39   6.56    3.50   15     5.67     3.02   17   5.65    2.91
Collaboration with the Government*                    45   8.18   2.25   31   7.77   1.94    5    7.40   3.13   4    4.75   0.50    14   6.71   2.53    3    7.00   4.36   32     7.13    2.42   39   6.85    3.09   16     6.38     1.63   19   6.47    2.63
Collaboration with other donors and
                                                      37   7.95   1.56   26   7.35   2.33    4    9.25   0.50   4    8.25   0.50    14   6.14   2.14    1    8.00     .    22     6.23    2.35   36   7.81    2.53   12     6.42     2.35   17   5.71    2.52
development partners*
Collaboration with the private sector                 34   5.82   2.74   26   5.04   2.20    4    9.00   2.00   4    3.75   2.06    15   4.40   3.02    2    3.50   3.54   25     5.68    3.21   26   4.88    2.92   14     5.50     1.91   18   4.83    2.81
The speed in which it gets things accomplished
                                                      46   7.07   2.13   33   6.73   2.10    5    7.20   0.84   4    3.25   2.50    15   5.53   3.16    1    5.00     .    33     5.03    3.29   30   6.47    3.08   14     5.64     2.93   20   5.50    2.69
on the ground*
Being a long-term partner                             40   7.78   2.66   30   7.37   2.80    5    8.00   2.92   4    7.00   2.00    14   6.64   3.27    1    9.00     .    29     6.55    3.81   35   7.23    3.07   15     6.67     2.85   18   6.67    2.61
To what extent does the WBG’s work help to
                                                      50   7.28   2.55   33   6.67   1.90    5    4.80   2.68   5    4.60   2.19    16   5.81   4.05    3    9.67   0.58   34     6.97    2.73   41   6.24    3.11   16     4.75     1.92   19   6.42    3.49
achieve development results in Sudan?*
The WBG’s program of managing trust funds
                                                      37   5.41   2.88   28   5.54   2.46    8    6.50   3.42   4    5.75   2.50    9    3.56   3.50    4    7.00   4.08   27     3.44    2.47   38   4.87    3.18   14     2.50     1.91   15   4.87    3.00
and partnerships meets the needs of Sudan*
The World Bank Group meets Sudan’s needs for
                                                      44   5.77   3.21   26   5.69   2.75    8    8.00   2.62   4    6.75   2.50    12   5.75   3.11    2    1.00   0.00   16     4.56    2.94   37   6.11    3.10   14     4.07     1.98   15   4.47    2.92
knowledge services*
Are adaptable to Sudan’s specific development
                                                      40   7.40   2.65   28   6.64   2.20    8    7.75   2.66   3    5.67   0.58    14   6.93   3.15    3    8.00   2.00   27     8.41    1.69   36   7.14    2.86   15     6.53     3.23   17   6.88    2.96
challenges and country circumstances
Overall, how significant a contribution do you
believe the World Bank Group’s knowledge
                                                      51   8.02   2.07   31   7.61   1.84    9    8.22   2.28   4    6.75   0.50    19   7.11   3.41    5    9.80   0.45   35     8.57    2.13   38   8.47    1.98   16     6.75     2.15   21   8.86    2.13
work and activities make to development
results in your country?*
Overall, how would you rate the technical
quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge           47   7.68   2.49   31   7.68   1.56    8    8.13   2.42   4    7.25   0.50    17   6.71   3.06    3    9.00   1.00   29     7.76    2.40   40   7.95    2.42   15     8.07     1.44   20   6.35    3.07
work and activities?
Where country systems are adequate, the WBG
                                                      39   8.00   2.33   31   7.65   2.21    6    8.67   1.37   4    3.00   2.45    15   6.87   3.00    4    8.75   1.50   21     7.48    2.75   33   8.21    2.64   10     8.50     1.35   14   6.36    2.56
makes appropriate use of them*
 *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                            178
The World Bank Group                                 Sudan                              Country Opinion Survey 2015



Appendix J: Sudan FY 2015 Questionnaire




                            World Bank Group Country Survey FY15 – Sudan


The World Bank Group is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Sudan or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey will give the World Bank Group’s team that works in Sudan, greater insight into how the Bank’s work is
perceived. This is one tool the World Bank Group uses to assess the views of its stakeholders, and to develop
more effective strategies that support development in Sudan.

A local independent firm has been hired to oversee the logistics of this survey. This ensures anonymity and
confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid.

Finally, the survey relates to the World Bank Group’s work. The World Bank Group consists of IBRD, IDA, IFC,
MIGA, and ICSID. When responding to the survey, please consider the area of the World Bank Group with which
you are most familiar.

To complete the survey, please circle/check the response that most accurately reflects your opinion.
If you prefer not to answer a question, please leave it blank. If you feel that you do not have an
adequate amount of information on a subject, please check “Don’t know?.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING SUDAN

 A1. In general would you say that Sudan is headed in ... ?
 1    The right direction
 2    The wrong direction
 3    Not sure




                                                      179
The World Bank Group                                        Sudan                                      Country Opinion Survey 2015



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

 A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Sudan.
 Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Sudan?
 (Choose no more than THREE)
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  1                                                          19     Education
       assistance)
  2    Food security                                         20     Poverty reduction
  3    Security/stabilization/reconstruction                 21     Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
       Public sector governance/reform (i.e., government
  4    effectiveness, public financial management, public    22     Social cohesion
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
  5    Global/regional integration                           23     Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
  6    Gender equity                                         24     Agricultural development
  7    Private sector development                            25     Trade and exports
  8    Foreign direct investment                             26     Crime and violence
  9    Water and sanitation                                  27     Economic growth
 10    Energy                                                28     Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 11    Regional conflict and tensions                        29     Regulatory framework
 12    Job creation/employment                               30     Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 13    Rural development                                     31     Local governance and institutions
 14    Financial markets                                     32     Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 15    Urban development                                     33     Anti corruption
 16    Environmental sustainability                          34     Disaster management
 17    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                35     Information and communications technology
 18    Health                                                36     Debt relief and access to finance




                                                            180
The World Bank Group                                          Sudan                                     Country Opinion Survey 2015



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing
 poverty in Sudan? (Choose no more than THREE)
  1   Water and sanitation                               19     Security/stabilization/reconstruction
  2   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)             20     Anti corruption
  3   Economic growth                                    21     Private sector development
  4   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)      22     Foreign direct investment
  5   Regional conflict and tensions                     23     Energy
                                                                Public sector governance/reform (i.e., government
  6   Global/regional integration                        24     effectiveness, public financial management, public
                                                                expenditure, fiscal system reform)
  7   Gender equity                                      25     Social cohesion
  8   Rural development                                  26     Education
  9   Urban development                                  27     Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 10   Regulatory framework                               28     Environmental sustainability
 11   Local governance and institutions                  29     Health
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted
 12                                                      30     Agricultural development
      social assistance)
 13   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)            31     Disaster management
 14   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)   32     Job creation/employment
 15   Crime and violence                                 33     Financial markets
 16   Communicable/non-communicable diseases             34     Trade and exports
 17   Information and communications technology
                                                         35     Food security
 18   Debt relief and access to finance




                                                              181
The World Bank Group                                         Sudan                               Country Opinion Survey 2015



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A4. The World Bank Group’s “Shared Prosperity? goal captures two key elements, economic growth
 and equity. It will seek to foster income growth among the bottom 40 percent of a country’s
 population. Improvement in the Shared Prosperity Indicator requires growth and well-being of the less
 well-off. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the following
 TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Better employment opportunities for young people
  2    Better employment opportunities for women
  3    Greater access to micro-finance for the poor
  4    Debt relief and access to finance
  5    Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability
  6    Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens
  7    Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized businesses)
  8    Better natural resource management
  9    A growing middle class
 10    Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas
 11    Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas
 12    Better security and peace building
 13    Consistent economic growth
 14    More reliable social safety net
 15    Greater equity of fiscal policy
 16    Education and training that better ensure job opportunity
 17    Better quality public services
 18    Other (please specify):_____________________________________




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                             182
The World Bank Group                                          Sudan                                                Country Opinion Survey 2015



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Sudan?
          1                 2       3        4            5            6            7         8           9                  10
 Not familiar at all                                                                                                 Extremely familiar



 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Sudan.
          1             2       3       4        5    6       7        8           9                10                       

 Not effective at all                                                                             Very effective        Don't know



 B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
 knowledge) to help Sudan solve its most complicated development challenges?
          1             2       3       4        5    6       7        8           9              10                         
                                                                                          To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                                    Don't know
                                                                                                       degree


 B4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results
 in Sudan, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its
 resources (financial and knowledge services) in Sudan? (Choose no more than THREE)
        Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  1                                                               19       Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
        assistance)
  2     Security/stabilization/reconstruction                     20       Regional conflict and tensions
  3     Crime and violence                                        21       Private sector development
  4     Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)          22       Water and sanitation
  5     Agricultural development                                  23       Food security
  6     Global/regional integration                               24       Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
  7     Gender equity                                             25       Poverty reduction
        Public sector governance/reform (i.e., government
  8     effectiveness, public financial management, public        26       Trade and exports
        expenditure, fiscal system reform)
  9     Health                                                    27       Economic growth
 10     Rural development                                         28       Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 11     Foreign direct investment                                 29       Local governance and institutions
 12     Education                                                 30       Regulatory framework
 13     Energy                                                    31       Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 14     Social cohesion                                           32       Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 15     Job creation/employment                                   33       Information and communications technology
 16     Financial markets                                         34       Anti corruption
 17     Urban development                                         35       Disaster management
 18     Environmental sustainability                              36       Debt relief and access to finance




                                                              183
The World Bank Group                                          Sudan                                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest
 VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Sudan?
                                                                        Greatest Value            Second Greatest Value
                                                                 (Choose only ONE)                (Choose only ONE)
 1     Convening/facilitating                                                                                
 2     Data and statistics                                                                                   
 3     Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                                      
 4     Financial resources                                                                                   
 5     Capacity development                                                                                  
 6     Technical assistance                                                                                  
 7     Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                            
 8     Donor coordination and policy dialogue                                                                
       Linkage to non-Bank expertise (e.g., South-South
 9                                                                                                           
       knowledge sharing)
 10    Strategy formulation (e.g., PRSP assistance)                                                          
 11    Other (please specify): ________________________                                                      


 How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in
 each of the following areas in Sudan? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed
 below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                 Not effective                                     Very    Don't
                                                                 at all                                        effective   know
        Project implementation (or other organizational
  B6                                                                1    2       3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
        strengthening)
        Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
  B7                                                                1    2       3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
        into development)
        Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
  B8                                                                1    2       3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
        achieve development goals)


 When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Sudan to help ensure better development
 results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
 aspects of capacity building? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed below,
 please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                 Not important                                 Very        Don't
                                                                 at all                                    important       know
        Project implementation (or other organizational
  B9                                                                1    2       3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
        strengthening)
        Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B10                                                                1    2       3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
        into development)
        Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B11                                                                1    2       3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
        achieve development goals)




                                                              184
The World Bank Group                                          Sudan                                 Country Opinion Survey 2015



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 B12. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its
 work in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Staff too inaccessible
 2    Not exploring alternative policy options
 3    Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the Government
 4    Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving
 5    Not enough public disclosure of its work
 6    Arrogant in its approach
 7    Not client focused
 8    The credibility of its knowledge/data
 9    World Bank Group’s processes too complex
 10   Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 11   Too influenced by developed countries
 12   Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 13   World Bank Group’s processes too slow (e.g., too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures)
 14   Not aligned with other donors’ work
 15   Not aligned with country priorities
 16   Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Sudan
 17   Not focused enough on issues that are unique to post-conflict countries
 18   Inadequate number of World Bank Group staff members located in the country
 19   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 20   Don’t know


 B13. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty
 in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
  2    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)
  3    Capacity development
  4    Trust Fund management
  5    Multi-sectoral approaches
  6    Co-financing arrangements (i.e., with other donors)
  7    Sector-wide approaches
  8    Emergency Recovery lending
  9    Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 10    Don’t know




                                                              185
The World Bank Group                                          Sudan                                       Country Opinion Survey 2015



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 B14. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support help the poorest in
 Sudan? (Select only ONE response)
 1     To a fully sufficient degree
 2     To a somewhat sufficient degree
 3     To a somewhat insufficient degree
 4     To a very insufficient degree
 5     Don’t know


 B15. In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which TWO of the following
 groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country? (Choose no more
 than TWO)
 1     Academia/think tanks/research institutes          9      Beneficiaries
 2     Donor community                                  10      Foundations
 3     Media                                            11      UN and regional peace keeping forces
 4     Local Government                                 12      Emerging donors
 5     Private sector                                   13      UN agencies
 6     Parliament                                       14      Regional organizations (e.g., IGAD)
 7     NGOs/Community Based Organizations (CBOs)        15      Other (please specify): _______________________
 8     Youth/university groups                          16      Don’t know


 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in
 Sudan?
                                                                 Strongly                                      Strongly   Don't
                                                                 disagree                                         agree   know
         Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
 B16                                                                1   2     3   4   5   6   7       8    9       10      
         relevant role in development in Sudan
         The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
 B17                                                                1   2     3   4   5   6   7       8    9       10      
         consider the development priorities for Sudan
         The World Bank Group supports programs and
 B18                                                                1   2     3   4   5   6   7       8    9       10      
         strategies that are realistic for Sudan
         The World Bank Group treats clients and
 B19                                                                1   2     3   4   5   6   7       8    9       10      
         stakeholders in Sudan with respect




                                                              186
The World Bank Group                                          Sudan                                           Country Opinion Survey 2015



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Sudan, in terms of each of
 the following?
                                                                    To no                                       To a very
                                                                                                                             Don't
                                                                    degree at                                  significant
                                                                                                                             know
                                                                    all                                           degree
 B20    Responsiveness to needs                                         1   2     3    4   5    6     7   8    9     10       
        Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
 B21                                                                    1   2     3    4   5    6     7   8    9     10       
        services)
        Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B22                                                                    1   2     3    4   5    6     7   8    9     10       
        circumstances)
 B23    Being inclusive                                                 1   2     3    4   5    6     7   8    9     10       

 B24    Openness (sharing data and other information)                   1   2     3    4   5    6     7   8    9     10       

 B25    Staff accessibility                                             1   2     3    4   5    6     7   8    9     10       

 B26    Straightforwardness and honesty                                 1   2     3    4   5    6     7   8    9     10       
        Ease of access to the people at the World Bank
 B27    Group who are making decisions important to my                  1   2     3    4   5    6     7   8    9     10       
        work
 B28    Collaboration with civil society                                1   2     3    4   5    6     7   8    9     10       
 B29    Collaboration with the UN                                       1   2     3    4   5    6     7   8    9     10       
 B30    Collaboration with the Government                               1   2     3    4   5    6     7   8    9     10       
        Collaboration with other donors and development
 B31                                                                    1   2     3    4   5    6     7   8    9     10       
        partners
 B32    Collaboration with the private sector                           1   2     3    4   5    6     7   8    9     10       
        The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
 B33                                                                    1   2     3    4   5    6     7   8    9     10       
        the ground
 B34    Being a long-term partner                                       1   2     3    4   5    6     7   8    9     10       



 B35. To be a more effective development partner in Sudan, do you believe that the World Bank Group
 should have… ? (Select only ONE response)
                                      The current level of local
   More local presence                                                        Less local presence         Don't know
                                          presence is adequate


 B36. In the past year, have you seen more, less, or just about the same level of effective collaboration
 between the UN and the World Bank Group in your country? (Select only ONE response)
       More effective              The same level of effective                Less effective
                                                                                                              Don't know
         collaboration                        collaboration                           collaboration




                                                                  187
The World Bank Group                                          Sudan                              Country Opinion Survey 2015



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 B37. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which THREE of the
 following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 2    There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 3    The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
 4    Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 5    Poor donor coordination
 6    The World Bank Group works too slowly
 7    The Government works inefficiently
 8    Political pressures and obstacles
 9    Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 10   Ongoing conflict and instability
 11   Inadequate funding
 12   Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                               188
The World Bank Group                                          Sudan                                  Country Opinion Survey 2015



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C1. In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
 areas of development in Sudan?
                                                                 Not important                            Very     Don't
                                                                 at all                               important    know
  1    Crime and violence                                           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  2    Financial markets                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)             1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  4    Anti corruption                                              1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  5    Regional conflict and tensions                               1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  6    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                      1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  7    Urban development                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  8    Environmental sustainability                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  9    Regulatory framework                                         1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 10    Information and communications technology                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 11    Poverty reduction                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 12    Gender equity                                                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 13    Private sector development                                   1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 14    Foreign direct investment                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 15    Local governance and institutions                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 16    Water and sanitation                                         1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 17    Trade and exports                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 18    Economic growth                                              1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 19    Energy                                                       1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 20    Disaster management                                          1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       Public sector governance/reform (i.e., government
 21    effectiveness, public financial management, public           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 22    Job creation/employment                                      1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 23    Social cohesion                                              1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 24    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                       1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 25    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                       1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 26    Health                                                       1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 27    Rural development                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 28    Global/regional integration                                  1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 29    Food security                                                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 30    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)         1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 31    Security/stabilization/reconstruction                        1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 32                                                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       assistance)
 33    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 34    Agricultural development                                     1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 35    Education                                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 36    Debt relief and access to finance                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       




                                                              189
The World Bank Group                                          Sudan                                      Country Opinion Survey 2015



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C2. How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following
 areas of development in Sudan? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in working in any of the sectors
 listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                 Not effective                                    Very    Don't
                                                                 at all                                       effective   know
  1    Anti corruption                                              1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  2    Information and communications technology                    1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  4    Crime and violence                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  5    Regional conflict and tensions                               1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  6    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  7    Urban development                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  8    Environmental sustainability                                 1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  9    Regulatory framework                                         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 10    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 11    Poverty reduction                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 12    Gender equity                                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 13    Private sector development                                   1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 14    Foreign direct investment                                    1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 15    Local governance and institutions                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 16    Water and sanitation                                         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 17    Trade and exports                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 18    Economic growth                                              1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 19    Energy                                                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 20    Disaster management                                          1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       Public sector governance/reform (i.e., government
 21    effectiveness, public financial management, public           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 22    Job creation/employment                                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 23    Social cohesion                                              1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 24    Financial markets                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 25    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 26    Health                                                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 27    Rural development                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 28    Global/regional integration                                  1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 29    Food security                                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 30    Education                                                    1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 31    Security/stabilization/reconstruction                        1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 32                                                                 1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       assistance)
 33    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 34    Agricultural development                                     1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 35    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 36    Debt relief and access to finance                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      




                                                              190
The World Bank Group                                                   Sudan                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2015



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C3. Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in
 Sudan? (Select only ONE response)
  1    At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)
  2    In the country
  3    Don’t know


 C4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in
 Sudan?
         1             2       3       4       5       6           7           8       9                   10                      
 To no degree at                                                                                            To a very
                                                                                                                              Don't know
 all                                                                                               significant degree


 C5. To what extent does the World Bank Group help to build/strengthen existing country systems
 (e.g., procurement, financial management, etc.) in Sudan?
         1             2       3       4       5       6           7           8       9                   10                      
 To no degree at                                                                                            To a very
                                                                                                                              Don't know
 all                                                                                               significant degree



 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Sudan?
                                                               Strongly                                                      Strongly    Don't
                                                               disagree                                                         agree    know
       The World Bank Group’s program of
 C6    managing trust funds and partnerships meets             1         2         3   4       5       6    7        8   9       10       
       the needs of Sudan
       The World Bank Group meets Sudan’s needs
 C7    for knowledge services (e.g., research,                 1         2         3   4       5       6    7        8   9       10       
       analysis, data, technical assistance)


 C8. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its work in real time
 in Sudan?
             1             2       3       4       5       6            7          8       9                    10                      
                                                                                                     To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                                             Don't know
                                                                                                                  degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                                       191
The World Bank Group                                               Sudan                                            Country Opinion Survey 2015



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S KNOWLEDGE WORK AND ACTIVITIES (i.e., ANALYSIS,
STUDIES, RESEARCH, DATA, REPORTS, CONFERENCES)
 D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work
 you do?
 1    Weekly
 2    Monthly
 3    A few times a year
 4    Rarely
 5    Never


 In Sudan, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                              To no                                                  To a very
                                                                                                                                  Don't
                                                              degree at                                             significant
                                                                                                                                  know
                                                              all                                                      degree

 D2    Are timely                                              1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
       Include appropriate level of stakeholder
 D3                                                            1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
       involvement during preparation
 D4    Lead to practical solutions                             1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
       Are accessible (well written and easy to
 D5                                                            1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
       understand)
       Are source of relevant information on global
 D6                                                            1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
       good practices
 D7    Are adequately disseminated                             1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     

 D8    Are translated enough into local language               1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
       Are adaptable to Sudan’s specific
 D9    development challenges and country                      1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
       circumstances


 D10. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group’s knowledge work
 and activities make to development results in your country?
           1                  2   3   4     5         6            7         8       9                 10                    
 Not significant at all                                                                          Very significant        Don't know



 D11. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge work and
 activities?
          1               2       3   4         5         6        7         8       9              10                       
 Very low                                                                                    Very high technical
                                                                                                                         Don't know
 technical quality                                                                                       quality




                                                                       192
The World Bank Group                                       Sudan                                            Country Opinion Survey 2015



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                           Strongly                                              Strongly   Don't
                                                           disagree                                                 agree   know
 E1    The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly        1       2       3   4   5   6     7     8        9       10      
       The World Bank Group effectively monitors and
 E2                                                         1       2       3   4   5   6     7     8        9       10      
       evaluates the projects and programs it supports
       The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews
 E3                                                         1       2       3   4   5   6     7     8        9       10      
       are done in a timely fashion
       The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy?
 E4                                                         1       2       3   4   5   6     7     8        9       10      
       requirements are reasonable
       The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in
 E5                                                         1       2       3   4   5   6     7     8        9       10      
       Sudan
       Working with the World Bank Group increases
 E6                                                         1       2       3   4   5   6     7     8        9       10      
       Sudan’s institutional capacity
       Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
       financial management, etc.) are adequate, the
 E7                                                         1       2       3   4   5   6     7     8        9       10      
       World Bank Group makes appropriate use of
       them
       The World Bank Group provides effective
 E8    implementation support (i.e., supervision of         1       2       3   4   5   6     7     8        9       10      
       projects)

 E9. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find solutions that
 promote private public partnerships in Sudan?
           1            2       3      4      5       6         7       8       9           10                         
                                                                                    To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                               Don't know
                                                                                                 degree

 E10. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Sudan?
 (Select only one response)
 1    The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Sudan
 2    The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Sudan
 3    The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate
 4    Don’t know

 E11. Which of the following best describes the WBG’s support in Sudan?
 (Select only one response)
      The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses on the most important development challenges in
 1
      Sudan
 2    The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in Sudan, and it is involved in too many areas of development
 3    Don’t know


 E12. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group is adequately staffed in Sudan?
          1             2      3       4      5       6      7          8       9           10                         
                                                                                             To a very
 To no degree at all                                                                                              Don't know
                                                                                    significant degree




                                                            193
The World Bank Group                                      Sudan                                      Country Opinion Survey 2015




SECTION F: THE MULTI PARTNER/DONOR TRUST FUND IN SUDAN AS MANAGED BY THE WORLD
BANK

 F1. Which of the following best describe what you consider the greatest STRENGTHS of the
 Multi Donor Trust Fund in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    The donors worked collaboratively with the government
 2    The donors were well coordinated
      There was an adequate level of communication and sharing of results amongst all players
 3
      (government, World Bank, donors)
 4    The Trust Fund's development priorities were aligned with country development priorities
 5    The level of resources distributed was sufficient
 6    The Trust Fund was adequately staffed
 7    The Trust Fund adequately took into consideration voices from outside of government
 8    Don’t know
 9    Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


 F2. Which of the following best describe what you consider the greatest WEAKNESSES of the
 Multi Donor Trust Fund in Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    The Trust Fund was not adequately staffed
 2    The level of resources distributed was too low
      There was an inadequate level of communication and sharing of results amongst all players
 3
      (government, World Bank, donors)
 4    The Trust Fund's development priorities were not aligned with country development priorities
 5    The donors were not well coordinated
 6    The donors did not work collaboratively with the government
 7    The Trust Fund did not adequately take into consideration voices from outside of government
 8    Don’t know
 9    Other (please specify): ______________________________________________




                                                           194
The World Bank Group                                         Sudan                                  Country Opinion Survey 2015




SECTION G: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN SUDAN
 G1. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in
 Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Sudan’s economy
 2    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
 3    Offer more innovative financial (non-lending) products (e.g., credit buy back/buy down)
 4    Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, other terms)
 5    Reach out more to groups outside of Government
 6    Mobilize third party financial resources (e.g., attract more trust funds and partnerships)
 7    Work faster
 8    Improve the quality of its experts as related to Sudan’s specific challenges
 9    Offer more innovative knowledge services
 10   Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., national, state, local)
 11   Increase the level of capacity development in the country
 12   Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing
 13   Increase availability of Fee-Based services
 14   Increase the level of World Bank Group staffing in Sudan’s office
 15   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


 G2. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Sudan, and
 taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the
 World Bank Group should offer more of in Sudan? (Select only ONE response)
  1    Leveraging more resources from trust funds
  2    Knowledge products
  3    Convening services
  4    None of the above
  5    The combination is appropriate for Sudan
  6    Don’t know




                                                              195
The World Bank Group                                          Sudan                                        Country Opinion Survey 2015



SECTION H: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING
 H1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in
 Sudan? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Periodicals                                        6    International television
  2    International newspapers                           7    Local newspapers
  3    Local radio                                        8    Internet
  4    International radio                                9    Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)
  5    Local television                                  10    Other (please specify): ____________________

 H2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
       Direct contact with World Bank Group (i.e.,        5    World Bank Group’s website
  1
       face to face meetings/discussions)                 6    Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)
  2    e-Newsletters                                      7    Mobile phones
       World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/                  The World Bank’s Information Center for Development
  3                                                       8
       conferences                                             located at the University of Khartoum
       World Bank Group’s publications and other
  4                                                       9    Other (please specify): ____________________
       written materials

       Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under which the
 H3                                                                                                         Yes          No
       Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past
 H4                                                                                                         Yes          No
       year? (If YES please go to Question H5; if NO please go to H6)
 H5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                            Yes          No
 H6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                                  Yes          No
 H7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group website?                                               Yes          No


 H8. Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
  1    High speed/WiFi
  2    Dial-up


 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.
                                                                      Strongly                                Strongly    Don't
                                                                      disagree                                   agree    know
        I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to
  H9    navigate. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank          1     2    3   4    5   6   7    8      9    10      
        Group website)
        I find the information on the World Bank Group’s
 H10    websites useful. (Only answer if you have used a World        1     2    3   4    5   6   7    8      9    10      
        Bank Group website)
        The World Bank Group’s social media channels (e.g.,
 H11    blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr) are valuable       1     2    3   4    5   6   7    8      9    10      
        sources of information about the institution
        When I need information from the World Bank Group I
 H12    know how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach       1     2    3   4    5   6   7    8      9    10      
        them, etc.)
        The World Bank Group is responsive to my information
 H13                                                                  1     2    3   4    5   6   7    8      9    10      
        requests and inquiries



                                                              196
The World Bank Group                                        Sudan                                    Country Opinion Survey 2015



SECTION I: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 I1. Which of the following best describes your current position?          (Select only ONE response)
 1    Office of the President                          11    NGO/Community Based Organization
 2    Office of Minister                               12    Media (press, radio, TV, web, etc.)
                                                             Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory
 3    Office of Parliamentarian                        13
                                                             Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
      Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial
 4                                                     14    Trade Union
      Department or Implementation Agency
      Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing
      implementation of project/
 5                                                     15    Faith-Based Group
      Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank
      Group supported project/program
 6    Local Government Office or Staff                 16    Youth Group
 7    Bilateral/Multilateral Agency                    17    Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 8    Private Sector Organization                      18    Judiciary Branch
 9    Private Foundation
                                                       19    Other (please specify): ________________________
 10   Financial Sector/Private Bank


 I2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Select only ONE response)
 1    Water                                            12   Gender
 2    Social protection and labor                      13   Transport and ICT
 3    Fragility, conflict and violence                 14   Urban, rural, and social development
 4    Environment and natural resources                15   Governance
 5    Public-private partnerships                      16   Poverty
 6    Education                                        17   Jobs
 7    Health, nutrition, and population                18   Agriculture
 8    Energy and extractives                           19   Climate change
 9    Macroeconomics and fiscal management             20   Generalist (specialized in multiple sectors)
 10   Trade and competitiveness
                                                       21   Other (please specify): _________________________
 11   Finance and markets


 I3. Which one of the following best describes your level of interaction with the World Bank Group in
 your country? (Select only ONE response)
 1    I currently collaborate with the World Bank Group
 2    I have previously collaborated with the World Bank Group
 3    Both of the above (I currently collaborate and previously have collaborated with the World Bank Group)
 4    I have never collaborated with the World Bank Group




                                                            197
The World Bank Group                                          Sudan                   Country Opinion Survey 2015



SECTION I: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 I4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Sudan?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank Group reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5    Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.


 I5. What’s your gender?
 1    Female
 2    Male


 I6. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1    Central Sudan (Khartoum, Gezira, Sennar, Blue Nile, and White Nile States)
 2    Northern Sudan (Nile and Northern States)
 3    Eastern Sudan (Gedarif, Kassala, and Red Sea States)
 4    Western Sudan (North Kordofan, West Kordofan, and South Kordofan States)




                                Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                               198
