                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia




FY16 Croatia Country Opinion Survey Report


          THE WORLD BANK GROUP
             Public Opinion Research Group




                           1
                                                                     February 2016
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia




Acknowledgements
The Croatia Country Opinion Survey is part of the County Opinion Survey Program series of the
World Bank Group. This report was prepared by the Public Opinion Research Group (PORG)
team led by Sharon Felzer (Senior Communications Officer, Head of PORG), Jessica Cameron,
Svetlana Markova, and Jing Guo. Calita Woods and Dania Mendoza provided data support. The
report was prepared under the overall guidance and supervision of Sumir Lal (Director, ECRGP).
PORG acknowledges the significant contribution from the Croatia country team and the local
fielding agency Ipsos. In particular, PORG is grateful for the support from Vanja Frajtic,
Communications Associate who coordinated the survey related activities from Zagreb, Croatia.




                                              1
                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



Table of Contents
     I. Objectives ...................................................................................3
     II. Methodology ...............................................................................3
    III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................4
    IV. General Issues Facing Croatia ....................................................11
    V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group .......................15
    VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness......................................23
   VII. How the World Bank Group Operates .......................................29
   VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments .....................36
    IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Croatia ................43
     X. Communication and Outreach ..................................................48
    XI. Appendices ................................................................................53




                                                    2
                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



I. Objectives
This survey was designed to assist the World Bank Group (WBG) in gaining a better
understanding of how stakeholders in Croatia perceive the WBG. The survey explored:
    General Issues facing Croatia
    Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
    World Bank Group’s Sectoral Effectiveness and Results
    The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
    Working with the World Bank Group
    The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Croatia
    Communication and Information Sharing
    Background Information


II. Methodology
From June to September 2015, 871 stakeholders of the WBG in Croatia were invited to provide
their opinions on the WBG’s work in the country by participating in a Country Opinion Survey.
Participants were drawn from the office of the President/Prime Minister, office of a Minister,
office of a Parliamentarian, employees of ministries/ministerial departments/implementation
agencies, Project Management Units (PMUs) overseeing implementation of a project or
consultants/contractors working on WBG-supported projects/programs, local governments,
bilateral/multilateral agencies, private sector organizations, private foundations, the financial
sector/private banks, NGOs/community-based organizations (CBOs), the media, independent
government institutions, trade unions, faith-based groups, youth groups, academia/research
institutes/think tanks, the judiciary branch, and the European Commission. A total of 175
stakeholders participated in the survey (20% response rate).

Respondents received an email invitation to take the questionnaire and completed the
questionnaire via an online platform. Respondents were asked about: general issues facing
Croatia, their overall attitudes toward the WBG, the WBG’s effectiveness and results, WBG’s
knowledge work and activities, working with the WBG, the WBG’s future role in Croatia, and
the WBG’s communication and information sharing.

Every country that engages in the Country Opinion Survey must include specific indicator
questions that will be aggregated for the World Bank Group’s annual Corporate Scorecard.
These questions are identified throughout the survey report.

The results of this year’s Country Survey were compared to the Country Survey conducted in
FY ’12 (response rate was 29%, N=198). The data were weighted to reach similar stakeholder
compositions across the two survey years, allowing for more statistically reliable comparisons.
Stakeholders who identified themselves as “other? in the stakeholder category options were not
included in these comparisons. As a result, mean ratings, percentages of respondents, and the
total number of respondents in both years are slightly different from those of the original data
reported in the FY ’12 COS report and the non-weighted data presented in this report. For the
weighted stakeholder breakdown and year comparison results, please refer to Appendix D
(see page 115).

                                                3
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



III. Demographics of the Sample

Current Position
      Note: For all further analyses, the small number of respondents from the office of the
       President/Prime Minister were combined with those from the office of a Minister. The
       few respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, local government, trade unions,
       youth groups, and the judiciary branch were included in the “Other? category.




                                               4
                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization




                                 5
                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

     Note: Because of the small number of respondents from outside of the Zagreb area,
      analyses comparing geographic locations would not be statistically reliable and,
      therefore, were not conducted.




Gender




                                             6
                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia




III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Exposure to Agencies within the World Bank Group




                                     7
                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Collaboration with the WBG
        Note: For all further analyses, respondents who indicated that they had previously
         collaborated with the WBG were combined with those who had never collaborated to
         make one group of those not collaborating with the WBG. Those who indicated both (that
         they currently collaborate and had collaborated in the past) were combined with those
         who are currently collaborating to create one group of those collaborating with the WBG.
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey were statistically just as
         likely to be currently collaborating with the WBG (weighted percentage of respondents
         collaborating = 57%) compared to respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey
         (weighted percentage of respondents collaborating = 56%)1.




1
 Please refer to Appendix D (page 115) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The percentages in the chart were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                              8
                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Exposure to the WBG in Croatia
     Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
      rates of exposure to the WBG in Croatia as respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey.




                                             9
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Familiarity with the World Bank Group
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
         ratings of familiarity with the WBG (weighted mean rating = 6.3) compared to
         respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted mean rating = 6.4)2.
        Impact of Familiarity: Respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the WBG were
         significantly, strongly correlated with their ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness, and
         had significant, moderate correlations with the extent to which the WBG achieves
         development results in Croatia, and the extent to which the WBG plays a relevant role in
         development in Croatia.




2
 Please refer to Appendix D (page 115) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The means in the chart were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             10
                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



IV. General Issues Facing Croatia

Headed in the Right Direction

        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey were significantly less
         likely to indicate that Croatia is headed in the right direction (weighted percentage of
         respondents = 27%) and significantly more likely to indicate that Croatia is headed in the
         wrong direction (weighted percentage of respondents = 42%) compared to respondents
         from the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted percentage of respondents = 38% and 22%,
         respectively)3.




3
 Please refer to Appendix D (page 115) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The percentages in the chart were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             11
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



IV. General Issues Facing Croatia (continued)
Development Priority
   Year comparison: Respondents in FY ’12 indicated that the most important development
    priorities were economic growth (percentage of respondents = 40%), job creation/
    employment (40%), education (33%), and public sector reform (33%).




                                             12
                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



IV. General Issues Facing Croatia (continued)
What Would Contribute Most to Reducing Poverty




                                   13
                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



IV. General Issues Facing Croatia (continued)

Factors Contributing to “Shared Prosperity?




                                       14
                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

Attributing Failed/Slow Reform Efforts

   Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that they most often
    attributed failed or slow reform efforts to lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in government
    (percentage of respondents = 41%) and reforms not being well thought out in light of country
    challenges (33%).




            As noted in the “Methodology? section, the indicator questions referred to
            throughout the Survey report are questions that are asked in every country
            that engages in the Country Opinion Survey. These will be aggregated for
                      the World Bank Group’s annual Corporate Scorecard.


                                                15
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

The World Bank Group’s Overall Effectiveness (Indicator Question)

        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
         ratings for the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Croatia (weighted mean = 6.6) compared
         to respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted mean = 6.4)4.

        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG gave significantly
         higher ratings for the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Croatia (mean rating = 7.2)
         compared to respondents who are not collaborating (mean rating = 6.0).




Achieving Development Results (Indicator Question)

        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
         ratings for the extent to which the WBG achieves development results (weighted mean =
         5.9) compared to respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted mean = 6.0)4.

        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG gave significantly
         higher ratings for the extent to which the WBG achieves development results (mean
         rating = 6.5) compared to respondents who are not collaborating (mean rating = 5.1).




4
 Please refer to Appendix D (page 115) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The means in the charts were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             16
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

WBG Staff Preparedness

        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
         ratings for the WBG’s staff being well prepared to help Croatia (weighted mean = 7.4)
         compared to respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted mean = 7.0)5.

        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG gave significantly
         higher ratings for the WBG’s staff being well prepared (mean rating = 7.8) compared to
         respondents who are not collaborating (mean rating = 6.8).




5
 Please refer to Appendix D (page 115) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The mean in the chart was
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             17
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Overall Ratings for Indicator Questions by Stakeholder Groups
      Stakeholders: Respondents from independent government institutions and PMUs/
       Consultants on WBG-supported projects had the highest mean rating for the aggregated
       responses to the twenty-five COS indicator questions whereas respondents from the
       financial sector/private banks, NGOs/CBOs, and the media had significantly lower mean
       ratings. Responses for individual indicator questions by stakeholder groups can be found
       in Appendix B (see page 74).

      Collaboration: Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had a significantly higher
       mean rating for the aggregated responses to the twenty-five COS indicator questions
       (mean rating = 7.1) compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG
       (mean rating = 5.9). Responses for individual indicator questions by exposure to the
       WBG can be found in Appendix E (see page 121).




                                              18
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Greatest Value
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that the WBG’s
      greatest value to Croatia was its financial resources (percentage of respondents = 52%)
      and technical assistance (50%).




                                             19
                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Effectiveness of WBG’s Instruments in Reducing Poverty




                                      20
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Importance and Effectiveness of WBG’s Capacity Building Work
     Stakeholders: Respondents from independent government institutions gave the highest
      ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness at project implementation whereas respondents from
      the media gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from bilateral/multilateral
      agencies and PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects gave the highest ratings for
      the WBG’s effectiveness at citizen engagement whereas respondents from the financial
      sector/private banks and the media gave significantly lower ratings.

     Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG gave significantly
      higher ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness at citizen engagement and policy design
      (mean ratings = 6.1 and 7.1, respectively) compared to respondents who are not
      collaborating (mean ratings = 4.7 and 6.1, respectively). In addition, respondents who are
      collaborating with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the importance of the
      WBG’s involvement in project implementation, citizen engagement and policy design
      (mean ratings = 8.6, 7.8, and 8.6, respectively) compared to respondents who are not
      collaborating (mean ratings = 7.8, 6.4, and 7.9, respectively).




                                              21
                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Greatest Weakness
     Year comparison: Respondents in FY ’12 indicated that the WBG’s greatest weaknesses
      in its work in Croatia were being too bureaucratic in its operational policies and
      procedures (percentage of respondents = 26%), being too influenced by developed
      countries (20%), and World Bank Group processes being too slow and complex (20%).




                                           22
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness
Importance of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas




                                     23
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Importance of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas (continued)

     Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects and
      other organizations had the highest ratings for the importance of information and
      communications technology and climate change whereas respondents from the financial
      sector/private banks gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from the office of the
      President/Prime Minister/Minister and bilateral/multilateral agencies had the highest
      ratings for the importance of regulatory framework whereas respondents from
      NGOs/CBOs gave significantly lower ratings. Please see Appendix B, page 74, for a
      complete breakdown stakeholder group responding.

     Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG had significantly
      higher ratings for the importance of the WBG’s involvement in information and
      communications technology, transport, trade and exports, and EU income convergence
      compared to respondents who are not collaborating with the WBG (refer to Appendix C,
      page 99, for a complete breakdown).




                                              24
                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas6




6
 Note, primarily informed stakeholders responded to these questions. Respondents were given the option of “don’t know? if they
did not have exposure to the WBG’s work in certain development areas. See Appendix A (page 57) for details.

                                                              25
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas (continued)

      Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had significantly higher ratings
       for the effectiveness of the WBG’s work in private sector development (weighted mean =
       5.7) compared to respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted mean = 4.8)7.

      Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across seven of these
       thirty-one development areas (refer to Appendix B, page 74, for a complete breakdown). For
       the most part, respondents from independent government institutions, bilateral/ multilateral
       agencies, and other organizations tended to give the highest ratings for the WBG’s
       effectiveness in these areas whereas respondents from the office of the President/ Prime
       Minister/Minister, the financial sector/private banks, and the media tended to give
       significantly lower ratings of effectiveness. Those development areas with significant
       stakeholder group differences were:
            Urban development;
            Environmental sustainability;
            Water and sanitation;
            Public sector governance/reform;
            Health;
            Rural development; and
            Regional disparities.

      Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG had higher ratings for the
       WBG’s effectiveness in all development areas compared to respondents who are not
       collaborating with the WBG, significantly so for those areas listed below (refer to Appendix
       C, page 99, for a complete breakdown):
               Transport;
               Law and justice;
               Urban development;
               Environmental sustainability;
               Poverty reduction;
               Private sector development;
               Foreign direct investment;
               Water and sanitation;
               Trade and exports;
               Economic growth;
               Energy;
               Public sector governance/reform;
               Job creation/employment;
               Rural development; and
               European Union (EU) income convergence.


7
    Please refer to Appendix D (page 115) for more details on weighting for year comparisons.

                                                                26
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

WBG Promoting Private Public Partnerships




Helping the Poorest in Croatia




                                     27
                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness
To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the World Bank Group’s overall
effectiveness and ratings of its ability to help achieve development results in Croatia, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the thirty-one specific areas
of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the World Bank Group’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve
development results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area
increase, respondents’ ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of
effectiveness in one area increase, ratings of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development
results increase. Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of effectiveness in one
specific area are related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness
or perceptions of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results.

      Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
       correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the WBG’s
       overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
       drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Croatia. The areas
       determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
              The WBG’s effectiveness at trade and exports;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at private sector development; and
              The WBG’s effectiveness at health.

      Achieving Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-
       Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the
       WBG’s ability to help achieve development results in Croatia, suggesting that ratings of
       effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s ability to
       help achieve development results. The areas determined to be key drivers from these
       analyses were:
              The WBG’s effectiveness at law and justice;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at poverty reduction;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at job creation/employment;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at trade and exports; and
              The WBG’s effectiveness at urban development.




                                                28
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates

The World Bank Group’s Work in Croatia

           Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had significantly higher
            levels of agreement that the WBG plays a relevant role in development in Croatia
            (weighted mean = 6.1) compared to respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey
            (weighted mean = 5.5)8.

           Stakeholders: Respondents from independent government institutions and other
            organizations had the highest levels of agreement that the WBG plays a relevant role in
            development whereas respondents from the financial sector/private banks and the media
            had significantly lower levels of agreement.




8
    Please refer to Appendix D (page 115) for more details on weighting for year comparisons.

                                                                29
                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates

The World Bank Group’s Decisions




                                   30
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions

      Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects had the
       highest levels of agreement that the WBG disburses funds promptly whereas respondents
       from NGOs/CBOs, the financial sector/private banks, and the office of the President/
       Prime Minister/Minister had significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                             31
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions: Year Comparison9




9
 All means presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix D (page 115) for details.

                                                               32
                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
The WBG as an Effective Development Partner
     Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across several of
      these aspects of how the WBG operates in Croatia. For the most part, respondents from
      independent government institutions tended to have the highest levels of agreement
      whereas respondents from the media tended to have significantly lower levels of
      agreement. For a complete breakdown of stakeholder group differences see Appendix B
      (page 74).




                                            33
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

The WBG as an Effective Development Partner: Year Comparison10




10
  All means presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix D (page 115) for details.

                                                               34
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Internal Measuring and Monitoring

     Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG had significantly
      higher ratings that the WBG measures and corrects its work in real time (mean rating =
      6.8) compared to those who are not collaborating (mean rating = 5.4).




The WBG’s Approach to Risk in Croatia




                                             35
                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments

Frequency of Consulting WBG Knowledge Work/Activities

     Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects
      indicated the most frequent usage of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities
      (percentage of respondents = 69% weekly/monthly) whereas respondents from the media
      indicated significantly less frequent usage (50% rarely/never).

     Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG indicated significantly
      more frequent usage of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities (percentage of
      respondents = 52% weekly/monthly) compared to respondents who are not collaborating
      with the WBG (36% rarely/never).




                                            36
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Frequency of Consulting WBG Knowledge Work/Activities: Year Comparison11




11
  All percentages presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix D (page 115) for details.

                                                               37
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Croatia’s Knowledge Needs (Indicator Question)

           Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
            levels of agreement that the WBG meets Croatia’s needs for knowledge services
            (weighted mean = 5.9) compared to respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey
            (weighted mean = 6.3)12.
           Stakeholders: Respondents from independent government institutions had the highest
            levels of agreement that the WBG meets Croatia’s needs for knowledge services whereas
            respondents from NGOs/CBOs and academia had significantly lower levels of
            agreement.
           Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG had significantly
            higher levels of agreement that the WBG meets Croatia’s needs for knowledge services
            (mean rating = 6.4) compared to those who are not collaborating (mean rating = 5.1).




12
     The mean in the chart was calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                               38
                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Contribution of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)
    Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar ratings
     for the significance of the contribution of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities
     (weighted mean = 6.2) compared to respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted
     mean = 6.3)13.
    Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG had significantly higher
     ratings for the significance of the contribution of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities
     (mean rating = 6.8) compared to respondents who are not collaborating with the WBG (mean
     rating = 5.4).




Technical Quality of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)
    Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Survey had statistically similar ratings for the
     technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge work (weighted mean = 7.2) compared to
     respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted mean = 7.5)13.
    Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG had significantly higher
     ratings for the technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge work (mean rating = 7.6) compared
     to those not collaborating with the WBG (mean rating = 6.8).




13
  Please refer to Appendix D (page 115) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The means in these charts were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             39
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Croatia’s Needs for Financial Instruments (Indicator Question)

        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
         levels of agreement that the WBG’s financial instruments meet Croatia’s needs (weighted
         mean = 6.1) compared to respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted mean =
         6.2)14.
        Stakeholders: Respondents from independent government institutions had the highest
         levels of agreement that the World Bank’s financial instruments meet Croatia’s needs
         whereas respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies and academia had
         significantly lower levels of agreement.
        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG had significantly
         higher levels of agreement that the WBG’s financial instruments meet Croatia’s needs
         (mean rating = 6.6) compared to respondents who are not collaborating (mean rating =
         5.5).




14
  Please refer to Appendix D (page 115) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The mean in the chart was
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             40
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Qualities of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities




                                     41
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Qualities of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities: Year Comparison15




15
  All means presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix D (page 115) for details.

                                                               42
                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Croatia

The World Bank Group’s Local Presence in Croatia




Selectivity of the World Bank Group’s Support




                                      43
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in Croatia (continued)

Making the World Bank Group of Greater Value

     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that the WBG
      should increase EU funds absorption (percentage of respondents = 57%) to make itself of
      greater value in Croatia.




                                             44
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in Croatia (continued)
World Bank Group Should Collaborate More with…
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that the WBG
      should collaborate more with the private sector (percentage of respondents = 43%) and
      local government (42%) to ensure better development results.
     Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG were significantly
      more likely to indicate that the WBG should collaborate more with the European
      Commission (percentage of respondents = 20%) compared to respondents who are not
      collaborating with the WBG (2%). In contrast, respondents who are not collaborating
      with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should collaborate
      more with NGOs/CBOs (17%) compared to respondents who are collaborating with the
      WBG (6%).




                                             45
                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in Croatia (continued)
Where the World Bank Group Should Focus its Resources
     Year comparison: Respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that the WBG
      should focus its resources on public sector reform (percentage of respondents = 31%),
      education (27%), and private sector development (26%).




                                            46
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in Croatia (continued)

Future Combination of WBG services

     Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG were significantly
      more likely to indicate that the WBG should offer more financial services (percentage
      of respondents = 24%) compared to respondents who are not collaborating with the
      WBG (9%).




                                             47
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



X. Communication and Outreach
When considering the World Bank Group’s future outreach with key constituencies, please see
Appendix B (page 74) for all responses by stakeholder groups.

Information Sources

      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that they got
       most of their information about economic and social development issues in Croatia from
       the Internet (78%).
      Stakeholders: Respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies and the media were
       significantly more likely to indicate using local newspapers compared to respondents
       from other stakeholder groups.




                                              48
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Preferred Information Sources

     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that they
      preferred to get their information from the WBG website (percentage of respondents =
      48%) and e-Newsletters (42%).




                                             49
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)
Access to Information16




         Collaboration: Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG were
          significantly more likely to have requested information from the WBG in the past year
          (percentage of respondents who requested = 15%) compared to respondents who are not
          collaborating (percentage of respondents who requested = 2%).




         Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG were significantly
          more likely to have received their requested information (percentage of respondents
          aware = 100%) compared to respondents who are not collaborating (percentage of
          respondents aware = 67%).




16
  All means presented in these charts are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix D (page 115) for details.

                                                               50
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)

WBG Website Usage17
         Internet Access: All but one respondent indicated having access to the Internet. All
          respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that they had access to the Internet.
         Internet Connection: All but one respondent indicated having High Speed/WiFi access
          to the Internet when visiting a WBG website.




WBG Website Evaluation17




17
  All means presented in these charts are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix D (page 115) for details.

                                                               51
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)

WBG Social Media and Evaluation




Information Sharing18




18
  All means presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix D (page 115) for details.

                                                               52
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia



XI. Appendices

     A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents...................... 54

     B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ...................... 71

     C. Responses to All Questions by Collaboration with the WBG ......... 96

     D. Responses to All Questions by Year ............................................ 112

     E. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the WBG ........ 118

     F. WBG COS FY15 – Croatia Questionnaire .................................... 119




                                          Croatia




                                             53
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=175)
All rating scale questions are presented with the total number of respondents that provided a rating (N), the number of
respondents who indicated that they “Don’t know? (DK), the mean rating across all respondents (Mean), and the standard
deviation of this mean (SD). Indicator questions are noted with an asterisk (*).

A. General Issues Facing Croatia

                                                                                            Percentage of Respondents
1. In general would you say that Croatia is headed in ... ?                                             (N=171)
The right direction                                                                                     28.1%
The wrong direction                                                                                     40.9%
Not sure                                                                                                31.0%

2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Croatia. Please
identify which of the following you consider the most important development                 Percentage of Respondents
priorities in Croatia? (Choose no more than THREE)                                          (Responses Combined; N=174)
Public sector governance/reform                                                                         58.6%
Job creation/employment                                                                                 36.2%
Private sector development                                                                              33.9%
Economic growth                                                                                         33.9%
Education                                                                                               28.7%
Anti-corruption                                                                                         17.2%
Foreign direct investment                                                                               12.6%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                                 12.6%
European Union (EU) income convergence                                                                  6.9%
Agricultural development                                                                                6.9%
Energy                                                                                                  6.3%
Global/regional integration                                                                             5.7%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                                  4.6%
Trade and exports                                                                                       4.6%
Poverty reduction                                                                                       3.4%
Food security                                                                                           2.9%
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                                    2.9%
Regulatory framework                                                                                    2.9%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                                        2.3%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                          2.3%
Information and communications technology                                                               2.3%
Urban development                                                                                       1.7%
Environmental sustainability                                                                            1.7%
Rural development                                                                                       1.1%
Regional disparities                                                                                    1.1%
Gender equity                                                                                           0.6%
Water and sanitation                                                                                    0.6%
Financial markets                                                                                       0.6%
Health                                                                                                  0.6%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                           0.0%
Crime and violence                                                                                      0.0%
Disaster management                                                                                     0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                                  0.0%



                                                             54
                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


A. General Issues Facing Croatia (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different
areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would         Percentage of Respondents
contribute most to reducing poverty in Croatia? (Choose no more than THREE)       (Responses Combined; N=173)
Economic growth                                                                               56.6%
Job creation/employment                                                                       41.0%
Public sector governance/reform                                                               29.5%
Private sector development                                                                    26.6%
Education                                                                                     26.0%
Rural development                                                                             16.8%
Anti-corruption                                                                               14.5%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                11.6%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                       10.4%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                        8.7%
Agricultural development                                                                      8.7%
European Union (EU) income convergence                                                        8.1%
Regional disparities                                                                          7.5%
Regulatory framework                                                                          6.4%
Foreign direct investment                                                                     6.4%
Global/regional integration                                                                   4.0%
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                          4.0%
Trade and exports                                                                             4.0%
Information and communications technology                                                     2.3%
Health                                                                                        1.7%
Energy                                                                                        1.7%
Environmental sustainability                                                                  1.2%
Gender equity                                                                                 0.6%
Urban development                                                                             0.0%
Water and sanitation                                                                          0.0%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                 0.0%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                              0.0%
Crime and violence                                                                            0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                        0.0%
Disaster management                                                                           0.0%
Financial markets                                                                             0.0%
Food security                                                                                 0.0%




                                                     55
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


A. General Issues Facing Croatia (continued)

4. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of
the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Croatia?                   Percentage of Respondents
(Choose no more than TWO)                                                                  (Responses Combined; N=172)
Consistent economic growth                                                                            45.9%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized
                                                                                                      40.1%
businesses)
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                                             37.8%
Better employment opportunities for young people                                                      24.4%
A growing middle class                                                                                13.4%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                                       9.9%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                                               7.0%
Better quality public services                                                                        4.7%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability                    4.1%
More reliable social safety net                                                                       4.1%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                                          3.5%
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                                   1.7%
Better employment opportunities for women                                                             1.7%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                               1.2%
Other                                                                                                 0.0%




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

Familiarity                                                                           N        DK       Mean       SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in
                                                                                     167        0       6.31       2.7
   Croatia? (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)

Effectiveness*                                                                        N        DK       Mean       SD
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                     148        19      6.72      1.93
    effectiveness in Croatia? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

Staff Preparedness                                                                    N        DK       Mean       SD
3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well
     prepared to help Croatia solve its most complicated development                 142        25      7.44      1.98
     challenges? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                             56
                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact
on development results in Croatia, in which sectoral areas do you believe the
World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge      Percentage of Respondents
services) in Croatia? (Choose no more than THREE)                                 (Responses Combined; N=168)
Public sector governance/reform                                                               45.2%
Economic growth                                                                               39.3%
Education                                                                                     26.8%
Job creation/employment                                                                       25.6%
Private sector development                                                                    22.6%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                       19.0%
Rural development                                                                             13.7%
Anti-corruption                                                                               10.7%
Foreign direct investment                                                                     9.5%
Regulatory framework                                                                          9.5%
Agricultural development                                                                      8.9%
Regional disparities                                                                          6.5%
Energy                                                                                        6.0%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                        5.4%
Poverty reduction                                                                             5.4%
Financial markets                                                                             4.8%
Trade and exports                                                                             4.8%
European Union (EU) income convergence                                                        3.6%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                              3.6%
Global/regional integration                                                                   3.6%
Environmental sustainability                                                                  3.6%
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                          3.0%
Urban development                                                                             2.4%
Health                                                                                        1.8%
Water and sanitation                                                                          1.8%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                1.8%
Gender equity                                                                                 1.2%
Information and communications technology                                                     1.2%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                 0.6%
Disaster management                                                                           0.0%
Crime and violence                                                                            0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                        0.0%
Food security                                                                                 0.0%




                                                      57
                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which                  Percentage of Respondents (N=165)
                                                                                         nd
activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is        Greatest      2 Greatest
of second greatest value in Croatia?                                       Value            Value     Combined
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                           33.3%            17.0%       50.3%
Financial resources                                                        15.2%            17.6%       32.7%
Capacity development                                                       15.2%            13.9%       29.1%
Convening/facilitating                                                     9.7%             9.1%        18.8%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                 6.7%             12.1%       18.8%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., knowledge sharing)                    6.1%             11.5%       17.6%
Coordination with the European Commission and international
                                                                            7.9%             7.9%            15.8%
partners
Technical assistance                                                        2.4%             9.1%            11.5%
Data                                                                        2.4%             1.2%            3.6%
Other                                                                       1.2%             0.6%            1.8%

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity                 Effectiveness
building work it does in each of the following areas in Croatia?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                             N      DK     Mean      SD
6.   Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                    120     43     7.22     1.83
7.   Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)               81     81     5.60     2.18
8.   Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)    115     46     6.77     1.98

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Croatia to help ensure                 Importance
better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the
World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?
(1-Not important all, 10-Very important)                                                N      DK     Mean      SD
9. Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                      131     31     8.29     1.74
10. Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)               114     47     7.22     2.22
11. Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)     130     32     8.32     1.81




                                                         58
                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

12. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest           Percentage of Respondents
   WEAKNESSES in its work in Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)                         (Responses Combined; N=164)
Don’t know                                                                                         18.3%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                       17.7%
Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the Government                                  14.6%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                                           14.6%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow (e.g., too bureaucratic in its operational
                                                                                                   14.0%
policies and procedures)
Too influenced by developed countries                                                              13.4%
Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving                      10.4%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                           9.8%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Croatia                                  9.1%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                              7.3%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                             6.7%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                                6.1%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                           5.5%
Not aligned with the European Commission’s and International Financial
                                                                                                    5.5%
Institutions’ work
Other                                                                                               3.0%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                            1.8%
Not client-focused                                                                                  1.8%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                               0.6%

13. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST
  effective in reducing poverty and promoting “shared prosperity? in Croatia?          Percentage of Respondents
  (Choose no more than TWO)                                                            (Responses Combined; N=163)
Investment lending (financing specific projects)                                                   41.7%
Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)                       34.4%
Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)                              24.5%
Capacity development                                                                               23.3%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government                                            16.6%
Multi-sectoral approaches                                                                          14.1%
Don’t know                                                                                         12.9%
Trust Fund management                                                                              7.4%
Other                                                                                              0.6%

14. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support
  help the poorest (i.e., the bottom 40% of the population) in Croatia?                 Percentage of Respondents
  (Select only ONE response)                                                                       (N=164)
To a fully sufficient degree                                                                       2.4%
To a somewhat sufficient degree                                                                    16.5%
To a somewhat insufficient degree                                                                  28.7%
To a very insufficient degree                                                                      9.8%
Don't know                                                                                         42.7%




                                                          59
                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

15. In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which
  TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with           Percentage of Respondents
  more in your country? (Choose no more than TWO)                                    (Responses Combined; N=164)
Private sector                                                                                    39.0%
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                          38.4%
Youth/university groups                                                                           21.3%
Beneficiaries                                                                                     21.3%
Local Government                                                                                  16.5%
European Commission                                                                               13.4%
NGOs/Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                         10.4%
Media                                                                                             5.5%
Don’t know                                                                                        5.5%
International Financial Institutions                                                              4.9%
Parliament                                                                                        3.7%
International partner community                                                                   3.0%
Other                                                                                             2.4%
Foundations                                                                                       1.2%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World                 Level of Agreement
Bank Group’s work in Croatia? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                N       DK Mean        SD
16. Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development
                                                                                     143     17      6.13    2.21
    in Croatia*
17. The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                                     141     19      6.35    2.04
    development priorities for Croatia*
18. The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic for
                                                                                     137     22      6.57    2.09
    Croatia
19. The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Croatia with respect     141     19      7.77    2.06




                                                       60
                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in                   Level of Agreement
Croatia, in terms of each of the following?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                                  N      DK    Mean       SD
20. Responsiveness*                                                                      124     35    6.73      2.13
21. Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*                   123     36    6.41      2.18
22. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                            122     36    6.38      2.18
23.   Being inclusive*                                                                   123     35     6.66     2.00
24.   Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                     134     24     7.25     2.12
25.   Staff accessibility*                                                               130     29     7.58     2.06
26.   Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                   130     28     7.29     2.19
27. Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                         119     37     7.50     2.20
    decisions important to my work*
28. Collaboration with civil society*                                                     91     67     6.66     1.78
29. Collaboration with the Government*                                                   108     51     7.44     1.90
30. Collaboration with the European Commission and international partners*                81     78     7.25     1.97
31. Collaboration with the private sector*                                                91     68     6.02     2.18
32. The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                        108     50     6.17     2.19
33. Being a long-term partner*                                                           130     29     7.48     2.05

34. To be a more effective development partner in Croatia, do you believe that the         Percentage of Respondents
World Bank Group should have…? (Select only ONE response)                                             (N=160)
More local presence                                                                                   61.9%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                                       23.1%
Less local presence                                                                                    0.0%
Don't know                                                                                            15.0%

35. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place,          Percentage of Respondents
which of the following would you attribute to? (Choose no more than TWO)                   (Responses Combined; N=158)
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                                   51.9%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                       32.3%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                                     25.3%
The Government works inefficiently                                                                    20.9%
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the
                                                                                                      17.7%
ground
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                                 13.3%
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                                    7.0%
Poor coordination with the European Commission and international partners                             4.4%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                                                 3.8%
Other                                                                                                 3.2%




                                                           61
                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

1. In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved                     Importance
in the following areas of development in Croatia?
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                                                  N      DK     Mean      SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                                       144      9     7.49     2.31
2.    Information and communications technology                                             147      6     7.38     2.19
3.    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                      149      3     6.77     2.50
4.    Crime and violence                                                                    142     10      5.44    2.73
5.    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                               147      5      7.66    2.23
6.    Urban development                                                                     144      6      7.23    2.05
7.    Environmental sustainability                                                          145      5      7.76    2.01
8.    Regulatory framework                                                                  146      4      7.40    2.33
9.    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                131     19      5.31    2.80
10.   Poverty reduction                                                                     148      5      8.05    2.01
11.   Gender equity                                                                         139     12      6.01    2.57
12.   Private sector development                                                            146      6      8.51    1.62
13.   Foreign direct investment                                                             143      8      8.27    1.93
14.   Water and sanitation                                                                  141     11      6.80    2.50
15.   Trade and exports                                                                     145      5      7.61    2.06
16.   Economic growth                                                                       145      7      8.69    1.76
17.   Energy                                                                                145      6      8.08    1.92
18.   Disaster management                                                                   135     14      6.36    2.45
19.   Public sector governance/reform (i.e., government effectiveness, public
                                                                                            145      8      8.64    1.78
      financial management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
20.   Job creation/employment                                                               143      8      8.20    2.16
21.   Financial markets                                                                     143      9      7.40    2.26
22.   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                141     10      7.24    2.27
23.   Health                                                                                139     10      6.61    2.57
24.   Rural development                                                                     145      6      7.83    2.05
25.   Global/regional integration                                                           143      5      7.50    2.12
26.   Food security                                                                         138     11      6.67    2.50
27.   Education                                                                             139     10      8.11    2.01
28.   Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                        141      7      7.09    2.31
29.   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                         139     12      7.15    2.24
30.   Agricultural development                                                              143      7      7.96    2.13
31. Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                    144      7      7.17    2.45
32. Regional disparities                                                                    141      6      7.52    2.03
33. European Union (EU) income convergence                                                  143      7      8.12    1.93




                                                            62
                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

2. How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it                    Effectiveness
does in the following areas of development in Croatia?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                                  N      DK     Mean      SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                                        49     87     4.94     2.36
2.    Information and communications technology                                              58     79     6.03     2.09
3.    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                       75     61     6.51     2.00
4.    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                61      75     5.43    2.32
5.    Urban development                                                                      53      82     5.85    2.20
6.    Environmental sustainability                                                           65      70     6.48    2.30
7.    Regulatory framework                                                                   61      74     6.08    2.06
8.    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                 30     105     5.17    2.36
9.    Poverty reduction                                                                      58      77     5.29    2.38
10.   Gender equity                                                                          42     93      5.48    2.09
11.   Private sector development                                                             56     78      5.80    2.24
12.   Foreign direct investment                                                              58     76      5.84    2.44
13.   Water and sanitation                                                                   58     75      6.55    2.31
14.   Trade and exports                                                                      55     78      5.87    2.16
15.   Economic growth                                                                        70     65      5.56    2.26
16. Energy                                                                                   54     80      5.80    2.09
17. Disaster management                                                                      35     99      5.09    2.17
18. Public sector governance/reform (i.e., government effectiveness, public
                                                                                             84     53      5.64    2.37
    financial management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
19. Job creation/employment                                                                  62     72      4.84    2.50
20. Financial markets                                                                        68     67      6.09    2.17
21. Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                   49     84      5.16    2.34
22. Health                                                                                   52     82      5.58    2.39
23. Rural development                                                                        55     80      5.60    2.10
24. Global/regional integration                                                              52     84      6.35    2.15
25.   Food security                                                                          42     92      5.05    2.12
26.   Education                                                                              61     73      5.64    2.40
27.   Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                         60     74      5.78    2.48
28.   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                          51     84      5.53    2.39
29.   Agricultural development                                                               57     78      5.54    2.29
30.   Regional disparities                                                                   52     82      5.56    2.12
31. European Union (EU) income convergence                                                   56     79      5.14    2.26

3. Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the               Percentage of Respondents
program in Croatia? (Select only ONE response)                                                        (N=146)
Don't know                                                                                               36.3%
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                                                 34.9%
In the Central Europe and the Baltics Office in Brussels, Belgium Office                                 17.8%
In the country                                                                                           9.6%
In the Istanbul Operational Center for IFC                                                               1.4%



                                                            63
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

Achieving Development Results*                                                                    N     DK     Mean      SD
4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development
                                                                                                122     25      5.99    2.13
    results in Croatia? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank
Group in Croatia? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                       N      DK     Mean      SD
5. The World Bank’s financial instruments meet the needs of Croatia*                            119     28     6.24     2.16
6. The World Bank Group meets Croatia’s needs for knowledge services*                           118     29     5.97     2.27

Measuring and Correcting Work                                                                     N     DK     Mean      SD
7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its
                                                                                                 93     53      6.34    2.33
   work in real time in Croatia? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and                          Percentage of Respondents
activities in the work you do?                                                                            (N=145)
Weekly                                                                                                       12.4%
Monthly                                                                                                      23.4%
A few times a year                                                                                           40.7%
Rarely                                                                                                       20.0%
Never                                                                                                        3.4%

In Croatia, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge                           Degree
work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                    N      DK Mean          SD
2. Are timely                                                                                   109     33    6.82      1.81
3. Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation                      106     35    6.80      1.80
4. Lead to practical solutions                                                                  112     30    6.75      1.97
5. Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                         115     26    7.50      1.65
6. Are source of relevant information on global good practices                                  115     27    7.59      1.60
7. Are adequately disseminated                                                                  112     29    7.08      1.84
8.   Are translated enough into local language                                                  107     35      7.21    2.13
9.   Are adaptable to Croatia’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                                111     31      6.98    2.07
     circumstances*

Overall Evaluations                                                                              N      DK     Mean      SD
10. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group’s
    knowledge work and activities make to development results in your country?*                 116     26      6.28    2.06
     (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
11. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group’s
    knowledge work and activities?*                                                             113     31      7.28    1.67
     (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




                                                                64
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?                                  Level of Agreement
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                                        N        DK Mean        SD
1.   The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                              81       52     8.36   1.85
2.   The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                                95      39      8.13   1.62
     programs it supports
3.   The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                  87      46      7.62   1.80
4.   The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable                      77      54      7.61   1.86
5.   The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable                            90      42      7.71   1.85
6.   The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Croatia*                                   87      44      7.45   1.88
7.   Working with the World Bank Group increases Croatia’s institutional capacity              106      25      7.66   2.02
8.   Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                                                80      52      7.75   1.80
     appropriate use of them*
9.   The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support                             93      39      8.03   1.78

WBG Promoting PPP in Croatia                                                                     N      DK     Mean     SD
10. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find
    solutions that promote private public partnerships in Croatia?                              75      61      6.29   2.15
     (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

11. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates                Percentage of Respondents
  in Croatia? (Select only one response)                                                                  (N=140)
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Croatia                                                          0.0%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Croatia                                                    32.1%
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                                                       28.6%
Don't know                                                                                                   39.3%

12. Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in                    Percentage of Respondents
  Croatia? (Select only one response)                                                                     (N=140)
The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses on the most important
                                                                                                             33.6%
development challenges in Croatia
The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in Croatia, and it is involved in too
                                                                                                             21.4%
many areas of development
Don't know                                                                                                   45.0%




                                                                65
                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Croatia

1. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of              Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)                                 (Responses Combined; N=138)
Assist in increasing European Union (EU) funds absorption                                          55.8%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                                          26.8%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/ statistics/figures on Croatia’s economy                      15.2%
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                                     14.5%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                                      14.5%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                           13.0%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                           10.9%
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., national, state, local)                10.9%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Croatia’s specific challenges                     9.4%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                             5.8%
Work faster                                                                                        5.8%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                                   4.3%
Increase availability of reimbursable advisory services (RAS)                                      2.2%
Other                                                                                              0.7%

2. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group
offers in Croatia, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which
ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of           Percentage of Respondents
in Croatia? (Select only ONE response)                                                             (N=139)
Knowledge products                                                                                 39.6%
The combination is appropriate for Croatia                                                         22.3%
Financial services                                                                                 17.3%
Convening services                                                                                 10.8%
Don't know                                                                                         8.6%
None of the above                                                                                  1.4%




G. Communication and Information Sharing

1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social                    Percentage of Respondents
  development issues in Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)                              (Responses Combined; N=140)
Internet                                                                                           85.0%
Local television                                                                                   35.0%
Periodicals                                                                                        25.0%
Local newspapers                                                                                   14.3%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                           10.0%
Other                                                                                              7.1%
International newspapers                                                                           6.4%
International television                                                                           2.1%
Local radio                                                                                        1.4%
International radio                                                                                0.0%




                                                          66
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

2. How would you prefer to obtain information from the World Bank Group?              Percentage of Respondents
(Choose no more than TWO)                                                             (Responses Combined; N=139)
World Bank Group’s website                                                                       52.5%
World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/ conferences                                               36.7%
e-Newsletters                                                                                    36.0%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                                                             24.5%
World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials                                      23.7%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                         5.0%
Mobile phones                                                                                    0.0%
Other                                                                                            0.0%

3. Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under
which the WBG will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on      Percentage of Respondents
a list of exceptions?                                                                            (N=140)
Yes                                                                                              29.3%
No                                                                                               70.7%

4. Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities         Percentage of Respondents
    in the past year?                                                                            (N=139)
Yes                                                                                              9.4%
No                                                                                               90.6%

                                                                                      Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                                     (N=15)
Yes                                                                                              93.3%
No                                                                                                6.7%

                                                                                      Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                                           (N=140)
Yes                                                                                              99.3%
No                                                                                               0.7%

                                                                                      Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group website?                                        (N=142)
Yes                                                                                              89.4%
No                                                                                               10.6%

8. Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites (e.g., blogs,     Percentage of Respondents
    Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)?                                                         (N=142)
Yes                                                                                              8.5%
No                                                                                               91.5%

9. Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank          Percentage of Respondents
    Group website?                                                                               (N=138)
High speed/WiFi                                                                                  99.3%
Dial-up                                                                                          0.7%




                                                       67
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.                           Level of Agreement
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                          N        DK      Mean     SD
10. I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate                      116       18       6.99   2.06
11. I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful             116       20       7.62   1.56
12. The World Bank Group’s social media channels (e.g., blogs, Facebook,
    Twitter, YouTube, Flickr) are valuable sources of information about the      27       103      7.19      2.13
    institution
13. When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to
                                                                                 119       16      7.70      2.13
    find it
14. The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                                 81        55      8.14      1.89
    inquiries



H. Background Information

1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                        Percentage of Respondents
(Select only ONE response)                                                                       (N=173)
Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency                          27.7%
Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                                           13.3%
PMU overseeing implementation of project/Consultant/Contractor working on
                                                                                                  9.2%
WBG supported project/program
Private Sector Organization                                                                       9.2%
Media                                                                                             6.4%
Independent Government Institution                                                                5.8%
Bilateral/ Multilateral Agency                                                                    5.2%
Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                                     5.2%
NGO/ Community-Based Organization                                                                 4.6%
Office of Minister                                                                                3.5%
Trade Union                                                                                       2.9%
Office of the President/Prime Minister                                                            1.7%
Other                                                                                             1.7%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                                         1.2%
Local Government Office or Staff                                                                  1.2%
Youth Group                                                                                       .6%
Judiciary Branch                                                                                  .6%




                                                        68
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


H. Background Information (continued)

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                           Percentage of Respondents
(Select only ONE response)                                                                       (N=172)
Other                                                                                            15.1%
Finance and markets                                                                              13.4%
Macroeconomics and fiscal management                                                             12.8%
Generalist (specialized in multiple sectors)                                                     10.5%
Environment and natural resources                                                                7.6%
Education                                                                                        7.6%
Transport and ICT                                                                                7.6%
Trade and competitiveness                                                                        5.8%
Governance                                                                                       5.8%
Energy and extractives                                                                           2.9%
Urban, rural, and social development                                                             2.9%
Social protection and labor                                                                      2.3%
Jobs                                                                                             2.3%
Water                                                                                            1.2%
Fragility, conflict and violence                                                                  .6%
Public-private partnerships                                                                       .6%
Health, nutrition, and population                                                                 .6%
Poverty                                                                                           .6%

3. Which of the following best describes your level of interaction with the World     Percentage of Respondents
Bank Group (IDA, IFC, or MIGA) in your country? (Select only ONE response)                       (N=171)
I currently collaborate with the World Bank Group                                                29.8%
Both of the above (I currently collaborate and previously have collaborated with
                                                                                                 27.5%
the World Bank Group)
I have previously collaborated with the World Bank Group                                         25.7%
I have never collaborated with the World Bank Group                                              17.0%

4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily           Percentage of Respondents
  engage with in Croatia? (Select only ONE response)                                             (N=153)
The World Bank (IDA)                                                                             89.5%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                      5.2%
Other                                                                                            5.2%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                              0.0%

                                                                                        Percentage of Respondents
5. Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?                                      (N=164)
Yes                                                                                                23.8%
No                                                                                                 76.2%

6. If yes, what was your view of how the two institutions work together in              Percentage of Respondents
Croatia? (Select only ONE response)                                                                (N=43)
The two institutions work well together                                                            48.8%
Don't know                                                                                         34.9%
The way the two institutions work together needs improvement                                       16.3%
The two institutions do not work well together                                                     0.0%




                                                        69
                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


H. Background Information (continued)

7. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank       Percentage of Respondents
  Group in Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)                                     (Responses Combined; N=173)
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                               36.4%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                                36.4%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                            35.3%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                           24.3%
Observer                                                                                     17.9%

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
8. What’s your gender?                                                                       (N=173)
Female                                                                                       52.6%
Male                                                                                         47.4%

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
9. Which best represents your geographic location?                                           (N=173)
Zagreb area                                                                                  85.5%
Other urban areas                                                                            13.3%
Rural areas                                                                                  1.2%




                                                     70
                                                                                                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups19
Office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister N= 9  Employee of a Ministry N= 48  PMU/Consultant on WBG project N=16
Bilateral/Multilateral Agency N=9  Private Sector N=16  Financial Sector/Private Bank N=9  NGO/CBO N=8
Media N=11  Independent Government Institution N=10  Academia N=23  Other N=14

A. General Issues facing Croatia

In general, would you say that Croatia is headed in...?
                                                Office of the                  PMU/              Bilateral/                     Financial                                     Independent
                                                 President/     Employee of Consultant on       Multilateral                     Sector/                                      Government
Percentage of Respondents                       PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project          Agency       Private Sector Private Bank       NGO/CBO          Media        Institution    Academia   Other
The right direction                                66.7%           28.3%           25.0%          33.3%             25.0%         12.5%           12.5%          9.1%            60.0%        21.7%      28.6%
The wrong direction                                11.1%           30.4%           43.8%          33.3%             31.3%         62.5%           75.0%          72.7%           20.0%        52.2%      50.0%
Not sure                                           22.2%           41.3%           31.3%          33.3%             43.8%         25.0%           12.5%          18.2%           20.0%        26.1%      21.4%




19
     Only 173 respondents provided the information about their current positions. Thus, only these respondents were included in the across-stakeholder analysis presented in this appendix.
                                                                                                               71
                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


A. General Issues Facing Croatia (continued)
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Croatia. Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Croatia.
(Choose no more than THREE)
                                             Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
Percentage of Respondents                     President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
(Responses combined)                         PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
Global/regional integration                     11.1%          2.1%         6.3%           0.0%              12.5%       0.0%          0.0%      9.1%        20.0%         4.3%      7.1%
Gender equity                                   0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          4.3%      0.0%
Private sector development                      66.7%          27.1%        25.0%          55.6%             56.3%       44.4%         0.0%      45.5%       20.0%         30.4%     28.6%
Energy                                          11.1%          6.3%         12.5%          11.1%             6.3%        0.0%          0.0%      9.1%        0.0%          4.3%      7.1%
Food security                                   0.0%           10.4%        0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Public sector governance/reform                 77.8%          50.0%        62.5%          66.7%             68.8%       55.6%         87.5%     63.6%       80.0%         47.8%     42.9%
Foreign direct investment*                      22.2%          6.3%         12.5%          44.4%             18.8%       11.1%         0.0%      18.2%       40.0%         0.0%      7.1%
Water and sanitation                            0.0%           2.1%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Anti-corruption                                 0.0%           18.8%        18.8%          11.1%             12.5%       11.1%         37.5%     9.1%        20.0%         21.7%     21.4%
Urban development                               0.0%           2.1%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        11.1%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          4.3%      0.0%
Environmental sustainability                    0.0%           2.1%         6.3%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          4.3%      0.0%
European Union (EU) income
                                                11.1%           4.2%        12.5%          11.1%             6.3%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         8.7%      14.3%
convergence
Job creation/employment                         22.2%          47.9%        31.3%          33.3%             12.5%       22.2%         50.0%     36.4%       40.0%         26.1%     50.0%
Rural development                               0.0%           2.1%         0.0%           0.0%              6.3%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Financial markets*                              0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        11.1%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Equality of opportunity*                        0.0%           4.2%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        11.1%         37.5%     0.0%        0.0%          4.3%      7.1%
Health                                          0.0%           2.1%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Transport                                       11.1%          2.1%         6.3%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Climate change                                  0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Agricultural development                        0.0%           6.3%         25.0%          11.1%             0.0%        11.1%         0.0%      9.1%        0.0%          0.0%      14.3%
Education                                       44.4%          33.3%        25.0%          0.0%              18.8%       22.2%         37.5%     27.3%       20.0%         47.8%     14.3%
Poverty reduction                               0.0%           2.1%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      9.1%        0.0%          8.7%      14.3%
Social protection                               0.0%           6.3%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          4.3%      0.0%
Trade and exports                               0.0%           4.2%         0.0%           0.0%              12.5%       11.1%         0.0%      9.1%        10.0%         0.0%      7.1%
Crime and violence                              0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Economic growth                                 22.2%          31.3%        37.5%          11.1%             37.5%       33.3%         37.5%     27.3%       40.0%         52.2%     28.6%
Natural resource management                     0.0%           8.3%         0.0%           11.1%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Disaster management                             0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Regional disparities                            0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          12.5%     0.0%        0.0%          4.3%      0.0%
Law and justice                                 0.0%           10.4%        6.3%           22.2%             12.5%       44.4%         0.0%      27.3%       10.0%         13.0%     7.1%
Regulatory framework                            0.0%           2.1%         0.0%           0.0%              12.5%       0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          8.7%      0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable
                                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
diseases
Information and communications
                                                 0.0%           2.1%        12.5%           0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%      7.1%
technology
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                        72
                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


A. General Issues Facing Croatia (continued)
Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty
in Croatia? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                             Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
Percentage of Respondents                     President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
(Responses combined)                         PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
Social protection*                              22.2%          6.4%         12.5%          0.0%              6.3%        11.1%         0.0%      18.2%       0.0%          13.0%     42.9%
Rural development                               11.1%          19.1%        31.3%          33.3%             18.8%       22.2%         37.5%     0.0%        10.0%         8.7%      0.0%
Regional disparities*                           44.4%          4.3%         6.3%           11.1%             0.0%        11.1%         12.5%     9.1%        10.0%         0.0%      7.1%
Urban development                               0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Regulatory framework                            0.0%           2.1%         12.5%          11.1%             6.3%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        20.0%         13.0%     7.1%
Gender equity                                   0.0%           0.0%         6.3%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Water and sanitation                            0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Equality of opportunity                         0.0%           6.4%         6.3%           11.1%             6.3%        22.2%         0.0%      9.1%        0.0%          17.4%     14.3%
Economic growth                                 66.7%          53.2%        31.3%          44.4%             56.3%       66.7%         62.5%     63.6%       60.0%         65.2%     64.3%
Climate change                                  0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Global/regional integration                     0.0%           2.1%         6.3%           0.0%              6.3%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        20.0%         4.3%      7.1%
Law and justice                                 11.1%          0.0%         12.5%          0.0%              18.8%       11.1%         0.0%      27.3%       20.0%         13.0%     14.3%
Transport                                       0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Crime and violence                              0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable
                                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
diseases
Information and communications
                                                11.1%           2.1%         6.3%           0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       9.1%        0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
technology
Public sector governance/reform                 44.4%          25.5%        25.0%          33.3%             43.8%       11.1%         50.0%     54.5%       30.0%         26.1%     0.0%
Natural resource management                     0.0%           4.3%         6.3%           0.0%              6.3%        0.0%          12.5%     0.0%        10.0%         0.0%      7.1%
European Union (EU) income
                                                11.1%           8.5%         0.0%          22.2%             6.3%         0.0%         0.0%      18.2%       10.0%         4.3%      14.3%
convergence
Environmental sustainability                    0.0%           2.1%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          4.3%      0.0%
Disaster management                             0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Health                                          0.0%           4.3%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          4.3%      0.0%
Anti-corruption                                 0.0%           10.6%        25.0%          33.3%             12.5%       22.2%         25.0%     9.1%        10.0%         13.0%     14.3%
Private sector development*                     11.1%          40.4%        37.5%          22.2%             31.3%       44.4%         12.5%     45.5%       10.0%         8.7%      0.0%
Foreign direct investment*                      0.0%           4.3%         6.3%           22.2%             12.5%       0.0%          0.0%      9.1%        30.0%         0.0%      0.0%
Education*                                      33.3%          29.8%        18.8%          0.0%              25.0%       0.0%          50.0%     0.0%        20.0%         52.2%     21.4%
Energy                                          0.0%           2.1%         6.3%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      7.1%
Agricultural development                        0.0%           14.9%        6.3%           22.2%             0.0%        22.2%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          4.3%      14.3%
Job creation/employment                         33.3%          46.8%        25.0%          33.3%             31.3%       55.6%         37.5%     27.3%       30.0%         47.8%     64.3%
Financial markets                               0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Trade and exports                               0.0%           6.4%         6.3%           0.0%              12.5%       0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        10.0%         0.0%      0.0%
Food security                                   0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                                                                                        73
                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


A. General Issues Facing Croatia (continued)
When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this woul d be achieved in Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                             Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
Percentage of Respondents                     President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
(Responses combined)                         PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
Greater access to health and
                                                 0.0%           2.2%         6.3%           0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         4.3%      0.0%
nutrition for citizens
Better entrepreneurial opportunities
(i.e., to start small and medium sized          44.4%          34.8%        43.8%          44.4%             37.5%       44.4%         37.5%     45.5%       70.0%         43.5%     21.4%
businesses)
A growing middle class                           0.0%          19.6%        12.5%          33.3%             12.5%       11.1%         0.0%      36.4%        0.0%         0.0%      14.3%
Better employment opportunities for
                                                33.3%          26.1%        25.0%          44.4%             6.3%        44.4%         25.0%      0.0%       30.0%         17.4%     28.6%
young people
Better employment opportunities for
                                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%             6.3%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         8.7%      0.0%
women
Greater access to micro-finance for
                                                 0.0%           2.2%        18.8%           0.0%             6.3%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         4.3%      0.0%
the poor
Greater voice and participation for
citizens to help ensure greater                  0.0%           4.3%         6.3%          11.1%             6.3%         0.0%         12.5%      0.0%        0.0%         4.3%      0.0%
accountability
Better opportunity for the poor who
                                                 0.0%           6.5%         6.3%          11.1%             12.5%        0.0%         0.0%      18.2%       10.0%         0.0%      7.1%
live in rural areas
Better opportunity for the poor who
                                                 0.0%           2.2%         6.3%           0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
live in urban areas
Consistent economic growth                      55.6%          50.0%        31.3%          44.4%             50.0%       55.6%         50.0%     18.2%       50.0%         43.5%     57.1%
More reliable social safety net*                0.0%           0.0%         6.3%           0.0%              0.0%        11.1%         25.0%     0.0%        0.0%          4.3%      14.3%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                 0.0%           10.9%        18.8%          0.0%              6.3%        11.1%         0.0%      36.4%       0.0%          4.3%      14.3%
Education and training that better
                                                66.7%          30.4%        18.8%          11.1%             43.8%       11.1%         50.0%     45.5%       40.0%         60.9%     42.9%
ensure job opportunity*
Better quality public services                   0.0%           8.7%         0.0%           0.0%             12.5%       11.1%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         4.3%      0.0%
Other                                            0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                        74
                                                                                                                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Independent
                                    President/PM/      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant          Bilateral/                          Financial Sector/                                           Government
                                    Minister Office      Ministry         on WBG project     Multilateral Agency   Private Sector       Private Bank          NGO/CBO              Media            Institution          Academia             Other

                                    N   Mean     SD    N    Mean   SD     N    Mean   SD       N   Mean    SD      N    Mean   SD     N    Mean     SD    N    Mean     SD    N    Mean    SD     N   Mean    SD    N     Mean      SD   N    Mean    SD
How familiar are you with the
work of the World Bank Group in     9    6.22   2.68   44   6.98   2.13   16   7.06   1.34     9    5.33   1.87    15   6.13   2.62   9     6.11   2.03   8     5.25   0.89   10   5.50    1.35   9   6.67   2.60   22     6.09   2.39   14   5.64    2.50
Croatia?
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Independent
                                    President/PM/      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant          Bilateral/                          Financial Sector/                                            Government
                                    Minister Office      Ministry         on WBG project     Multilateral Agency   Private Sector       Private Bank          NGO/CBO              Media             Institution         Academia             Other
                                    N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N    Mean SD        N    Mean SD        N Mean SD         N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
Overall, please rate your
impression of the World Bank        8    7.50   1.93   39   7.05   1.78   16   7.25   1.29     7    6.71   2.22    13   6.46   1.56   8     5.88   1.73   6     6.00   1.90   9    5.56    1.33   9   7.67   2.87   21     6.19   2.27   10   6.40    2.12
Group’s effectiveness in Croatia.
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Independent
                                    President/PM/      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant          Bilateral/                          Financial Sector/                                            Government
                                    Minister Office      Ministry         on WBG project     Multilateral Agency   Private Sector       Private Bank          NGO/CBO              Media             Institution         Academia             Other
                                    N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N    Mean SD        N    Mean SD        N Mean SD         N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the
WBG's staff is well prepared to
help Croatia solve its most         8    7.75   2.25   40   7.45   1.66   15   7.27   1.62     7    8.14   2.80    11   7.64   1.43   6     7.67   1.63   6     7.33   1.51   8    6.12    2.59   9   7.78   2.39   20     7.50   2.33   10   6.90    2.42
complicated development
challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                                          75
                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Croatia, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most
of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in Croatia? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                             Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
Percentage of Respondents                     President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
(Responses combined)                         PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
Health                                          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        11.1%         12.5%     0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Rural development                               11.1%          6.8%         25.0%          11.1%             20.0%       22.2%         50.0%     10.0%       11.1%         8.7%      7.1%
Foreign direct investment*                      22.2%          2.3%         0.0%           11.1%             13.3%       11.1%         0.0%      10.0%       44.4%         0.0%      28.6%
Education*                                      33.3%          29.5%        0.0%           11.1%             20.0%       11.1%         37.5%     40.0%       11.1%         60.9%     14.3%
Energy                                          0.0%           4.5%         18.8%          0.0%              6.7%        11.1%         0.0%      20.0%       0.0%          0.0%      7.1%
Job creation/employment                         33.3%          25.0%        6.3%           44.4%             20.0%       33.3%         12.5%     30.0%       22.2%         30.4%     28.6%
Financial markets                               22.2%          2.3%         0.0%           0.0%              13.3%       0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        11.1%         4.3%      7.1%
Disaster management                             0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Crime and violence                              0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
European Union (EU) income
                                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%             6.7%         0.0%         0.0%      10.0%        0.0%         8.7%      14.3%
convergence
Transport                                       0.0%           4.5%         6.3%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        11.1%         0.0%      7.1%
Agricultural development                        0.0%           15.9%        18.8%          11.1%             0.0%        22.2%         0.0%      0.0%        11.1%         0.0%      7.1%
Global/regional integration                     0.0%           4.5%         6.3%           0.0%              6.7%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        22.2%         0.0%      0.0%
Gender equity                                   0.0%           0.0%         6.3%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          4.3%      0.0%
Public sector governance/reform                 55.6%          43.2%        50.0%          55.6%             53.3%       33.3%         50.0%     70.0%       44.4%         43.5%     21.4%
Urban development                               0.0%           2.3%         6.3%           0.0%              6.7%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          4.3%      0.0%
Environmental sustainability                    0.0%           6.8%         18.8%          0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Economic growth                                 55.6%          34.1%        43.8%          55.6%             46.7%       22.2%         37.5%     10.0%       33.3%         47.8%     35.7%
Law and justice                                 0.0%           18.2%        6.3%           11.1%             0.0%        33.3%         37.5%     40.0%       33.3%         21.7%     21.4%
Regulatory framework                            11.1%          6.8%         6.3%           11.1%             20.0%       11.1%         0.0%      0.0%        11.1%         13.0%     14.3%
Communicable/non-communicable
                                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
diseases
Natural resource management                      0.0%          6.8%         6.3%           11.1%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%       0.0%       0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Anti-corruption                                  0.0%          13.6%        12.5%          11.1%             0.0%        11.1%         0.0%       0.0%       11.1%         13.0%     28.6%
Information and communications
                                                 0.0%           0.0%         6.3%           0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%      10.0%        0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
technology
Equality of opportunity                         0.0%           9.1%         12.5%          0.0%              0.0%        11.1%         12.5%     0.0%        0.0%          4.3%      0.0%
Private sector development                      22.2%          29.5%        12.5%          22.2%             40.0%       22.2%         12.5%     30.0%       11.1%         13.0%     21.4%
Regional disparities                            22.2%          6.8%         6.3%           22.2%             6.7%        0.0%          25.0%     0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Water and sanitation                            0.0%           0.0%         12.5%          0.0%              0.0%        11.1%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Food security                                   0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Climate change                                  0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          4.3%      0.0%
Poverty reduction                               0.0%           0.0%         6.3%           0.0%              6.7%        0.0%          12.5%     10.0%       0.0%          13.0%     14.3%
Trade and exports                               11.1%          11.4%        0.0%           0.0%              6.7%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        11.1%         0.0%      0.0%
Social protection                               0.0%           2.3%         6.3%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          4.3%      0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                        76
                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of GREATEST VALUE in Croatia?
                                             Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
GREATEST VALUE                                President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
Percentage of Respondents                    PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
Convening/facilitating                          0.0%           14.0%        13.3%          33.3%             6.7%        0.0%          12.5%     0.0%        11.1%         0.0%      14.3%
Data                                            22.2%          2.3%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          4.5%      0.0%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                11.1%          30.2%        20.0%          44.4%             40.0%       55.6%         37.5%     30.0%       44.4%         40.9%     21.4%
Financial resources                             33.3%          9.3%         26.7%          0.0%              26.7%       22.2%         12.5%     10.0%       11.1%         9.1%      21.4%
Capacity development                            11.1%          11.6%        0.0%           0.0%              26.7%       11.1%         0.0%      20.0%       22.2%         31.8%     21.4%
Technical assistance                            0.0%           2.3%         6.7%           0.0%              0.0%        11.1%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      7.1%
Mobilizing third party financial
                                                11.1%           7.0%         6.7%          11.1%             0.0%         0.0%         25.0%     10.0%       11.1%         0.0%      7.1%
resources
Coordination with the European
Commission and international                     0.0%           7.0%        20.0%          11.1%             0.0%         0.0%         12.5%     30.0%        0.0%         0.0%      7.1%
partners
Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e.,
                                                11.1%          14.0%         6.7%           0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         9.1%      0.0%
knowledge sharing)
Other                                            0.0%           2.3%         0.0%           0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         4.5%      0.0%

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of SECOND GREATEST VALUE in Croatia?
                                             Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
2nd GREATEST VALUE                            President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
Percentage of Respondents                    PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
Convening/facilitating                          0.0%           14.0%        0.0%           0.0%              26.7%       0.0%          25.0%     10.0%       0.0%          9.1%      0.0%
Data                                            0.0%           2.3%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      7.1%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                44.4%          23.3%        0.0%           11.1%             13.3%       11.1%         25.0%     30.0%       11.1%         18.2%     0.0%
Financial resources                             0.0%           14.0%        40.0%          0.0%              13.3%       11.1%         25.0%     20.0%       22.2%         18.2%     21.4%
Capacity development                            0.0%           18.6%        13.3%          22.2%             6.7%        11.1%         12.5%     10.0%       22.2%         9.1%      21.4%
Technical assistance*                           11.1%          2.3%         6.7%           44.4%             6.7%        22.2%         0.0%      10.0%       11.1%         9.1%      7.1%
Mobilizing third party financial
                                                22.2%          14.0%        13.3%           0.0%             6.7%        22.2%         0.0%      10.0%       33.3%         4.5%      14.3%
resources
Coordination with the European
Commission and international                     0.0%           4.7%        13.3%          11.1%             6.7%        11.1%         12.5%      0.0%        0.0%         13.6%     14.3%
partners
Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e.,
                                                22.2%           4.7%        13.3%          11.1%             20.0%       11.1%         0.0%      10.0%        0.0%         18.2%     14.3%
knowledge sharing)
Other                                            0.0%           2.3%         0.0%           0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                        77
                                                                                                                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the following areas in Croatia? (1-NotIndependent
                                                                                                                                                      effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                      President/PM/      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant          Bilateral/                          Financial Sector/                                        Government
                                      Minister Office      Ministry         on WBG project     Multilateral Agency   Private Sector       Private Bank       NGO/CBO              Media           Institution          Academia            Other
                                      N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD         N   Mean SD       N Mean SD         N      Mean SD      N    Mean    SD
Project implementation (or other
                                      7    6.43   2.23   35   7.46   1.80   14   7.86   1.17     4    7.50   1.29    11   6.36   1.96   8     6.63   1.60   4   7.25   0.96   3   4.00   1.73   6   8.50   1.23   18    7.06   2.16   8    7.50    1.31
organizational strengthening)*
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                      4    4.75   2.06   17   6.35   1.97   10   6.90   1.66     4    7.00   1.63    10   5.50   1.72   5     3.20   1.10   7   3.57   1.81   2   3.50   2.12   3   5.33   3.06   14    5.57   2.53   4    6.25    0.96
citizens' voices into development)*
Policy design (for clarity and
                                      7    6.71   2.69   29   7.10   1.47   14   6.64   1.95     6    6.67   2.58    10   6.10   1.91   6     6.50   1.98   6   5.67   1.97   2   3.50   2.12   6   8.50   1.38   18    6.56   2.18   9    7.11    1.83
better incentives to achieve
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Croatia to help ensure better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved
in the following aspects of capacity building? (1-Not important all, 10-Very important)                                                         Independent
                                      President/PM/      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant          Bilateral/                          Financial Sector/                                        Government
                                      Minister Office      Ministry         on WBG project     Multilateral Agency   Private Sector       Private Bank       NGO/CBO              Media           Institution          Academia            Other
                                      N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD         N   Mean SD       N Mean SD         N      Mean SD      N    Mean    SD
Project implementation (or other
                                      7    9.29   0.95   33   8.42   1.64   14   8.79   1.12     7    8.71   1.60    11   7.91   1.38   8     8.00   2.33   8   7.75   1.49   2   5.00   0.00   9   8.67   1.23   20    8.00   2.20   10   8.00    2.36
organizational strengthening)
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                      5    6.60   2.70   25   7.52   1.96   13   7.85   1.68     7    8.14   1.57    10   7.30   1.70   7     5.86   2.91   8   7.25   2.92   1   5.00    .     7   7.86   2.12   20    6.70   2.70   9    6.89    2.26
citizens' voices into development)
Policy design (for clarity and
                                      7    8.71   1.11   33   8.18   1.69   14   8.79   1.37     7    8.43   1.72    10   8.80   1.14   9     8.89   1.62   8   7.87   1.55   1   5.00    .     9   9.00   1.23   20    8.25   2.36   10   6.80    2.57
better incentives to achieve




                                                                                                                            78
                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                             Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
Percentage of Respondents                     President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
(Responses combined)                         PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
Arrogant in its approach                         0.0%           2.3%        0.0%           11.1%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%      0.0%         0.0%         4.5%      0.0%
Not client-focused                               0.0%           2.3%        0.0%           11.1%             6.7%         0.0%         0.0%      0.0%         0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
The credibility of its knowledge/data            0.0%           2.3%        0.0%           0.0%              0.0%         0.0%         0.0%      0.0%         0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
Staff too inaccessible                           0.0%           7.0%        14.3%          11.1%             0.0%         0.0%         12.5%     30.0%        0.0%         0.0%      7.1%
Not exploring alternative policy
                                                 0.0%          11.6%         0.0%           0.0%             13.3%        0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         4.5%      7.1%
options
Not collaborating enough with
stakeholders outside the                         0.0%          11.6%         7.1%          22.2%             20.0%       11.1%         37.5%     10.0%       33.3%         13.6%     14.3%
Government
Its advice and strategies do not lend
themselves to practical problem                 22.2%           9.3%        21.4%          11.1%             13.3%        0.0%         0.0%      10.0%        0.0%         9.1%      7.1%
solving
Not enough public disclosure of its
                                                 0.0%           7.0%         0.0%          22.2%             13.3%       11.1%         0.0%      30.0%       11.1%         18.2%     0.0%
work
World Bank Group’s processes too
                                                33.3%          11.6%         0.0%           0.0%             13.3%       55.6%         25.0%     10.0%       33.3%         9.1%      0.0%
complex*
Not willing to honestly criticize
policies and reform efforts in the              11.1%          18.6%        21.4%          22.2%             13.3%       22.2%         12.5%     30.0%       11.1%         27.3%     0.0%
country
Too influenced by developed
                                                11.1%           9.3%        14.3%          11.1%             13.3%       22.2%         37.5%     10.0%        0.0%         18.2%     14.3%
countries
Imposing technocratic solutions
                                                 0.0%           4.7%        21.4%           0.0%             6.7%        11.1%         0.0%      10.0%        0.0%         4.5%      21.4%
without regard to political realities
World Bank Group’s processes too
slow (e.g., too bureaucratic in its             33.3%          23.3%        14.3%           0.0%             6.7%        11.1%         0.0%      10.0%       11.1%         13.6%     0.0%
operational policies and procedures)
Not aligned with the European
Commission’s and International                  11.1%           7.0%         7.1%          11.1%             6.7%        11.1%         12.5%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
Financial Institutions’ work
Not aligned with country priorities             11.1%           4.7%         7.1%           0.0%             6.7%        11.1%         0.0%      10.0%        0.0%         9.1%      7.1%
Not adequately sensitive to
                                                 0.0%           4.7%        14.3%           0.0%             6.7%        11.1%         12.5%      0.0%        0.0%         18.2%     28.6%
political/social realities in Croatia
Other                                           11.1%          2.3%         7.1%           0.0%              0.0%         0.0%         0.0%      10.0%       0.0%          4.5%      0.0%
Don’t know                                      22.2%          18.6%        14.3%          22.2%             20.0%        0.0%         0.0%      10.0%       33.3%         18.2%     35.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                        79
                                                                                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST EFFECTIVE in reducing poverty and promoting “shared prosperity? in Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                            Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
Percentage of Respondents                    President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
(Responses combined)                        PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
Trust Fund management                          0.0%            9.5%        20.0%           0.0%             6.7%         0.0%         25.0%      0.0%       11.1%         4.5%      0.0%
Knowledge products/services
                                               33.3%          19.0%        20.0%          22.2%             26.7%       12.5%         50.0%     30.0%       11.1%         31.8%     21.4%
(analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
Investment lending (financing
                                               77.8%          45.2%        60.0%           0.0%             46.7%       37.5%         50.0%     50.0%       33.3%         27.3%     28.6%
specific projects)
Technical assistance                           33.3%          35.7%        33.3%          66.7%             33.3%       37.5%         25.0%     30.0%       22.2%         27.3%     35.7%
Capacity development                           0.0%           16.7%        20.0%          11.1%             13.3%       25.0%         37.5%     20.0%       44.4%         36.4%     42.9%
Policy based lending / budget
                                               33.3%          19.0%        13.3%          11.1%             6.7%         0.0%         12.5%     30.0%       33.3%         9.1%      14.3%
support to the Government
Multi-sectoral approaches                      0.0%           21.4%        20.0%          33.3%             26.7%       25.0%         0.0%      10.0%       0.0%          4.5%      0.0%
Other                                          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          4.5%      0.0%
Don’t know                                     11.1%          11.9%        0.0%           11.1%             20.0%       25.0%         0.0%      10.0%       11.1%         18.2%     21.4%
Trust Fund management                          0.0%           9.5%         20.0%          0.0%              6.7%        0.0%          25.0%     0.0%        11.1%         4.5%      0.0%

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support help the poorest in Croatia? (Select only ONE response)
                                            Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
                                             President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
Percentage of Respondents                   PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
To a fully sufficient degree                     -            2.3%           -              -                 -           -           12.5%       -           -           9.1%        -
To a somewhat sufficient degree                22.2%          11.6%        13.3%          33.3%             35.7%       11.1%           -       10.0%       33.3%         4.5%      14.3%
To a somewhat insufficient degree              33.3%          27.9%        60.0%          11.1%             21.4%       22.2%         37.5%     30.0%         -           36.4%     21.4%
To a very insufficient degree                  11.1%          7.0%         6.7%           22.2%             7.1%        22.2%           -       20.0%         -           9.1%      14.3%
Don't know                                     33.3%          51.2%        20.0%          33.3%             35.7%       44.4%         50.0%     40.0%       66.7%         40.9%     50.0%




                                                                                                       80
                                                                                                                                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country?
(Choose no more than TWO)
                                                   Office of the                    PMU/                        Bilateral/                      Financial                                                Independent
Percentage of Respondents                           President/       Employee of Consultant on                 Multilateral                      Sector/                                                 Government
(Responses combined)                               PM/Minister        a Ministry  WBG project                    Agency        Private Sector Private Bank            NGO/CBO           Media             Institution         Academia             Other
Academia/think tanks/research
                                                        44.4%              39.5%             33.3%               11.1%             33.3%               25.0%           37.5%            20.0%               0.0%               77.3%              50.0%
institutes*
European Commission*                                    11.1%              20.9%             40.0%               0.0%              6.7%                12.5%           0.0%             10.0%              11.1%               4.5%               0.0%
International partner community                         0.0%               2.3%              6.7%                0.0%              0.0%                0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               22.2%               4.5%               0.0%
Media                                                   0.0%               4.7%              0.0%                0.0%              6.7%                0.0%            12.5%            30.0%              11.1%               4.5%               0.0%
Local Government                                        33.3%              14.0%             20.0%               11.1%             6.7%                0.0%            12.5%            50.0%              11.1%               13.6%              21.4%
Private sector*                                         33.3%              34.9%             20.0%               55.6%             66.7%               75.0%           25.0%            50.0%              55.6%               31.8%              14.3%
Parliament                                              0.0%               7.0%              0.0%                11.1%             0.0%                0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%                4.5%               7.1%
NGOs/Community Based
                                                        0.0%               2.3%                  6.7%            44.4%              6.7%               0.0%            62.5%            10.0%               0.0%               4.5%               21.4%
Organizations (CBOs)*
International Financial Institutions*                   11.1%              0.0%              0.0%                11.1%             20.0%               25.0%           0.0%             0.0%               0.0%                0.0%               0.0%
Youth/university groups                                 11.1%              20.9%             13.3%               22.2%             33.3%               25.0%           25.0%            20.0%              22.2%               22.7%              14.3%
Beneficiaries                                           11.1%              30.2%             33.3%               22.2%             6.7%                25.0%           12.5%            10.0%              44.4%               9.1%               21.4%
Foundations                                             0.0%               2.3%              0.0%                0.0%              0.0%                0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%                4.5%               0.0%
Other*                                                  0.0%               0.0%              0.0%                0.0%              0.0%                0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%                4.5%               21.4%
Don’t know                                              22.2%              4.7%              6.7%                0.0%              6.7%                0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%                4.5%               14.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Croatia? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                                      Independent
                                     President/PM/      Employee of a       PMU/Consultant            Bilateral/                          Financial Sector/                                           Government
                                     Minister Office      Ministry          on WBG project       Multilateral Agency   Private Sector       Private Bank           NGO/CBO             Media            Institution           Academia              Other
                                     N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N    Mean SD       N    Mean SD       N Mean SD           N      Mean SD       N     Mean    SD
Overall the World Bank Group
currently plays a relevant role in   8    5.88   2.17   36   6.47   2.20    14     6.64   1.87     9    6.00   2.00    12   5.67   1.61   8     3.75   2.25    6    6.33   1.21   10   4.40   2.12   7     7.57   2.51   21     5.86   2.18   10     7.40   1.65
development in Croatia*
The World Bank Group’s work is
aligned with what I consider the     8    6.63   2.13   35   6.51   1.84    14     6.57   1.74     9    6.00   2.24    12   6.08   1.88   8     5.63   1.69    6    6.33   2.34   10   4.90   1.60   6     8.17   1.72   21     6.33   2.42   10     6.40   2.37
development priorities for Croatia
The World Bank Group supports
programs and strategies that are     7    7.00   1.92   33   6.82   1.72    14     6.86   1.88     8    6.13   2.85    12   6.08   1.78   8     6.25   2.55    6    6.50   2.59   10   5.20   1.87   7     8.00   1.41   20     6.40   2.35   10     6.60   2.59
realistic for Croatia
The World Bank Group treats
clients and stakeholders in          8    8.38   0.92   36   8.03   2.01    14     8.50   1.61     9    7.00   2.92    12   7.75   2.26   7     6.86   2.41    7    7.29   1.89   7    6.29   2.50   8     8.50   1.41   21     7.57   2.01   10     7.50   2.22
Croatia with respect
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                              81
                                                                                                                                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Croatia, in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                                                                                                        Independent
                                      President/PM/      Employee of a       PMU/Consultant            Bilateral/                                  Financial Sector/                                             Government
                                      Minister Office      Ministry          on WBG project       Multilateral Agency       Private Sector           Private Bank        NGO/CBO              Media               Institution            Academia             Other
                                      N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD                N Mean SD               N Mean SD           N Mean SD         N   Mean SD           N Mean SD           N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
Responsiveness*                       8    7.13   3.18   33   7.21   1.65    13     8.15   1.35     7    7.43   1.81        10   5.80   1.81       8     5.38   1.92    5   6.80   1.79   6   3.67       1.37   6     7.33   2.07   18     5.94   2.36   8     6.88   1.81
Flexibility (in terms of the
institution’s products and            8    6.75   2.12   32   6.72   2.28    14     7.50   1.65     7    6.29   2.43        10   5.90   1.79       8     5.38   1.69    4   5.50   1.73   6   4.00       2.19   6     8.00   1.67   17     5.88   2.21   9     6.33   2.29
services)*
Flexibility (in terms of changing
                                      8    6.88   1.89   31   6.74   2.21    13     6.85   2.04     7    6.14   2.67        9    6.00   1.87       8     5.75   1.91    5   6.40   1.82   6   4.17       2.14   6     7.50   1.76   18     5.94   2.31   9     6.11   2.37
country circumstances)
Being inclusive*                      7    7.14   1.77   30   6.97   1.85    13     7.54   1.61     7    6.43   3.05        12   6.25   1.82       7     5.86   1.86    7   5.57   1.81   7   4.14       2.12   5     7.60   1.82   18     6.78   1.90   8     7.00   1.51
Openness (sharing data and other
                                      8    8.25   1.49   33   7.42   2.19    13     7.77   2.09     7    6.86   2.27        12   7.00   2.09       8     7.00   2.39    6   6.33   1.63   9   4.11       1.05   7     9.00   0.82   21     7.29   1.90   8     8.00   1.60
information)*
Staff accessibility*                  8    8.63   1.51   33   7.97   1.78    14     8.21   1.63     7    6.71   2.69        12   7.33   2.15       8     7.00   1.69    6   7.00   1.27   6   4.33       1.63   7     8.14   2.41   18     7.56   2.20   9     7.78   2.39
Straightforwardness and honesty*      7    8.57   1.27   33   7.52   2.18    13     8.15   1.63     7    6.86   2.91        12   7.17   1.99       8     6.63   1.92    7   6.57   1.90   7   4.29       1.80   6     8.50   1.38   19     7.26   2.23   9     7.33   2.69
Ease of access to the people at the
WBG who are making decisions          6    7.83   1.47   34   8.24   1.69    14     8.29   1.59     6    6.50   3.08        10   6.90   2.28       6     6.17   2.04    6   7.00   1.79   6   4.83       2.32   5     9.20   1.30   16     6.81   2.61   8     7.62   2.62
important to my work*
Collaboration with civil society      3    6.33   1.53   20   7.10   1.74    8      7.13   1.25     5    7.40   1.52        10   6.80   2.10       3     7.33   1.16    7   5.43   2.15   5   4.60       1.52   2     8.00   1.41   18     6.22   1.87   8     7.00   1.07
Collaboration with the
                                      7    8.14   0.69   26   8.12   1.63    11     7.55   2.21     7    6.86   2.19        10   6.70   2.06       7     7.43   1.81    4   6.50   2.08   7   5.14       1.46   5     8.60   1.34   14     6.86   2.03   8     8.25   1.04
Government*
Collaboration with the European
Commission and international          3    7.00   1.73   18   7.72   2.05    10     7.20   1.48     6    6.67   2.73        9    6.78   1.99       5     7.20   1.92    3   5.33   2.08   5   5.20       1.10   3     8.67   1.16   12     7.50   2.02   5     8.40   1.34
partners
Collaboration with the private
                                      2    6.00   2.83   21   6.52   2.40    9      6.33   1.50     5    7.20   1.48        11   5.64   2.29       7     4.14   2.12    3   6.00   2.65   6   4.33       2.81   4     7.00   1.41   15     6.00   1.85   6     6.17   2.14
sector
The speed in which it gets things
                                      5    5.80   2.78   30   6.77   1.83    13     7.38   1.12     7    6.14   3.02        9    5.78   2.11       7     5.57   2.15    5   5.40   1.82   4   3.50       2.08   5     7.80   1.92   17     5.12   2.23   4     5.50   2.89
accomplished on the ground*
Being a long-term partner*            8    7.63   1.77   34   7.79   1.74    13     8.46   1.39     7    6.86   2.91        12   7.17   2.37       8     6.62   2.50    7   7.14   2.80   8   5.88       2.03   6     8.83   0.98   17     6.65   2.06   8     8.50   1.20
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To be more effective development partner in Croatia, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have? (Select only ONE response)
                                                    Office of the                    PMU/                        Bilateral/                          Financial                                                      Independent
                                                     President/       Employee of Consultant on                 Multilateral                          Sector/                                                       Government
Percentage of Respondents                           PM/Minister        a Ministry  WBG project                    Agency            Private Sector Private Bank              NGO/CBO           Media                 Institution         Academia            Other
More local presence                                      77.8%              57.1%             50.0%               55.6%                 85.7%                   55.6%          75.0%           90.0%                  50.0%               52.4%              50.0%
The current level of local presence is
                                                         11.1%              23.8%             42.9%               33.3%                        -                44.4%          12.5%                 -                37.5%               38.1%              7.1%
adequate
Less local presence                                        -                  -                     -                   -                 -                        -             -               -                      -                    -                 -
Don't know                                               11.1%              19.0%                 7.1%            11.1%                 14.3%                      -           12.5%           10.0%                  12.5%               9.5%               42.9%




                                                                                                                                   82
                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                             Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
Percentage of Respondents                     President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
(Responses combined)                         PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
The World Bank Group does not do
                                                22.2%           9.8%         0.0%           0.0%             6.7%        22.2%         0.0%      20.0%        0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
adequate follow through/follow-up
Poor coordination with the European
Commission and international                     0.0%           2.4%        21.4%           0.0%             6.7%        11.1%         12.5%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
partners
The World Bank Group is not
sensitive enough to political/social            22.2%           7.3%        14.3%          22.2%             13.3%       11.1%         37.5%     20.0%       14.3%         33.3%     23.1%
realities on the ground
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity
                                                33.3%          43.9%        35.7%          44.4%             60.0%       66.7%         62.5%     60.0%       57.1%         52.4%     69.2%
in Government
There is not an adequate level of
                                                 0.0%          12.2%         0.0%          44.4%             6.7%         0.0%         25.0%     10.0%        0.0%         19.0%     30.8%
citizen/civil society participation*
The World Bank Group works too
                                                 0.0%           4.9%         7.1%           0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%      10.0%       14.3%         4.8%      0.0%
slowly
The Government works inefficiently              11.1%          14.6%        42.9%          33.3%             20.0%       11.1%         25.0%     30.0%       14.3%         23.8%     15.4%
Political pressures and obstacles               33.3%          26.8%        42.9%          22.2%             33.3%       44.4%         12.5%     20.0%       14.3%         9.5%      15.4%
Reforms are not well thought out in
                                                44.4%          53.7%        14.3%          22.2%             33.3%       11.1%         25.0%     10.0%       28.6%         28.6%     30.8%
light of country challenges
Other                                            0.0%           2.4%         0.0%           0.0%             6.7%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%       14.3%         9.5%      0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                        83
                                                                                                                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


C. World Bank Group’s Sectoral Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Croatia? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                                                                                    Independent
                                  President/PM/      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant          Bilateral/                          Financial Sector/                                         Government
                                  Minister Office      Ministry         on WBG project     Multilateral Agency   Private Sector       Private Bank       NGO/CBO               Media           Institution          Academia            Other
                                  N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD         N    Mean SD       N Mean SD         N      Mean SD      N    Mean    SD
Anti-corruption                   8    6.50   1.69   33   6.76   2.59   10   8.60   1.51     9    8.44   2.24    15   7.07   1.75   9     8.67   1.32   8   8.75   1.39   10   6.70   2.58   7   7.86   1.77   21    7.52   2.56   12   7.42    3.00
Information and communications
                                  8    7.88   2.36   34   7.50   1.48   13   8.54   1.20     9    7.00   2.55    15   7.40   2.23   8     4.63   2.72   7   7.57   2.23   10   7.20   2.86   7   6.29   2.75   21    7.05   2.31   13   8.38    1.50
technology*
Transport                         7    7.43   3.10   35   6.97   2.09   13   7.38   2.60     9    5.56   3.36    15   6.67   2.35   8     4.63   2.97   8   7.50   1.60   10   6.60   2.55   8   6.50   3.07   21    6.14   2.50   13   8.00    1.68
Crime and violence                7    5.43   3.36   34   5.32   2.83   11   5.09   2.77     9    5.89   2.67    14   5.57   2.17   8     4.87   3.60   8   5.00   3.25   10   4.90   1.79   6   4.67   2.88   21    5.48   2.68   12   6.42    2.75
Law and justice                   6    7.17   2.04   35   7.17   2.70   12   7.75   1.82     9    7.89   2.89    15   7.80   2.04   9     8.67   1.32   8   7.62   2.00   10   7.10   2.23   8   7.88   1.36   21    8.00   2.15   12   7.50    2.51
Urban development                 6    7.67   1.75   33   6.91   1.81   13   7.77   1.36     9    7.44   2.13    14   7.79   2.08   9     6.56   3.28   7   6.57   2.23   10   6.10   2.77   7   7.00   1.92   21    7.29   1.93   13   7.92    1.66
Environmental sustainability      7    7.71   0.95   33   7.30   1.78   13   9.23   1.01     9    8.33   1.87    14   7.14   2.45   9     8.00   1.87   8   7.25   2.49   10   7.30   2.50   8   7.63   2.39   20    7.55   2.21   12   8.42    1.83
Regulatory framework*             6    8.50   1.05   33   6.30   2.64   14   7.50   2.14     9    8.56   1.67    15   8.33   1.68   8     7.38   2.67   8   5.75   2.32   10   7.80   2.15   7   7.86   1.46   21    8.00   2.12   13   6.92    2.78
Communicable/non-
                                  5    5.20   2.49   29   5.62   2.58   9    4.78   3.19     9    6.22   2.49    15   5.13   2.77   7     3.86   3.24   8   3.75   3.06   8    4.25   2.32   7   4.14   3.19   20    5.85   2.91   12   6.33    2.46
communicable diseases
Poverty reduction                 7    8.00   1.63   34   8.26   1.56   13   8.08   1.85     9    8.89   1.05    15   7.40   2.50   9     7.22   3.70   8   8.25   1.58   10   8.00   2.06   8   8.13   2.10   21    7.81   1.91   12   8.33    2.43
Gender equity                     6    5.17   2.23   31   5.97   2.65   12   6.58   2.39     9    7.33   2.87    14   5.93   2.17   9     3.78   2.77   8   6.13   2.80   10   5.50   2.76   7   5.71   2.87   19    6.26   2.49   12   6.33    2.06
Private sector development        7    8.71   1.60   34   8.56   1.38   12   8.33   1.56     9    8.56   1.74    15   8.80   1.78   9     9.22   0.97   8   7.50   2.00   10   8.00   2.06   8   9.00   0.93   21    8.33   2.03   11   8.45    1.57
Foreign direct investment         7    8.29   1.50   33   8.18   1.51   11   7.73   2.65     9    8.22   2.05    15   8.80   1.32   9     7.89   3.44   8   8.50   2.00   10   8.40   2.01   8   9.13   0.99   20    7.65   2.08   11   8.64    1.80
Water and sanitation              5    7.20   1.48   33   6.79   2.36   13   8.00   2.61     9    7.33   2.29    14   7.14   2.18   8     5.13   3.83   7   7.00   2.58   10   5.90   2.33   7   6.71   2.43   21    6.52   2.42   12   6.42    2.84
Trade and exports                 7    8.43   1.27   34   7.38   1.89   12   7.25   2.26     9    6.56   2.01    13   8.38   1.50   9     6.89   3.41   8   7.75   1.67   10   8.00   1.89   8   9.00   0.76   21    6.81   2.34   12   8.33    1.83
Economic growth                   7    9.00   1.16   32   8.72   1.40   13   8.38   1.98     9    8.89   1.54    15   9.20   0.94   9     7.89   3.44   8   9.25   0.71   10   8.40   1.90   8   9.25   0.89   21    8.19   2.27   11   8.82    1.83
Energy                            7    8.00   1.63   33   8.00   1.98   13   8.62   1.90     9    6.89   2.98    15   8.80   0.94   9     7.44   3.01   8   8.38   1.19   9    8.33   1.94   7   8.14   2.04   21    7.57   1.75   12   8.42    1.44
Disaster management               6    6.83   2.56   31   6.61   2.17   12   7.00   2.92     9    6.33   2.96    13   6.15   1.68   7     5.86   3.29   8   4.87   2.85   8    4.75   2.25   8   7.25   2.32   20    6.25   2.45   11   6.64    2.38
Public sector governance/reform   7    8.57   1.62   33   8.64   1.69   14   7.93   2.20     9    9.56   0.53    15   8.93   1.49   9     9.44   0.73   8   8.63   1.60   10   8.60   2.27   8   9.13   0.84   20    8.75   1.80   10   7.00    2.71
Job creation/employment           7    8.57   1.40   33   8.36   1.69   13   7.46   2.88     9    8.78   1.72    15   8.60   1.24   8     8.00   2.14   8   7.63   2.97   10   7.80   3.08   8   8.00   3.07   19    8.21   2.30   11   8.18    2.27
Financial markets                 7    8.71   1.11   31   7.16   1.88   13   6.77   2.86     9    7.11   2.71    15   8.40   1.50   9     6.56   3.01   8   7.25   2.96   10   6.90   1.91   8   6.25   3.11   20    7.65   2.16   11   8.00    1.55
Equality of opportunity           5    7.00   2.12   31   7.29   2.48   12   6.75   2.90     9    8.11   2.62    15   7.07   1.83   9     6.56   2.79   8   7.75   2.05   10   6.30   1.83   8   7.37   1.60   19    7.58   1.92   13   7.23    2.62
Health                            5    6.40   2.61   33   6.97   2.58   10   5.90   3.64     9    7.00   2.24    15   7.00   1.81   8     5.50   2.73   8   6.25   2.92   10   6.10   2.64   7   6.00   3.22   21    7.10   2.30   11   5.91    2.55
Rural development                 7    8.14   1.57   33   8.18   1.53   13   8.62   1.19     9    7.67   2.12    15   8.00   2.14   9     6.89   3.18   8   7.63   2.07   10   7.00   2.79   8   6.88   3.14   20    7.75   1.80   11   7.82    2.23
Global/regional integration       6    7.83   1.84   33   7.36   1.88   13   8.23   1.42     8    8.13   2.70    14   7.43   2.17   9     6.33   3.12   8   5.75   2.49   10   6.70   2.75   8   8.38   1.19   20    7.80   1.82   12   8.00    1.86
Food security                     5    7.20   1.79   31   7.26   2.25   13   6.92   2.33     9    6.33   2.96    15   6.07   2.55   8     6.88   2.30   8   4.25   2.77   10   6.20   2.62   8   6.25   3.01   18    7.33   2.09   11   6.27    2.83
Education                         7    8.71   1.38   33   8.24   2.00   12   7.75   1.49     8    7.88   1.81    14   8.36   1.22   8     7.75   1.83   8   7.88   3.00   10   8.10   2.33   7   7.57   2.94   19    8.53   1.98   11   7.36    2.69
Social protection                 6    7.00   2.10   34   7.12   2.27   11   7.09   2.39     9    6.67   3.32    15   7.73   1.22   7     6.57   2.99   7   7.14   2.91   10   6.70   2.41   8   6.63   2.62   21    7.43   1.86   11   6.36    2.91
Climate change*                   5    7.20   2.49   32   7.47   1.83   12   9.17   0.94     9    7.67   1.87    15   6.60   1.72   7     5.71   3.59   8   6.75   2.82   10   6.00   2.06   8   7.13   2.70   20    6.65   2.18   11   7.18    2.71
Agricultural development          6    8.50   1.38   34   8.21   1.86   12   8.75   1.14     9    8.89   1.17    15   7.73   2.25   8     7.25   3.45   8   7.88   2.48   10   7.20   2.53   7   6.86   3.53   20    7.40   1.98   12   8.25    1.96
Natural resource management       7    7.00   1.63   33   7.06   2.42   12   7.75   2.70     9    6.56   3.28    15   7.00   2.10   8     6.25   3.28   8   7.50   2.67   10   6.40   2.72   7   7.14   2.85   21    7.52   2.21   12   7.75    2.09
Regional disparities              7    8.71   1.25   33   7.55   1.95   13   7.69   1.60     8    8.25   1.75    15   7.07   1.79   8     6.88   3.09   7   7.14   3.02   10   7.00   2.26   7   7.86   2.04   20    7.35   2.03   11   7.73    2.20
European Union (EU) income
                                  7    8.43   1.90   31   8.48   1.57   13   8.31   2.14     9    7.67   2.40    15   8.07   1.49   9     7.22   2.99   8   7.88   1.55   9    7.56   2.56   7   8.29   1.80   21    7.71   2.15   12   8.83    1.27
convergence
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                        84
                                                                                                                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


C. World Bank Group’s Sectoral Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Croatia? (1-Not effective Independent
                                                                                                                                                      at all, 10-Very effective)
                                   President/PM/      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant          Bilateral/                          Financial Sector/                                        Government
                                   Minister Office      Ministry         on WBG project     Multilateral Agency   Private Sector       Private Bank       NGO/CBO              Media           Institution          Academia           Other
                                   N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD         N   Mean SD       N Mean SD         N      Mean SD      N   Mean    SD
Anti-corruption                    2    1.00   0.00   10   5.00   2.75   8    5.00   2.27     1    8.00    .      4   5.50    1.29   5     4.20   2.59   3   5.67   1.16   1   2.00    .     1   6.00    .     9     5.33   2.18   4   4.25    2.22
Information and communications
                                   3    2.67   1.53   14   6.07   1.64   9    6.00   1.58     1    9.00    .      6   6.17    1.47   5     6.20   2.17   3   6.00   1.73   1   2.00    .     1   6.00    .     10    5.90   2.64   3   7.67    1.53
technology
Transport                          3    5.67   4.51   20   6.55   1.36   10   6.80   1.55     3    6.00   3.61    5   6.20    1.10   6     5.67   1.37   3   5.67   1.16   5   5.80   3.03   2   8.50   2.12   10    6.10   2.56   6   7.83    1.47
Law and justice                    1    1.00    .     14   5.64   1.91   8    5.88   2.90     3    5.67   4.16    4   5.75    0.96   6     3.83   2.32   4   5.50   1.00   3   3.00   1.73   2   7.50   0.71   10    5.60   2.27   4   5.25    1.50
Urban development*                 2    3.50   3.54   11   5.73   1.49   7    6.71   2.22     1    8.00    .      5   5.80    1.10   5     3.20   1.64   3   5.33   0.58   2   4.00   2.83   1   7.00    .     9     5.89   2.71   5   8.00    1.41
Environmental sustainability*      2    3.50   3.54   14   6.64   1.87   11   8.09   1.30     1    9.00    .      6   6.67    1.63   6     4.50   2.59   3   5.33   0.58   2   4.50   3.54   2   8.50   2.12   11    6.00   2.76   5   6.40    2.19
Regulatory framework               3    5.33   3.79   13   6.00   1.92   7    6.29   2.14     2    6.00   4.24    7   5.86    2.27   4     6.00   1.41   4   6.50   1.92   2   4.00   2.83   1   8.00    .     12    6.17   2.08   4   5.75    1.26
Communicable/non-
                                   1    1.00    .     4    5.00   2.94   3    5.00   3.61     1    8.00    .      3   5.33    1.53   2     4.50   0.71   3   4.00   1.73   1   2.00    .     1   7.00    .     8     5.87   2.23   2   4.50    0.71
communicable diseases
Poverty reduction                  1    1.00    .     15   5.93   1.67   6    5.17   2.56     2    5.00   5.66    5   5.40    0.89   5     3.00   2.35   4   5.75   0.96   3   4.00   2.65   2   8.50   2.12   10    4.90   2.81   3   5.33    0.58
Gender equity                      1    1.00    .     10   5.40   1.65   4    4.75   2.99     1    8.00    .      4   5.75    0.96   3     5.33   0.58   3   5.33   0.58   2   3.00   1.41   1   7.00    .     9     5.67   2.78   2   6.50    0.71
Private sector development         3    5.00   3.46   13   6.08   1.19   6    6.50   1.64     2    5.50   4.95    6   5.83    0.98   5     5.20   3.19   3   5.33   0.58   3   5.33   3.51   1   8.00    .     9     5.00   3.24   3   6.00    1.73
Foreign direct investment          3    5.00   3.46   12   5.83   1.85   5    7.20   2.17     2    5.00   5.66    5   5.80    0.84   6     4.83   2.48   4   5.25   1.26   3   4.67   3.06   1   8.00    .     9     5.00   2.96   6   7.50    2.59
Water and sanitation*              3    5.33   3.79   14   7.21   1.89   7    8.43   0.98     3    7.00   1.73    5   6.40    1.52   5     5.20   0.84   3   4.33   1.16   3   3.67   2.89   1   8.00    .     9     5.67   2.96   3   8.33    1.53
Trade and exports                  3    5.33   3.79   14   5.93   1.49   5    7.80   1.30     2    5.50   3.54    5   6.00    1.00   6     5.33   3.33   3   5.00   0.00   3   3.67   1.53   1   8.00    .     8     5.13   2.59   3   6.67    0.58
Economic growth                    3    5.33   3.79   18   5.33   1.68   7    7.43   1.90     3    5.67   4.04    5   6.20    0.84   7     3.43   2.37   3   5.00   0.00   5   5.40   2.41   1   8.00    .     11    5.45   2.58   5   5.20    1.64
Energy                             2    4.50   4.95   11   5.82   0.98   6    6.67   2.94     1    8.00    .      5   6.00    1.00   7     4.57   2.30   3   5.67   1.16   4   5.25   3.20   1   8.00    .     9     5.44   2.13   3   6.00    1.00
Disaster management                1    1.00    .     8    5.13   1.96   4    4.75   3.20     1    8.00    .      4   5.50    0.58   1     5.00     .    3   4.33   1.16   2   2.50   0.71   1   7.00    .     7     5.14   2.61   2   6.50    0.71
Public sector governance/reform*   3    4.67   3.51   21   5.71   2.08   10   6.30   2.11     3    6.33   3.79    7   5.14    1.77   6     3.17   2.40   4   5.75   1.50   6   4.00   1.67   3   9.33   1.16   13    6.23   2.46   6   5.00    1.67
Job creation/employment            3    4.67   3.51   15   4.67   1.45   5    5.60   2.79     2    5.00   5.66    5   5.40    1.52   6     3.17   3.55   4   5.75   1.50   4   2.75   0.96   2   8.00   1.41   9     4.44   3.09   5   5.00    1.73
Financial markets                  3    5.67   4.04   17   5.76   1.56   6    6.83   1.84     3    7.67   1.53    8   5.88    2.10   6     6.67   3.14   3   5.00   0.00   5   4.20   2.17   3   7.33   1.16   8     5.63   2.72   4   7.00    1.83
Equality of opportunity            2    4.50   4.95   12   5.17   2.33   5    5.80   3.11     1    8.00    .      5   6.00    1.58   4     3.75   2.22   3   5.00   0.00   3   2.33   0.58   1   7.00    .     7     4.86   2.85   5   5.80    1.10
Health*                            3    4.67   3.51   13   5.92   1.55   6    5.67   2.73     2    5.00   4.24    5   6.20    1.64   3     2.67   1.53   3   4.33   1.16   3   2.33   0.58   1   8.00    .     9     6.11   2.57   3   8.33    1.53
Rural development*                 3    4.67   3.51   10   5.70   0.68   8    6.75   2.25     1    8.00    .      5   6.00    1.58   4     3.50   2.38   4   4.50   1.00   4   3.25   1.89   2   8.00   1.41   8     5.50   2.45   4   6.00    0.82
Global/regional integration        2    4.50   4.95   11   6.55   1.64   7    7.00   2.24     1    9.00    .      5   6.00    1.00   4     5.25   2.87   3   5.00   0.00   3   3.33   2.31   2   8.50   0.71   9     6.56   2.07   3   7.67    1.53
Food security                      1    1.00    .     10   5.50   2.07   5    5.40   1.95     1    8.00    .      4   5.00    1.63   3     3.33   2.52   3   4.67   0.58   2   2.00   0.00   1   7.00    .     8     5.25   2.38   3   5.33    0.58
Education                          2    4.50   4.95   14   5.36   2.10   7    6.57   2.37     2    6.00   2.83    5   5.40    1.52   5     4.00   2.12   3   5.67   1.16   3   2.33   0.58   2   9.00   1.41   12    6.42   2.54   4   4.75    2.06
Social protection                  1    1.00    .     15   5.93   2.52   7    6.71   2.56     1    8.00    .      6   5.83    1.84   6     5.50   3.27   3   5.33   0.58   4   4.50   2.89   1   8.00    .     8     5.13   2.85   6   5.67    1.86
Climate change                     1    1.00    .     12   4.83   2.21   7    7.57   2.15     2    5.00   4.24    6   6.17    1.94   4     5.75   2.87   3   4.33   1.16   3   4.67   3.06   1   7.00    .     8     5.00   2.56   3   6.00    0.00
Agricultural development           1    1.00    .     12   5.17   1.95   9    7.11   1.97     2    5.00   5.66    6   6.00    1.90   5     3.60   1.67   3   5.33   0.58   4   3.75   2.87   1   8.00    .     8     5.75   2.12   4   5.75    0.50
Regional disparities*              2    2.50   2.12   10   5.40   1.43   8    6.38   2.50     1    8.00    .      6   6.33    2.07   4     3.00   1.41   3   5.33   0.58   3   3.33   1.53   2   8.50   0.71   8     5.88   1.96   4   5.75    0.96
European Union (EU) income
                                   3    4.00   3.61   12   5.00   1.41   5    5.60   2.88     2    8.00   0.00    5   5.60    1.67   5     2.40   1.52   3   4.67   0.58   4   3.75   2.06   2   7.50   2.12   9     5.67   2.74   4   5.25    0.96
convergence
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                         85
                                                                                                                                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Croatia? (Select only ONE response)
                                                  Office of the                        PMU/                        Bilateral/                          Financial                                                        Independent
                                                   President/           Employee of Consultant on                 Multilateral                          Sector/                                                         Government
Percentage of Respondents                         PM/Minister            a Ministry  WBG project                    Agency            Private Sector Private Bank                NGO/CBO           Media                 Institution         Academia             Other
At the Headquarters (in Washington
                                                       57.1%                  44.1%             42.9%               11.1%                 21.4%                   66.7%           14.3%            10.0%                  50.0%               25.0%              28.6%
D.C.)
In the Central Europe and the Baltics
                                                       14.3%                  17.6%             21.4%               22.2%                 28.6%                      -                -            20.0%                  16.7%               15.0%              28.6%
Office in Brussels, Belgium Office
In the Istanbul Operational Center for
                                                            -                   -                    -                    -                      -                22.2%               -                  -                   -                   -                  -
IFC
In the country                                           -                    2.9%              21.4%               22.2%                   -                       -             14.3%            10.0%                  16.7%               10.0%              21.4%
Don't know                                             28.6%                  35.3%             14.3%               44.4%                 50.0%                   11.1%           71.4%            60.0%                  16.7%               50.0%              21.4%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Independent
                                    President/PM/      Employee of a           PMU/Consultant            Bilateral/                                  Financial Sector/                                               Government
                                    Minister Office      Ministry              on WBG project       Multilateral Agency       Private Sector           Private Bank           NGO/CBO             Media                Institution           Academia              Other
                                    N Mean SD          N Mean SD                N Mean SD            N Mean SD                N Mean SD               N Mean SD           N    Mean SD       N    Mean SD           N Mean SD           N      Mean SD       N     Mean    SD
To what extent does the World
Bank Group’s work help to achieve   7    5.71   2.36   27       6.22   2.03    13     6.62   1.66     6    6.83   2.79        10   5.80   1.32       9     4.89   2.15    5    6.80   1.10   9    4.56       2.24   7     7.57   1.72   17     5.12   2.23   10     6.10   2.28
development results in Croatia?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Croatia? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                                                            Independent
                                    President/PM/      Employee of a           PMU/Consultant            Bilateral/                                  Financial Sector/                                               Government
                                    Minister Office      Ministry              on WBG project       Multilateral Agency       Private Sector           Private Bank           NGO/CBO             Media                Institution           Academia              Other
                                    N Mean SD          N Mean SD                N Mean SD            N Mean SD                N Mean SD               N Mean SD           N    Mean SD       N    Mean SD           N Mean SD           N      Mean SD       N     Mean    SD
The World Bank Group's financial
instruments meet the needs of       7    5.86   2.27   27       7.00   1.90    14     6.79   2.05     4    5.00   2.83        11   5.82   1.66       9     5.67   2.00    6    5.50   3.02   9    5.33       1.32   6     8.33   0.82   18     5.06   2.34   6      7.33   1.97
Croatia*
The World Bank Group meets
Croatia’s needs for knowledge       7    6.29   2.06   27       6.67   2.00    13     6.38   1.98     4    5.00   2.83        10   5.20   1.69       9     6.11   2.52    5    4.40   2.19   10   5.20       1.93   6     8.50   0.84   18     4.78   2.34   7      6.00   3.06
services*

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Independent
                                    President/PM/      Employee of a           PMU/Consultant            Bilateral/                                  Financial Sector/                                               Government
                                    Minister Office      Ministry              on WBG project       Multilateral Agency       Private Sector           Private Bank           NGO/CBO             Media                Institution           Academia              Other
                                    N Mean SD          N Mean SD                N Mean SD            N Mean SD                N Mean SD               N Mean SD           N    Mean SD       N    Mean SD           N Mean SD           N      Mean SD       N     Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the
World Bank Group measures and
                                    4    7.00   2.83   21       6.29   2.13    14     7.21   2.08     5    6.00   4.30        8    6.13   1.36       7     5.14   2.12    4    6.75   1.89   3    4.00       3.46   4     8.25   1.50   16     5.88   2.31   6      6.50   2.35
corrects its work in real time in
Croatia?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                                                     86
                                                                                                                                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do? (Select only ONE response)*
                                                    Office of the                    PMU/                        Bilateral/                      Financial                                               Independent
                                                     President/       Employee of Consultant on                 Multilateral                      Sector/                                                Government
Percentage of Respondents                           PM/Minister        a Ministry  WBG project                    Agency        Private Sector Private Bank           NGO/CBO           Media             Institution         Academia             Other
Weekly                                                   14.3%              20.6%             46.2%                 -               7.1%                  -               -               -                  -                 5.0%               7.7%
Monthly                                                  14.3%              23.5%             23.1%               22.2%             28.6%               11.1%             -             20.0%              42.9%               30.0%              23.1%
A few times a year                                       57.1%              32.4%             30.8%               44.4%             28.6%               66.7%           71.4%           30.0%              42.9%               50.0%              38.5%
Rarely                                                   14.3%              23.5%               -                 22.2%             21.4%               22.2%           28.6%           40.0%              14.3%               15.0%              23.1%
Never                                                      -                  -                 -                 11.1%             14.3%                 -               -             10.0%                -                   -                7.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In Croatia, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                                                                                                            Independent
                                      President/PM/      Employee of a       PMU/Consultant            Bilateral/                          Financial Sector/                                          Government
                                      Minister Office      Ministry          on WBG project       Multilateral Agency   Private Sector       Private Bank        NGO/CBO               Media           Institution            Academia              Other
                                      N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N   Mean SD       N Mean SD           N      Mean SD       N     Mean    SD
Are timely                            6    6.67   2.07   24   7.21   1.79    14     6.64   1.55     5    6.40   2.88    11   6.73   1.35   8     6.25   1.91    4    7.25   1.71   6   6.00   2.19   6     8.00   1.67   16     6.31   2.02   7      7.43   1.51
Include appropriate level of
                                      6    6.67   2.50   23   7.22   1.91    14     7.00   1.36     5    6.40   2.88    11   7.00   1.10   8     6.00   1.51    6    6.50   1.23   5   6.60   1.14   5     7.40   1.95   15     6.27   2.34   6      7.00   2.00
stakeholder involvement during
Lead to practical solutions           6    6.33   2.73   26   7.35   1.85    14     6.64   1.99     4    6.25   3.30    11   6.64   0.92   8     6.25   2.12    6    7.00   1.41   6   6.33   1.51   6     7.33   1.97   16     5.88   2.50   7      7.43   1.51
Are accessible (well written and
                                      7    7.00   2.52   27   7.67   1.71    13     7.23   1.64     5    7.80   2.28    11   7.55   1.04   8     7.38   1.60    6    7.33   1.37   5   7.00   1.87   6     8.33   1.37   17     7.29   1.72   8      7.87   1.73
easy to understand)
Are source of relevant information
                                      5    7.60   1.67   26   7.73   1.49    13     7.46   1.71     5    8.00   1.41    11   7.91   1.30   8     7.50   1.85    6    8.00   2.00   7   6.71   1.70   6     8.17   1.47   18     7.33   1.82   8      7.25   1.83
on global good practices
Are adequately disseminated           6    5.83   3.43   24   7.62   1.69    14     7.07   1.69     5    6.20   2.49    11   7.09   1.70   8     6.75   1.49    6    7.17   1.72   6   6.00   1.90   6     9.00   0.63   16     6.69   1.45   8      7.38   1.92
Are translated enough into local
                                      6    6.67   2.81   23   7.30   2.10    14     6.86   2.48     3    6.33   3.79    10   7.10   2.18   8     7.75   1.04    6    6.67   2.07   7   6.57   2.07   4     8.50   1.73   16     7.00   2.19   8      8.75   1.58
language
Are adaptable to Croatia’s specific
development challenges and            6    5.83   2.14   23   7.17   1.72    14     6.79   2.05     5    7.20   2.49    11   7.64   1.69   8     6.88   1.81    6    6.83   1.47   6   5.83   2.64   5     8.80   1.10   17     6.76   2.66   8      6.88   2.64
country circumstances

                                                                                                                                                                                                      Independent
                                      President/PM/      Employee of a       PMU/Consultant            Bilateral/                          Financial Sector/                                          Government
                                      Minister Office      Ministry          on WBG project       Multilateral Agency   Private Sector       Private Bank           NGO/CBO            Media            Institution           Academia              Other
                                      N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N    Mean SD       N   Mean SD       N Mean SD           N      Mean SD       N     Mean    SD
Overall, how significant a
contribution do you believe the
WBG's knowledge work and              6    6.83   1.84   25   6.48   2.10    14     6.71   1.38     5    5.00   3.24    11   5.91   1.58   7     5.00   2.45    5    6.40   1.34   8   5.50   1.85   5     8.20   0.84   18     5.67   2.22   10     7.20   2.25
activities make to development
results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the
technical quality of the World
                                      5    7.20   1.92   25   7.64   1.50    14     7.21   1.42     6    7.00   2.83    12   7.17   1.19   8     6.50   1.93    5    6.60   1.14   6   5.83   1.60   4     9.25   0.50   17     7.24   1.92   9      7.78   1.20
Bank Group's knowledge work and
activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




                                                                                                                               87
                                                                                                                                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                                                                                          Independent
                                     President/PM/      Employee of a           PMU/Consultant            Bilateral/                                  Financial Sector/                                               Government
                                     Minister Office      Ministry              on WBG project       Multilateral Agency       Private Sector           Private Bank           NGO/CBO             Media                Institution           Academia             Other
                                     N Mean SD          N Mean SD                N Mean SD            N Mean SD                N Mean SD               N Mean SD           N    Mean SD        N   Mean SD           N Mean SD           N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
The World Bank Group disburses
                                     5    6.80   2.28   24       8.71   1.12    14     9.50   1.09     2    8.50   2.12        10   8.20   1.55       6     6.17   2.93    1    5.00       .   1   8.00        .     2     9.00   1.41   9      7.89   2.32   5     8.60   1.67
funds promptly*
The World Bank Group effectively
monitors and evaluates the           7    7.86   2.41   26       8.42   1.21    14     8.86   1.23     3    7.33   3.06        11   8.00   1.10       7     7.14   2.34    4    7.00   0.82    2   6.50       2.12   2     9.00   1.41   12     7.67   1.78   5     8.60   1.34
projects and programs it supports
The WBG’s approvals and reviews
                                     5    6.80   2.28   26       7.62   1.92    14     8.00   1.75     3    7.00   3.61        10   7.70   0.95       6     6.67   2.07    2    6.50   0.71    1   8.00        .     2     8.50   0.71   10     7.80   1.23   6     7.83   2.64
are done in a timely fashion
The WBG’s “Safeguard Policy?
                                     3    6.33   2.31   23       7.83   1.59    12     8.42   1.78     1    7.00     .         10   7.30   0.82       5     5.60   1.52    1    5.00       .   1   8.00        .     2     9.00   1.41   11     8.00   1.61   6     6.83   3.55
requirements are reasonable
The WBG’s conditions on its
                                     6    6.33   3.01   25       8.00   1.38    13     8.62   1.76     3    6.67   3.51        10   7.60   1.27       6     6.50   1.87    3    7.00   1.73    3   7.33       0.58   3     8.67   1.16   12     7.42   2.28   4     8.25   1.50
lending are reasonable
The World Bank Group takes
                                     6    7.00   2.45   25       7.64   1.66    14     7.71   1.68     3    6.67   4.16        9    7.44   1.01       5     6.20   2.49    4    6.75   1.26    1   7.00        .     2     8.50   2.12   11     7.45   1.97   5     7.60   2.88
decisions quickly in Croatia
Working with the WBG increases
                                     6    7.67   1.63   25       7.96   1.81    14     7.93   2.17     3    7.00   4.36        10   7.60   0.97       6     6.00   2.83    6    8.17   1.72    6   7.33       1.97   4     8.75   0.96   17     7.35   2.15   7     7.43   2.76
Croatia’s institutional capacity
Where country systems are
adequate, the World Bank Group       5    6.60   1.82   21       7.86   1.82    14     7.86   1.83     3    7.67   3.22        6    8.00   0.89       5     7.00   2.00    3    7.00   1.73    3   8.33       1.16   2     9.00   1.41   11     7.73   1.68   5     7.80   2.95
makes appropriate use of them
The World Bank Group provides
                                     7    7.29   2.14   25       8.16   1.77    14     8.43   1.79     3    7.33   3.06        9    8.56   1.13       6     6.67   1.51    6    8.17   1.72    1   9.00        .     2     9.00   1.41   13     7.62   1.81   5     8.40   2.30
effective implementation support
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Independent
                                     President/PM/      Employee of a           PMU/Consultant            Bilateral/                                  Financial Sector/                                               Government
                                     Minister Office      Ministry              on WBG project       Multilateral Agency       Private Sector           Private Bank           NGO/CBO             Media                Institution           Academia             Other
                                     N Mean SD          N Mean SD                N Mean SD            N Mean SD                N Mean SD               N Mean SD           N    Mean SD        N   Mean SD           N Mean SD           N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe that
the WBG’s work helps to find
                                     5    5.00   3.16   16       6.44   1.86    6      7.17   1.94     3    3.67   2.08        10   6.30   1.64       4     5.25   1.50    2    5.50   2.12    5   5.20       2.17   3     8.00   2.00   14     6.93   2.13   5     6.40   2.97
solutions that promote private
public partnerships in Croatia?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Croatia? (Select only ONE response)*
                                                   Office of the                        PMU/                        Bilateral/                          Financial                                                        Independent
                                                    President/           Employee of Consultant on                 Multilateral                          Sector/                                                         Government
Percentage of Respondents                          PM/Minister            a Ministry  WBG project                    Agency            Private Sector Private Bank                NGO/CBO           Media                 Institution         Academia            Other
The World Bank Group takes too
                                                             -                   -                    -                    -                      -                   -                -                  -                   -                   -                 -
much risk in Croatia
The World Bank Group does not take
                                                        28.6%                  15.6%             28.6%               44.4%                 64.3%                   75.0%           14.3%            50.0%                  16.7%               40.0%              7.7%
enough risk in Croatia
The World Bank Group’s approach to
                                                        28.6%                  43.8%             35.7%                     -                7.1%                   25.0%           28.6%            25.0%                  50.0%               15.0%              30.8%
risk is appropriate
Don't know                                              42.9%                  40.6%             35.7%               55.6%                 28.6%                      -            57.1%            25.0%                  33.3%               45.0%              61.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups



                                                                                                                                      88
                                                                                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in Croatia? (Select only ONE response)
                                           Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
                                            President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
Percentage of Respondents                  PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
The WBG is sufficiently selective and
focuses on the most important                 28.6%          43.8%        35.7%          11.1%             14.3%       25.0%         42.9%     12.5%       33.3%         35.0%     46.2%
development challenges in Croatia
The WBG is not sufficiently selective in
Croatia, and it is involved in too many       14.3%          18.8%        21.4%          22.2%             42.9%       50.0%         28.6%       -            -          20.0%     15.4%
areas of development
Don't know                                    57.1%          37.5%        42.9%          66.7%             42.9%       25.0%         28.6%     87.5%       66.7%         45.0%     38.5%




                                                                                                      89
                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Croatia
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                             Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
Percentage of Respondents                     President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
(Responses combined)                         PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
Provide more adequate data/
knowledge/statistics/figures on                  0.0%          16.1%         0.0%           0.0%             28.6%       12.5%         14.3%     25.0%        0.0%         30.0%     7.1%
Croatia’s economy
Ensure greater selectivity in its work           0.0%          12.9%        14.3%           0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         5.0%      7.1%
Offer more innovative financial
                                                 0.0%           6.5%        21.4%          33.3%             14.3%       12.5%         14.3%     12.5%       14.3%         10.0%     0.0%
products
Increase availability of reimbursable
                                                 0.0%           6.5%         0.0%           0.0%             7.1%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
advisory services (RAS)
Assist in increasing European Union
                                                42.9%          54.8%        78.6%          50.0%             42.9%       62.5%         42.9%     87.5%       57.1%         40.0%     64.3%
(EU) funds absorption
Improve the competitiveness of its
financing compared to markets (e.g.,            14.3%           0.0%         7.1%          16.7%             0.0%        12.5%         14.3%      0.0%        0.0%         5.0%      0.0%
cost, timeliness, other terms)
Reach out more to groups outside of
                                                 0.0%           9.7%        14.3%           0.0%             35.7%       12.5%         14.3%      0.0%       14.3%         15.0%     21.4%
Government
Work faster                                     14.3%          12.9%         0.0%           0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%       14.3%         0.0%      14.3%
Improve the quality of its experts as
related to Croatia’s specific                   28.6%           6.5%         7.1%           0.0%             7.1%         0.0%         0.0%      25.0%        0.0%         15.0%     14.3%
challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge
                                                14.3%          16.1%        14.3%          16.7%             21.4%        0.0%         14.3%     12.5%       14.3%         10.0%     7.1%
services
Collaborate more effectively with
Government clients (e.g., national,              0.0%          12.9%         7.1%           0.0%             7.1%        12.5%         28.6%      0.0%       28.6%         15.0%     7.1%
state, local)
Increase the level of capacity
                                                14.3%          16.1%        14.3%          16.7%             35.7%       37.5%         28.6%     37.5%       14.3%         50.0%     28.6%
development in the country
Reduce the complexity of obtaining
                                                42.9%          16.1%        21.4%          16.7%             0.0%        25.0%         14.3%      0.0%       14.3%         5.0%      14.3%
World Bank Group financing
Other*                                           0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          16.7%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                        90
                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Croatia (continued)

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Croatia, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe
the World Bank Group should offer more of in Croatia? (Select only ONE response)
                                             Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
                                              President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
Percentage of Respondents                    PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
Financial services                              28.6%          15.2%        14.3%          33.3%             21.4%       12.5%         14.3%     28.6%       28.6%         15.0%     7.1%
Knowledge products                              28.6%          36.4%        50.0%          33.3%             50.0%       25.0%         28.6%     42.9%       28.6%         55.0%     35.7%
Convening services                              14.3%          18.2%        7.1%             -               7.1%        12.5%           -         -         14.3%           -       28.6%
None of the above                                 -              -            -              -                 -           -             -         -           -           5.0%      7.1%
The combination is appropriate for
                                                14.3%          24.2%        21.4%             -              7.1%        50.0%         42.9%     14.3%       28.6%         25.0%     7.1%
Croatia
Don't know                                      14.3%           6.1%         7.1%          33.3%             14.3%          -          14.3%     14.3%          -            -       14.3%



G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                             Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
Percentage of Respondents                     President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
(Responses combined)                         PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
Periodicals                                     0.0%           18.2%        21.4%          16.7%             28.6%       37.5%         0.0%      25.0%       28.6%         50.0%     21.4%
International newspapers                        14.3%          6.1%          0.0%          0.0%              14.3%       0.0%          14.3%     0.0%        0.0%          15.0%     0.0%
Local radio                                     0.0%           0.0%          7.1%          0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      12.5%       0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
International radio                             0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Local television                                0.0%           48.5%        28.6%          33.3%             50.0%       37.5%         42.9%     25.0%       14.3%         15.0%     50.0%
International television                        14.3%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        14.3%         5.0%      0.0%
Local newspapers*                               14.3%          15.2%         7.1%          50.0%             0.0%        12.5%         14.3%     50.0%       14.3%         5.0%      14.3%
Internet                                        57.1%          93.9%        100.0%         66.7%             85.7%       87.5%         85.7%     87.5%       57.1%         80.0%     85.7%
Social media (blogs, Facebook,
                                                 0.0%           6.1%        14.3%           0.0%             14.3%       12.5%         28.6%      0.0%       28.6%         10.0%     7.1%
Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)
Other*                                          42.9%           0.0%        14.3%          16.7%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%       14.3%         5.0%      14.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                        91
                                                                                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

How would you prefer to obtain information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                       Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
Percentage of Respondents               President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
(Responses combined)                   PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia     Other
Direct contact with World Bank
                                            28.6%        28.1%        14.3%          16.7%             21.4%       12.5%         28.6%     37.5%        0.0%         40.0%       14.3%
Group
e-Newsletters                               42.9%        21.9%        35.7%          16.7%             57.1%       62.5%         57.1%     37.5%       28.6%         30.0%       42.9%
World Bank Group’s
                                            42.9%        56.3%        57.1%          16.7%             21.4%       12.5%         42.9%     25.0%       42.9%         35.0%       14.3%
seminars/workshops/ conferences
World Bank Group’s publications and
                                            28.6%        25.0%         7.1%          16.7%             35.7%       37.5%         14.3%     25.0%       28.6%         30.0%       14.3%
other written materials
World Bank Group’s website                  14.3%        40.6%        64.3%          83.3%             57.1%       37.5%         42.9%     37.5%       71.4%         55.0%       71.4%
Social media (blogs, Facebook,
                                            0.0%          6.3%        14.3%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%         0.0%      12.5%        0.0%         0.0%        14.3%
Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)
Mobile phones                               0.0%          0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%
Other                                       0.0%          0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the WBG will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                       Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
                                        President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
Percentage of Respondents              PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia     Other
Yes                                         28.6%        33.3%        35.7%          28.6%             14.3%       12.5%         57.1%     37.5%       14.3%         26.3%       28.6%
No                                          71.4%        66.7%        64.3%          71.4%             85.7%       87.5%         42.9%     62.5%       85.7%         73.7%       71.4%

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?
                                       Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
                                        President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
Percentage of Respondents              PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia     Other
Yes                                         14.3%        12.1%           -           14.3%             7.1%        16.7%           -       12.5%       14.3%         10.0%       7.1%
No                                          85.7%        87.9%        100.0%         85.7%             92.9%       83.3%        100.0%     87.5%       85.7%         90.0%       92.9%

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                       Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
                                        President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
Percentage of Respondents              PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia     Other
Yes                                      100.0%         100.0%           -          100.0%             100.0%      50.0%           -       100.0%      100.0%       100.0%       100.0%
No                                          -              -             -             -                  -        50.0%           -          -           -            -            -




                                                                                                  92
                                                                                                                                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Do you have access to the Internet?
                                                     Office of the                   PMU/                        Bilateral/                      Financial                                               Independent
                                                      President/      Employee of Consultant on                 Multilateral                      Sector/                                                Government
Percentage of Respondents                            PM/Minister       a Ministry  WBG project                    Agency        Private Sector Private Bank           NGO/CBO           Media             Institution          Academia             Other
Yes                                                    100.0%               100.0%              100.0%           100.0%             100.0%              100.0%         100.0%           87.5%              100.0%              100.0%           100.0%
No                                                        -                    -                   -                -                  -                   -              -             12.5%                 -                   -                -

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?
                                                     Office of the                   PMU/                        Bilateral/                      Financial                                               Independent
                                                      President/      Employee of Consultant on                 Multilateral                      Sector/                                                Government
Percentage of Respondents                            PM/Minister       a Ministry  WBG project                    Agency        Private Sector Private Bank           NGO/CBO           Media             Institution          Academia             Other
Yes                                                     85.7%               90.9%               92.9%             87.5%             71.4%               87.5%          100.0%           100.0%             100.0%               95.0%              78.6%
No                                                      14.3%               9.1%                7.1%              12.5%             28.6%               12.5%             -                -                  -                 5.0%               21.4%

Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites?
                                                     Office of the                   PMU/                        Bilateral/                      Financial                                               Independent
                                                      President/      Employee of Consultant on                 Multilateral                      Sector/                                                Government
Percentage of Respondents                            PM/Minister       a Ministry  WBG project                    Agency        Private Sector Private Bank           NGO/CBO           Media             Institution          Academia             Other
Yes                                                     14.3%               12.1%                  -              12.5%             14.3%                  -              -                -                  -                 15.0%              7.1%
No                                                      85.7%               87.9%               100.0%            87.5%             85.7%               100.0%         100.0%           100.0%             100.0%               85.0%              92.9%

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
                                                     Office of the                   PMU/                        Bilateral/                      Financial                                               Independent
                                                      President/      Employee of Consultant on                 Multilateral                      Sector/                                                Government
Percentage of Respondents                            PM/Minister       a Ministry  WBG project                    Agency        Private Sector Private Bank           NGO/CBO           Media             Institution          Academia             Other
High speed/WiFi                                        100.0%               100.0%              100.0%           100.0%             100.0%              100.0%         100.0%           100.0%             100.0%              100.0%              92.9%
Dial-up                                                   -                    -                   -                -                  -                   -              -                -                  -                   -                7.1%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                                                                                Independent
                                    President/PM/        Employee of a       PMU/Consultant            Bilateral/                          Financial Sector/                                          Government
                                    Minister Office        Ministry          on WBG project       Multilateral Agency   Private Sector       Private Bank           NGO/CBO            Media            Institution            Academia              Other
                                    N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N    Mean SD       N   Mean SD       N Mean SD            N      Mean SD       N     Mean    SD
I find the World Bank Group’s
                                    5    6.80   2.49    28   6.61    2.13    11     7.00   2.28     6    6.33   2.34    10   7.70   1.25   6     7.50   2.35    7    6.86   1.77   7   6.29   1.98   5     8.00    2.55   18     7.28   1.78   11     7.09   2.66
websites easy to navigate.
I find the information on the
World Bank Group’s websites         6    7.67   1.51    27   7.78    1.31    10     7.30   1.83     6    7.17   1.94    9    8.33   1.12   7     7.57   1.62    7    7.43   1.81   7   6.86   1.07   6     8.33    1.63   18     7.89   1.32   11     7.00   2.41
useful.
The WBG’s social media channels
are valuable sources of             1    9.00    .       7   6.57    1.81     1     7.00    .       1    6.00     .     4    7.25   1.71                        1    5.00    .                       1     10.00    .     6      8.17   1.60   4      6.50   4.04
information about the institution
When I need information from the
World Bank Group I know how to      6    7.00   1.67    27   8.00    2.00    12     8.17   1.64     6    5.67   3.50    9    8.33   0.87   7     7.86   2.80    7    6.14   2.55   8   8.38   1.41   6     8.17    1.84   18     7.78   1.93   11     7.36   2.77
find it
The World Bank Group is
responsive to my information        4    7.75   1.89    21   8.19    1.99    12     8.67   1.56     5    7.00   1.87    5    8.60   1.34   4     8.75   1.50    4    7.00   2.31   4   8.25   1.50   3     9.33    0.58   9      8.22   1.56   8      7.50   3.16
requests and inquiries


                                                                                                                               93
                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


H. Background Information

Which one of the following best describes your level of interaction with the World Bank Group in your country? (Select only ONE response)*
                                             Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
                                              President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
Percentage of Respondents                    PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
I currently collaborate with the
                                                44.4%          52.1%        37.5%          11.1%             40.0%       22.2%           -         -         30.0%         8.7%      14.3%
World Bank Group
I have previously collaborated with
                                                22.2%          18.8%           -           22.2%             13.3%       55.6%         37.5%     20.0%       40.0%         52.2%     21.4%
the World Bank Group
Both of the above (I currently
collaborate and previously have                 22.2%          22.9%        62.5%          44.4%             26.7%       11.1%         50.0%     30.0%       30.0%         13.0%     14.3%
collaborated with the WBG)
I have never collaborated with the
                                                11.1%           6.3%           -           22.2%             20.0%       11.1%         12.5%     50.0%          -          26.1%     50.0%
World Bank Group
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily engage with in Croatia? (Select only ONE response)*
                                             Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
                                              President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
Percentage of Respondents                    PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
The World Bank (IBRD)                          100.0%          95.7%        100.0%         88.9%             69.2%       62.5%         87.5%     62.5%       100.0%        89.5%     100.0%
The International Finance
                                                      -         2.2%           -              -              30.8%       37.5%           -         -            -            -         -
Corporation (IFC)
The Multilateral Investment
                                                      -           -            -              -                -            -            -         -            -            -         -
Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
Other                                                 -         2.2%           -           11.1%               -            -          12.5%     37.5%          -          10.5%       -
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?
                                             Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
                                              President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
Percentage of Respondents                    PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
Yes                                             44.4%          24.4%        6.3%           22.2%             43.8%       11.1%         25.0%     11.1%       20.0%         33.3%     8.3%
No                                              55.6%          75.6%        93.8%          77.8%             56.3%       88.9%         75.0%     88.9%       80.0%         66.7%     91.7%




                                                                                                        94
                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


H. Background Information (continued)

If yes, what was your view of how the two institutions work together in Croatia? (Select only ONE response)
                                             Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
                                              President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
Percentage of Respondents                    PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
The two institutions work well
                                                25.0%          36.4%        100.0%        100.0%             71.4%       100.0%        50.0%       -         50.0%         44.4%     100.0%
together
The way the two institutions work
                                                      -        36.4%           -              -              28.6%          -            -         -            -          11.1%       -
together needs improvement
The two institutions do not work well
                                                      -           -            -              -                -            -            -         -            -            -         -
together
Don’t know                                      75.0%          27.3%           -              -                -            -          50.0%     100.0%      50.0%         44.4%       -

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                             Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
Percentage of Respondents                     President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
(Responses combined)                         PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
Observer*                                       22.2%          2.1%          0.0%          44.4%             31.3%       11.1%         12.5%     27.3%       30.0%         17.4%     50.0%
Use World Bank Group reports/data*              44.4%          14.9%         0.0%          55.6%             43.8%       22.2%         62.5%     72.7%       40.0%         56.5%     42.9%
Engage in World Bank Group
                                                11.1%          48.9%        43.8%          11.1%             37.5%       33.3%         75.0%      0.0%       30.0%         30.4%     42.9%
related/sponsored events/activities*
Collaborate as part of my
                                                44.4%          55.3%        68.8%          11.1%             12.5%       44.4%         25.0%      0.0%       40.0%         26.1%     14.3%
professional duties*
Use World Bank Group website for
                                                11.1%          12.8%        18.8%          55.6%             25.0%       22.2%         25.0%     54.5%       40.0%         30.4%     14.3%
information, data, research, etc.
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

What’s your gender?
                                             Office of the                  PMU/          Bilateral/                     Financial                         Independent
                                              President/     Employee of Consultant on   Multilateral                     Sector/                          Government
Percentage of Respondents                    PM/Minister      a Ministry  WBG project      Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO    Media      Institution   Academia   Other
Female                                          55.6%          64.6%        50.0%          44.4%             31.3%       44.4%         87.5%     60.0%       40.0%         47.8%     35.7%
Male                                            44.4%          35.4%        50.0%          55.6%             68.8%       55.6%         12.5%     40.0%       60.0%         52.2%     64.3%




                                                                                                        95
                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


Appendix C: Responses to All Questions by Level of Collaboration with the WBG20
Collaborating with the WBG N=98                    Not collaborating with the WBG N=73

A. General Issues facing Croatia

In general, would you say that Croatia is headed in...?
                                                                                         Collaborating            Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                                with the WBG              with the WBG
The right direction                                                                          33.7%                     20.5%
The wrong direction                                                                          36.8%                     46.6%
Not sure                                                                                     29.5%                     32.9%

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Croatia. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Croatia? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                                                     Collaborating          Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                          with the WBG            with the WBG
Global/regional integration                                                       5.1%                     5.5%
Gender equity                                                                     0.0%                     1.4%
Private sector development                                                        33.7%                   34.2%
Energy                                                                            8.2%                     4.1%
Food security                                                                     5.1%                     0.0%
Public sector governance/reform                                                   56.1%                   63.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                         12.2%                   11.0%
Water and sanitation                                                              1.0%                     0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                                   17.3%                   17.8%
Urban development                                                                 1.0%                     2.7%
Environmental sustainability                                                      2.0%                     1.4%
European Union (EU) income convergence                                            6.1%                     6.8%
Job creation/employment                                                           37.8%                   34.2%
Rural development                                                                 2.0%                     0.0%
Financial markets                                                                 1.0%                     0.0%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                            2.0%                     8.2%
Health                                                                            1.0%                     0.0%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                  3.1%                     0.0%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                     0.0%                     0.0%
Agricultural development                                                          6.1%                     8.2%
Education                                                                         28.6%                   30.1%
Poverty reduction                                                                 2.0%                     5.5%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                    3.1%                     1.4%
Trade and exports                                                                 3.1%                     6.8%
Crime and violence                                                                0.0%                     0.0%
Economic growth                                                                   36.7%                   31.5%
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                              3.1%                     2.7%
Disaster management                                                               0.0%                     0.0%
Regional disparities                                                              2.0%                     0.0%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                           9.2%                    16.4%
Regulatory framework                                                              4.1%                     1.4%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                            0.0%                     0.0%
Information and communications technology                                         3.1%                     1.4%



20
  Only 171 respondents provided the information about their levels of collaboration with the World Bank Group (question H3 in the questionnaire).
Thus only these respondents were included in the analysis presented in this appendix. Response options “I currently collaborate with the WBG? and
“both of the above? were combined as “Collaborating with the WBG? for the comparisons in this appendix. “I have previously collaborated with the
WBG,? and “I have never collaborated with the WBG? were combined as “Not collaborating with the WBG?.

                                                                       96
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


A. General Issues Facing Croatia (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Croatia? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                                                    Collaborating       Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                        with the WBG          with the WBG
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                   8.2%                  16.4%
Rural development*                                                               22.7%                 9.6%
Regional disparities                                                             8.2%                  6.8%
Urban development                                                                0.0%                  0.0%
Regulatory framework                                                             8.2%                  4.1%
Gender equity                                                                    1.0%                  0.0%
Water and sanitation                                                             0.0%                  0.0%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)*                                          3.1%                  16.4%
Economic growth                                                                  54.6%                 57.5%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                    0.0%                  0.0%
Global/regional integration                                                      4.1%                  4.1%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                          7.2%                  12.3%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                 0.0%                  0.0%
Crime and violence                                                               0.0%                  0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                           0.0%                  0.0%
Information and communications technology                                        2.1%                  2.7%
Public sector governance/reform                                                  33.0%                 23.3%
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                             2.1%                  6.8%
European Union (EU) income convergence                                           6.2%                  11.0%
Environmental sustainability                                                     1.0%                  1.4%
Disaster management                                                              0.0%                  0.0%
Health                                                                           2.1%                  1.4%
Anti-corruption                                                                  16.5%                 12.3%
Private sector development                                                       25.8%                 28.8%
Foreign direct investment*                                                       9.3%                  1.4%
Education                                                                        23.7%                 30.1%
Energy                                                                           3.1%                  0.0%
Agricultural development                                                         11.3%                 5.5%
Job creation/employment                                                          40.2%                 42.5%
Financial markets                                                                0.0%                  0.0%
Trade and exports                                                                3.1%                  5.5%
Food security                                                                    0.0%                  0.0%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                     97
                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


A. General Issues Facing Croatia (continued)

When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this
would be achieved in Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)*
Percentage of Respondents                                                    Collaborating        Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                         with the WBG           with the WBG
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                               2.1%                    1.4%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium
                                                                                 39.6%                   41.1%
sized businesses)
A growing middle class                                                           16.7%                    9.6%
Better employment opportunities for young people                                 21.9%                   27.4%
Better employment opportunities for women                                         2.1%                    1.4%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                      5.2%                    1.4%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater
                                                                                  5.2%                    2.7%
accountability
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                           8.3%                    4.1%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                           2.1%                    0.0%
Consistent economic growth                                                       47.9%                   43.8%
More reliable social safety net*                                                  1.0%                    8.2%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                   8.3%                   11.0%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                        33.3%                   43.8%
Better quality public services                                                    5.2%                    4.1%
Other                                                                             0.0%                    0.0%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                              Collaborating              Not Collaborating
                                                                                              with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                            N     Mean      SD           N     Mean      SD

How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Croatia?*                    93       7.13      1.78       70      5.29      2.21
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.


                                                                                              Collaborating              Not Collaborating
                                                                                              with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                            N     Mean      SD           N     Mean      SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                           89       7.21      1.74      55       5.95      1.98
effectiveness in Croatia.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.


                                                                                              Collaborating              Not Collaborating
                                                                                              with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                            N     Mean      SD           N     Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe the WBG's staff is well prepared to help
                                                                                           89       7.84      1.69      49       6.78      2.21
Croatia solve its most complicated development challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                        98
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Croatia, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services)
in Croatia? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                                                     Collaborating         Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                         with the WBG             with the WBG
Health                                                                            2.2%                    0.0%
Rural development                                                                 15.1%                   12.7%
Foreign direct investment                                                         8.6%                    8.5%
Education                                                                         23.7%                   32.4%
Energy                                                                            7.5%                    4.2%
Job creation/employment                                                           20.4%                   32.4%
Financial markets                                                                 5.4%                    4.2%
Disaster management                                                               0.0%                    0.0%
Crime and violence                                                                0.0%                    0.0%
European Union (EU) income convergence*                                           1.1%                    7.0%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)*                                 5.4%                    0.0%
Agricultural development                                                          12.9%                   4.2%
Global/regional integration                                                       3.2%                    2.8%
Gender equity                                                                     1.1%                    1.4%
Public sector governance/reform                                                   45.2%                   46.5%
Urban development                                                                 3.2%                    1.4%
Environmental sustainability                                                      5.4%                    1.4%
Economic growth                                                                   41.9%                   35.2%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                           15.1%                   23.9%
Regulatory framework*                                                             14.0%                   4.2%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                            0.0%                    0.0%
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                              3.2%                    2.8%
Anti-corruption                                                                   8.6%                    14.1%
Information and communications technology                                         1.1%                    0.0%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                            7.5%                    2.8%
Private sector development                                                        20.4%                   26.8%
Regional disparities                                                              7.5%                    4.2%
Water and sanitation                                                              2.2%                    1.4%
Food security                                                                     0.0%                    0.0%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                     0.0%                    1.4%
Poverty reduction                                                                 3.2%                    8.5%
Trade and exports                                                                 5.4%                    4.2%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                    2.2%                    1.4%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                     99
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of GREATEST VALUE in Croatia?
GREATEST VALUE                                                              Collaborating        Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                   with the WBG          with the WBG
Convening/facilitating                                                            9.9%                 10.0%
Data                                                                              1.1%                  4.3%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                 28.6%                 40.0%
Financial resources                                                              17.6%                 10.0%
Capacity development                                                             15.4%                 15.7%
Technical assistance                                                              2.2%                  2.9%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                        5.5%                  8.6%
Coordination with the European Commission and international partners             11.0%                  2.9%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., knowledge sharing)                           7.7%                  4.3%
Other                                                                             1.1%                  1.4%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

                                                                                                  ND
When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of 2 GREATEST VALUE in Croatia?
 ND
2 GREATEST VALUE                                                            Collaborating       Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                   with the WBG         with the WBG
Convening/facilitating                                                           11.0%                7.1%
Data                                                                              0.0%                2.9%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                 19.8%               14.3%
Financial resources                                                              14.3%               20.0%
Capacity development                                                             14.3%               14.3%
Technical assistance                                                              7.7%               11.4%
Mobilizing third party financial resources*                                      16.5%                5.7%
Coordination with the European Commission and international partners              6.6%               10.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., knowledge sharing)                           8.8%               14.3%
Other                                                                             1.1%                0.0%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the following
  areas in Croatia? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                Collaborating            Not Collaborating
                                                                                with the WBG              with the WBG
                                                                              N     Mean       SD       N      Mean      SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                          79        7.42    1.74   37    6.84    1.91
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)*                   49        6.12    2.12   29    4.72    2.07
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                        71        7.14    1.86   40    6.10    2.00
goals)*
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Croatia to help ensure better development results, looking forward,
how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?
(1-Not important all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                              Collaborating      Not Collaborating
                                                                                              with the WBG         with the WBG
                                                                                            N     Mean      SD   N     Mean      SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)*                         78        8.63    1.47   49    7.80    2.01
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)*                   65        7.83    1.72   45    6.44    2.61
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                        77        8.62    1.51   49    7.88    2.13
goals)*
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.


                                                                     100
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Croatia? (Choose no
   more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                                    Collaborating        Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                         with the WBG           with the WBG
Arrogant in its approach                                                         1.1%                   2.9%
Not client-focused                                                               3.3%                   0.0%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                            1.1%                   0.0%
Staff too inaccessible*                                                          11.1%                  1.4%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                         6.7%                   4.3%
Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the Government                14.4%                  15.7%
Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem
                                                                                 12.2%                  7.1%
solving
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                         7.8%                   11.4%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                         12.2%                  17.1%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country     21.1%                  14.3%
Too influenced by developed countries                                            13.3%                  14.3%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities            6.7%                   7.1%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow (e.g., too bureaucratic in its
                                                                                 18.9%                  7.1%
operational policies and procedures)*
Not aligned with the European Commission’s and International Financial
                                                                                 7.8%                   2.9%
Institutions’ work
Not aligned with country priorities                                              4.4%                   8.6%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Croatia                8.9%                   10.0%
Other                                                                            2.2%                   4.3%
Don’t know*                                                                      10.0%                  30.0%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST EFFECTIVE in reducing poverty and promoting “shared
   prosperity? in Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                                    Collaborating     Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                         with the WBG       with the WBG
Trust Fund management                                                            10.1%               4.3%
Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)            20.2%              30.0%
Investment lending (financing specific projects)*                                50.6%              28.6%
Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)     36.0%              32.9%
Capacity development                                                             19.1%              28.6%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government                          15.7%              15.7%
Multi-sectoral approaches                                                        19.1%               8.6%
Other                                                                            1.1%                0.0%
Don’t know*                                                                      7.9%               20.0%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support help the poorest in Croatia?
   (Select only ONE response)*
                                                                           Collaborating         Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                  with the WBG            with the WBG
To a fully sufficient degree                                                   4.4%
To a somewhat sufficient degree                                                18.7%                   11.4%
To a somewhat insufficient degree                                              33.0%                   22.9%
To a very insufficient degree                                                  7.7%                    12.9%
Don't know                                                                     36.3%                   52.9%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                     101
                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank
   Group collaborate with more in your country? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                                    Collaborating         Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                         with the WBG            with the WBG
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                         38.9%                   40.0%
European Commission*                                                             20.0%                   2.9%
International partner community                                                   3.3%                   2.9%
Media                                                                             5.6%                   5.7%
Local Government                                                                 12.2%                   21.4%
Private sector                                                                   40.0%                   37.1%
Parliament                                                                        3.3%                   4.3%
NGOs/Community Based Organizations (CBOs)*                                        5.6%                   17.1%
International Financial Institutions                                              4.4%                   2.9%
Youth/university groups                                                          22.2%                   20.0%
Beneficiaries                                                                    22.2%                   21.4%
Foundations                                                                       1.1%                   1.4%
Other                                                                             1.1%                   4.3%
Don’t know                                                                        5.6%                   5.7%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Croatia?
                                                                               Collaborating          Not Collaborating
                                                                               with the WBG             with the WBG
                                                                             N     Mean      SD      N      Mean      SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                                         85       6.52     2.14       54       5.48   2.09
development in Croatia*
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                                         84       6.73     1.88       53       5.77   2.08
development priorities for Croatia*
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic
                                                                                         83       7.02     1.84       50       5.86   2.24
for Croatia*
The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Croatia with
                                                                                         86       8.30     1.69       51       6.96   2.23
respect*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                     102
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Croatia, in terms of each of the following?
                                                                                Collaborating            Not Collaborating
                                                                               with the WBG                with the WBG
                                                                             N       Mean      SD        N     Mean      SD
Responsiveness*                                                                         77   7.18   2.02   43   5.98    2.01
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*                      75   7.07   1.96   44   5.34    2.02
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                               74   6.89   1.98   44   5.55    2.15
Being inclusive*                                                                        75   7.16   1.81   44   5.89    1.94
Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                          80   7.73   2.00   50   6.62    2.02
Staff accessibility*                                                                    83   8.00   1.89   43   6.95    2.05
Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                        79   7.84   1.92   47   6.53    2.27
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                        77   8.17   1.77   38   6.32    2.32
decisions important to my work*
Collaboration with civil society*                                                       50   7.26   1.60   37   5.97    1.59
Collaboration with the Government*                                                      66   7.88   1.71   38   6.82    1.81
Collaboration with the European Commission and international partners                   49   7.61   1.73   28   6.79    2.01
Collaboration with the private sector*                                                  54   6.46   2.21   33   5.36    1.90
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                           69   6.75   2.02   35   5.11    2.07
Being a long-term partner*                                                              79   7.95   1.87   47   6.81    2.01
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

To be more effective development partner in Croatia, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have?
(Select only ONE response)
                                                                             Collaborating       Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                    with the WBG          with the WBG
More local presence                                                              60.0%                 64.2%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                  28.9%                 16.4%
Less local presence                                                                 -                     -
Don't know                                                                       11.1%                 19.4%

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this
to? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                                     Collaborating         Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                          with the WBG            with the WBG
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                6.7%                    6.2%
Poor coordination with the European Commission and international
                                                                                  6.7%                    1.5%
partners
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities
                                                                                  12.4%                   24.6%
on the ground*
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                               50.6%                   53.8%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation             12.4%                   15.4%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                             3.4%                    4.6%
The Government works inefficiently                                                24.7%                   15.4%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                 30.3%                   18.5%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                   31.5%                   35.4%
Other                                                                             2.2%                    4.6%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.



                                                                     103
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


C. World Bank Group’s Sectoral Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Croatia? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                 Collaborating          Not Collaborating
                                                                                with the WBG              with the WBG
                                                                              N      Mean      SD       N     Mean      SD
Anti-corruption                                                                         77   7.53   2.35   63   7.46    2.28
Information and communications technology*                                              82   7.76   2.03   61   6.90    2.29
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)*                                       83   7.14   2.51   62   6.23    2.41
Crime and violence                                                                      76   5.58   2.87   62   5.23    2.49
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                 80   7.69   2.33   63   7.65    2.07
Urban development                                                                       78   7.35   1.99   62   7.06    2.11
Environmental sustainability                                                            80   7.90   2.02   61   7.57    1.99
Regulatory framework                                                                    80   7.39   2.37   62   7.45    2.30
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                  72   5.18   2.99   55   5.45    2.49
Poverty reduction                                                                       82   8.07   1.97   62   8.03    2.06
Gender equity                                                                           75   6.19   2.58   60   5.78    2.52
Private sector development                                                              81   8.64   1.44   61   8.38    1.78
Foreign direct investment                                                               79   8.48   1.66   60   8.00    2.18
Water and sanitation                                                                    78   7.04   2.52   59   6.41    2.46
Trade and exports*                                                                      79   7.96   1.64   62   7.13    2.41
Economic growth                                                                         80   8.89   1.38   61   8.48    2.10
Energy                                                                                  78   8.27   1.76   63   7.84    2.06
Disaster management                                                                     76   6.53   2.61   56   6.09    2.23
Public sector governance/reform                                                         82   8.76   1.59   59   8.54    1.98
Job creation/employment                                                                 81   8.35   2.00   58   8.02    2.37
Financial markets                                                                       79   7.54   2.17   60   7.13    2.33
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                  78   7.15   2.52   59   7.31    1.90
Health                                                                                  77   6.53   2.69   58   6.62    2.41
Rural development                                                                       81   7.86   1.99   60   7.78    2.15
Global/regional integration                                                             80   7.79   1.92   60   7.13    2.31
Food security                                                                           79   6.80   2.52   55   6.51    2.40
Education                                                                               79   8.25   1.86   56   7.93    2.19
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                          77   7.21   2.15   60   6.88    2.51
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                           77   7.32   2.34   58   6.90    2.12
Agricultural development                                                                79   8.00   2.14   60   7.88    2.12
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                    79   7.16   2.46   61   7.15    2.47
Regional disparities                                                                    79   7.65   1.92   58   7.38    2.18
European Union (EU) income convergence*                                                 79   8.46   1.63   60   7.67    2.16
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                     104
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


C. World Bank Group’s Sectoral Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Croatia? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                Collaborating           Not Collaborating
                                                                                with the WBG              with the WBG
                                                                              N     Mean       SD       N     Mean      SD
Anti-corruption                                                                         29   5.03   2.63   19   4.58    1.74
Information and communications technology                                               37   6.24   2.06   19   5.32    1.92
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)*                                       48   7.00   1.89   25   5.36    1.73
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)*                                                37   5.76   2.30   22   4.55    2.02
Urban development*                                                                      30   6.33   2.06   21   4.95    2.20
Environmental sustainability*                                                           39   7.13   2.08   24   5.29    2.27
Regulatory framework                                                                    38   6.34   2.13   21   5.38    1.75
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                  17   5.06   2.61   12   5.00    1.86
Poverty reduction*                                                                      33   5.79   2.30   23   4.30    2.14
Gender equity                                                                           24   5.54   2.11   16   5.06    2.02
Private sector development*                                                             35   6.29   1.92   19   4.63    2.36
Foreign direct investment*                                                              34   6.56   2.09   22   4.50    2.43
Water and sanitation*                                                                   35   7.09   2.04   21   5.48    2.46
Trade and exports*                                                                      33   6.33   2.09   20   4.85    1.93
Economic growth*                                                                        40   6.22   2.06   28   4.39    2.06
Energy*                                                                                 31   6.23   2.14   21   4.90    1.67
Disaster management                                                                     20   5.25   2.40   14   4.64    1.74
Public sector governance/reform*                                                        51   6.20   2.32   31   4.55    2.06
Job creation/employment*                                                                36   5.61   2.33   24   3.38    1.97
Financial markets                                                                       43   6.21   2.11   23   5.65    2.25
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                  27   5.56   2.56   21   4.52    1.89
Health                                                                                  32   5.97   2.43   19   4.79    2.18
Rural development*                                                                      32   6.06   2.11   21   4.67    1.80
Global/regional integration                                                             32   6.50   2.21   18   5.89    2.08
Food security                                                                           26   5.23   2.25   15   4.53    1.77
Education                                                                               33   5.79   2.45   26   5.23    2.30
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                          37   5.97   2.46   21   5.19    2.48
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                           31   5.97   2.54   19   4.68    1.95
Agricultural development                                                                33   5.88   2.37   22   4.77    1.95
Regional disparities                                                                    32   5.81   2.32   19   5.00    1.63
European Union (EU) income convergence*                                                 34   5.68   2.25   20   3.95    1.76
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Croatia? (Select only 1 response)
                                                                           Collaborating          Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                  with the WBG             with the WBG
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                       39.5%                    25.8%
In the Central Europe and the Baltics Office in Brussels, Belgium Office       18.5%                    17.7%
In the Istanbul Operational Center for IFC                                        -                     3.2%
In the country                                                                 12.3%                    6.5%
Don't know                                                                     29.6%                    46.8%




                                                                     105
                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

                                                                                              Collaborating              Not Collaborating
                                                                                              with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                            N     Mean      SD           N     Mean      SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
                                                                                           75       6.45     1.95       44       5.11      2.12
development results in Croatia?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Croatia?
                                                                               Collaborating                             Not Collaborating
                                                                               with the WBG                                with the WBG
                                                                             N     Mean      SD                          N     Mean      SD

The World Bank’s financial instruments meet the needs of Croatia*                          75       6.64     2.12       41       5.46      2.04

The World Bank Group meets Croatia’s needs for knowledge services*                         73       6.41     2.20       42       5.12      2.17
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

                                                                                              Collaborating              Not Collaborating
                                                                                              with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                            N     Mean      SD           N     Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects
                                                                                           62       6.76     2.20       30       5.40      2.34
its work in real time in Croatia?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?
(Select only ONE response)*
                                                                          Collaborating          Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                 with the WBG             with the WBG
Weekly                                                                        21.0%                       -
Monthly                                                                       30.9%                    13.1%
A few times a year                                                            34.6%                    50.8%
Rarely                                                                        13.6%                    27.9%
Never                                                                             -                    8.2%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                       106
                                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Croatia, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                                                Collaborating                           Not Collaborating
                                                                                with the WBG                              with the WBG
                                                                              N     Mean      SD                        N     Mean      SD
Are timely*                                                                                     70        7.11   1.69   37    6.22    1.95
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation*                        69        7.12   1.77   35    6.14    1.75
Lead to practical solutions*                                                                    72        7.01   1.89   38    6.18    2.07
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                            71        7.66   1.71   42    7.21    1.55
Are source of relevant information on global good practices                                     70        7.76   1.54   43    7.30    1.71
Are adequately disseminated*                                                                    69        7.39   1.85   41    6.56    1.78
Are translated enough into local language                                                       67        7.24   2.12   38    7.18    2.23
Are adaptable to Croatia’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                                69        7.30   1.91   40    6.40    2.27
circumstances*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.


                                                                                                   Collaborating        Not Collaborating
                                                                                                   with the WBG           with the WBG
                                                                                                 N     Mean      SD     N     Mean      SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the WBG's knowledge
                                                                                                70        6.79   1.92   44    5.41    2.02
work and activities make to development results in your country?*
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                                69        7.59   1.51   41    6.76    1.80
knowledge work and activities?*
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.



E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                   Collaborating             Not Collaborating
                                                                                  with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                               N       Mean       SD         N     Mean      SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly*                                                  59        8.58   1.59   20    7.55    2.35
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                                65        8.38   1.35   28    7.39    1.95
programs it supports*
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                       62        7.71   1.78   23    7.26    1.89
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable                           54        7.67   1.88   21    7.33    1.85
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable*                                62        7.94   1.82   26    7.08    1.85
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Croatia                                         60        7.60   1.76   25    6.96    2.13
Working with the WBG increases Croatia’s institutional capacity                                 69        7.86   1.91   35    7.20    2.22
Where country systems (e.g., procurement, financial management, etc.) are
                                                                                                57        7.81   1.81   21    7.48    1.86
adequate, the World Bank Group makes appropriate use of them
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support                                  62        8.19   1.70   29    7.62    1.95
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                           107
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

                                                                                              Collaborating      Not Collaborating
                                                                                              with the WBG         with the WBG
                                                                                            N     Mean      SD   N     Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to
                                                                                        45        6.42    2.35   28    5.96    1.82
find solutions that promote private public partnerships in Croatia?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Croatia? (Select only ONE response)*
                                                                            Collaborating          Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                  with the WBG              with the WBG
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Croatia                               -                         -
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Croatia                       36.7%                    27.1%
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                          35.4%                    16.9%
Don't know                                                                      27.8%                    55.9%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in Croatia? (Select only ONE response)*
                                                                             Collaborating          Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                   with the WBG             with the WBG
The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses on the most
                                                                                 39.2%                   23.7%
important development challenges in Croatia
The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in Croatia, and it is
                                                                                 24.1%                   18.6%
involved in too many areas of development
Don't know                                                                       36.7%                   57.6%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.



F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Croatia

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Croatia?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                                  Collaborating          Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                       with the WBG            with the WBG
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Croatia’s
                                                                               13.9%                   15.8%
economy
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                          8.9%                    1.8%
Offer more innovative financial products                                       13.9%                    7.0%
Increase availability of reimbursable advisory services (RAS)                   2.5%                    1.8%
Assist in increasing European Union (EU) funds absorption                      53.2%                   59.6%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                6.3%                    1.8%
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                 15.2%                   12.3%
Work faster                                                                     6.3%                    5.3%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Croatia’s specific
                                                                                5.1%                   15.8%
challenges*
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                       13.9%                   12.3%
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                           12.7%                    8.8%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                      22.8%                   33.3%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                  12.7%                   15.8%
Other                                                                           1.3%                    0.0%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                     108
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Croatia (continued)

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Croatia, and taking into account its limited
level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in Croatia? (Select
only ONE response)
                                                                             Collaborating         Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                    with the WBG           with the WBG
Financial services*                                                              24.1%                   8.6%
Knowledge products                                                               34.2%                   48.3%
Convening services                                                               11.4%                   10.3%
None of the above                                                                   -                    3.4%
The combination is appropriate for Croatia                                       24.1%                   17.2%
Don't know                                                                       6.3%                    12.1%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.



G. Communication and Information Sharing

How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Croatia?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborating          Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                     with the WBG             with the WBG
Periodicals                                                                   22.5%                   27.6%
International newspapers                                                      10.0%                    1.7%
Local radio                                                                   2.5%                     0.0%
International radio                                                           0.0%                     0.0%
Local television                                                              35.0%                   34.5%
International television                                                      1.3%                     3.4%
Local newspapers                                                              12.5%                   17.2%
Internet                                                                      83.8%                   86.2%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                      10.0%                   10.3%
Other                                                                         7.5%                     6.9%

How would you prefer to obtain information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                                Collaborating       Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                     with the WBG         with the WBG
Direct contact with World Bank Group                                         21.3%                28.1%
e-Newsletters                                                                33.8%                40.4%
World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/ conferences                           43.8%                28.1%
World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials                  25.0%                22.8%
World Bank Group’s website                                                   52.5%                50.9%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                     5.0%                  5.3%
Mobile phones                                                                0.0%                  0.0%
Other                                                                        0.0%                  0.0%

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the WBG will now disclose any information
in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                                                            Collaborating       Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                  with the WBG          with the WBG
Yes                                                                             32.1%                 24.6%
No                                                                              67.9%                 75.4%




                                                                     109
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*
                                                                             Collaborating                    Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                   with the WBG                       with the WBG
Yes                                                                              15.0%                              1.8%
No                                                                               85.0%                             98.2%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

Were you able to obtain this information?*
                                                                                       Collaborating          Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                              with the WBG            with the WBG
Yes                                                                                       100.0%                   66.7%
No                                                                                            -                    33.3%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

Do you have access to the Internet?
                                                                                       Collaborating          Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                              with the WBG            with the WBG
Yes                                                                                       100.0%                   98.3%
No                                                                                            -                     1.7%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?
                                                                                       Collaborating          Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                              with the WBG            with the WBG
Yes                                                                                        91.4%                   86.4%
No                                                                                         8.6%                    13.6%

Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites?
                                                                                       Collaborating          Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                              with the WBG            with the WBG
Yes                                                                                        9.9%                     6.8%
No                                                                                         90.1%                   93.2%

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
                                                                            Collaborating                     Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                   with the WBG                       with the WBG
High speed/WiFi                                                                100.0%                              98.2%
Dial-up                                                                            -                                1.8%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                    Collaborating                 Not Collaborating
                                                                                   with the WBG                     with the WBG
                                                                                N       Mean       SD             N     Mean      SD
I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.                                66     6.92    2.32       48     7.08     1.70
I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.                       66     7.71    1.68       48     7.50     1.41
The World Bank Group’s social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                                        16     7.06    2.38       10     7.40     1.90
information about the institution
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it                 70     7.97    2.00       47     7.28     2.29
The WBG is responsive to my information requests and inquiries                          58     8.28    1.94       21     7.76     1.81
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                     110
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


H Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily engage with in Croatia? (Select only 1 response)*
                                                                            Collaborating          Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                   with the WBG            with the WBG
The World Bank (IBRD)                                                           96.9%                    76.4%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                     3.1%                     9.1%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                -                        -
Other                                                                              -                     14.5%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?
                                                                                       Collaborating   Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                              with the WBG     with the WBG
Yes                                                                                        28.9%            16.7%
No                                                                                         71.1%            83.3%

If yes, what was your view of how the two institutions work together in Croatia? (Select only 1 response)
                                                                              Collaborating          Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                     with the WBG             with the WBG
The two institutions work well together                                           60.7%                    28.6%
The way the two institutions work together needs improvement                      21.4%                    7.1%
The two institutions do not work well together                                       -                        -
Don't know                                                                        17.9%                    64.3%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                                   Collaborating       Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                        with the WBG          with the WBG
Observer*                                                                       5.1%                  34.7%
Use World Bank Group reports/data*                                              26.5%                 47.2%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities*                 44.9%                 26.4%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties*                                  53.1%                 13.9%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.              19.4%                 31.9%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

What’s your gender?
                                                                                       Collaborating   Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                              with the WBG     with the WBG
Female                                                                                     54.1%            51.4%
Male                                                                                       45.9%            48.6%




                                                                     111
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


Appendix D: Responses to All Questions by Year
Comparing responses across Country Surveys reflect changes in attitudes over time, but also changes in respondent
samples and changes to the survey instrument itself. To reduce the influence of the latter factor, only those
questions with similar response scales/options were analyzed. Although the FY12 and FY15 samples were fairly
similar, the samples from both years were weighted to have equivalent stakeholder groups. Note, there were not
enough respondents from local government to be included in this analysis.

                                                                                     Original Distribution
Percentage of Respondents                                                      FY12                          FY15
Office of the President/Minister                                               5.2%                          5.4%
Government institutions (includes Office of Parliamentarian,
employees of ministries, independent government institutions,
                                                                              47.7%                          45.8%
PMU/Consultants on WBG supported projects, and the
judiciary branch)
Bilateral/multilateral agencies (includes international partners)             7.0%                           5.4%
Private sector (includes financial sector/private banks)                      7.6%                           14.9%
Academia                                                                      15.1%                          13.7%
Media                                                                         6.4%                           6.5%
Civil society (includes NGOs/CBOs, trade unions, and youth
                                                                              11.0%                          8.3%
groups)
Total Number of Respondents (Un-Weighted)                                      172                           168
(Note, respondents who indicated “Other? were excluded.)

The weighted stakeholder breakdown is presented below:
                                                                                 Weighted Distribution
Percentage of Respondents                                                     FY12                           FY15
Office of the President/Minister                                              5.2%                           5.2%
Government Institutions                                                       44.6%                          44.8%
Bilateral/Multilateral Agency                                                 5.4%                           5.4%
Private Sector                                                                15.1%                          15.1%
Academia                                                                      14.1%                          13.9%
Media                                                                         5.2%                           5.2%
Civil Society                                                                 10.3%                          10.4%
Total Number of Respondents (Weighted)                                         184                            166

All data presented in this appendix are weighted. As a result, means of the FY15 data and the total number of
respondents indicated will be slightly different from the aggregated responses in Appendix A. Similarly, responses
from FY12 respondents and the total number of respondents indicated may differ from those reported in the FY12
COS report.


A. General Issues facing Croatia

In general, would you say that Croatia is headed in...?

Percentage of Respondents                                                             FY12                      FY15
The right direction*                                                                  37.7%                     27.0%
The wrong direction*                                                                  21.2%                     41.6%
Not sure                                                                              41.1%                     31.5%
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12




                                                                    112
                                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                                    FY12                 FY15
                                                                                             N      Mean    SD      N    Mean   SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Croatia?                     183       6.38   2.25   158   6.28   2.14
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)


                                                                                                    FY12                 FY15
                                                                                             N      Mean    SD      N    Mean   SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                           163       6.39   2.07   140   6.64   1.92
effectiveness in Croatia.
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


                                                                                                    FY12                 FY15
                                                                                             N      Mean    SD      N    Mean   SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared
                                                                                           153       6.99   2.30   134   7.37   1.99
to help Croatia solve its most complicated development challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Croatia?
                                                                                                    FY12                 FY15
                                                                                             N      Mean    SD      N    Mean   SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                                           166       5.47   2.20   135   6.06   2.15
development in Croatia*
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                                           162       5.85   2.29   133   6.27   2.03
development priorities for Croatia
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic
                                                                                           158       6.43   2.19   129   6.47   2.09
for Croatia
The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Croatia with
                                                                                           163       7.15   2.27   134   7.68   2.06
respect*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between FY15 and FY12

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Croatia in terms of each of the following?
                                                                                                    FY12                 FY15
                                                                                             N      Mean    SD      N    Mean   SD
Responsiveness*                                                                            151       6.05   2.09   118   6.72   2.11
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*                         145       5.51   2.01   117   6.33   2.16
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                                  144       5.49   2.06   116   6.29   2.16
Being inclusive*                                                                           142       6.05   1.95   117   6.60   1.99
Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                             156       6.61   2.34   127   7.23   2.10
Staff accessibility*                                                                       146       6.82   2.33   123   7.58   2.01
Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                           151       6.58   2.36   124   7.29   2.15
Collaboration with civil society*                                                          127       5.76   2.23   86    6.60   1.79
Collaboration with the Government                                                          139       7.14   1.99   100   7.38   1.90
Collaboration with the European Commission and international partners                      121       7.30   2.05   76    7.18   1.97
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between FY15 and FY12



                                                                        113
                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Croatia? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                     FY12                    FY15
                                                                               N     Mean     SD       N     Mean      SD
Anti-corruption                                                               116     5.28   2.49     47      4.92    2.30
Information and communications technology                                     112     5.80   2.07     55      5.90    2.01
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                              118     6.23   1.91     68      6.35    1.95
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                       122     5.50   2.40     57      5.36    2.25
Urban development                                                             109     5.74   2.31     48      5.65    2.16
Environmental sustainability                                                  121     6.33   2.36     59      6.41    2.29
Regulatory framework                                                          123     6.28   2.21     57      6.06    2.04
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                         72     4.49   2.20     28      5.07    2.30
Poverty reduction                                                             109     4.83   2.34     56      5.20    2.31
Gender equity                                                                  95     5.31   2.40     40      5.38    2.03
Private sector development*                                                   113     4.84   2.36     54      5.69    2.19
Foreign direct investment                                                     109     5.44   2.36     54      5.59    2.31
Water and sanitation                                                          111     5.89   2.25     53      6.38    2.28
Trade and exports                                                              98     5.27   2.13     51      5.78    2.14
Economic growth                                                               125     5.38   2.41     66      5.45    2.24
Energy                                                                        112     5.60   2.25     50      5.70    2.04
Disaster management                                                            76     4.39   2.08     33      4.99    2.15
Job creation/employment                                                       123     4.79   2.36     59      4.73    2.45
Financial markets                                                             115     5.63   2.30     64      6.03    2.16
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                        103     5.08   2.48     46      5.08    2.32
Health                                                                        103     5.44   2.22     49      5.46    2.30
Rural development                                                             104     5.22   2.16     50      5.53    2.10
Education                                                                     124     5.51   2.23     58      5.58    2.38
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                117     5.13   2.34     56      5.66    2.49
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                 100     5.02   2.31     49      5.46    2.39
Agricultural development                                                      111     5.07   2.05     52      5.46    2.27
European Union (EU) income convergence                                        121     5.73   2.26     51      5.05    2.25
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12


                                                                                     FY12                    FY15
                                                                               N     Mean     SD       N     Mean      SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
                                                                              166     6.01   1.95    116      5.92    2.09
development results in Croatia?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                 114
                                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Croatia?
                                                                                                         FY12                   FY15
                                                                                                 N       Mean    SD      N      Mean    SD
The World Bank’s financial instruments meet the needs of Croatia                               167        6.17   2.17   112      6.14   2.17
The World Bank Group meets Croatia’s needs for knowledge services                              165        6.25   2.20   111      5.86   2.28
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)



D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do? (Select only 1 response)
Percentage of Respondents                                                                             FY12                   FY15
Weekly*                                                                                               4.8%                   11.3%
Monthly                                                                                               17.8%                  22.0%
A few times a year*                                                                                   55.4%                  42.4%
Rarely                                                                                                17.1%                  20.8%
Never                                                                                                 4.9%                   3.5%
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12

In Croatia, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                                                                         FY12                   FY15
                                                                                                 N       Mean    SD      N      Mean    SD
Are timely*                                                                                     156       6.19   2.18   103      6.80   1.81
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation*                        150       6.05   2.21   100      6.76   1.78
Lead to practical solutions                                                                     158       6.35   2.14   106      6.68   1.97
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)*                                           164       6.51   2.25   109      7.47   1.64
Are source of relevant information on global good practices                                     162       7.14   2.21   109      7.58   1.62
Are adequately disseminated*                                                                    151       5.79   2.36   106      7.03   1.83
Are translated enough into local language                                                       151       6.85   2.32   101      7.16   2.13
Are adaptable to Croatia’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                                159       6.21   2.08   105      6.92   2.09
circumstances*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between FY15 and FY12


                                                                                                         FY12                   FY15
                                                                                                 N       Mean    SD      N      Mean    SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the WBG’s knowledge
                                                                                               171        6.31   2.00   109      6.19   2.03
work and activities make to development results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                               168        7.45   1.96   106      7.24   1.66
knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




                                                                           115
                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                                                                  FY12                 FY15
                                                                                           N      Mean    SD      N    Mean      SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly*                                            113      7.38   2.39   75       8.29   1.86
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                          149      7.19   2.24   89       8.04   1.60
programs it supports*
The WBG’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion*                             133      6.71   2.24   81       7.58   1.72
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable*                    125      6.45   2.27   71       7.54   1.81
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable*                          144      6.82   2.29   85       7.66   1.87
Working with the WBG increases Croatia’s institutional capacity                           167      7.38   2.06   100      7.65   2.00
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                                          125      7.19   2.20   74       7.71   1.73
appropriate use of them
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support*                           149      7.10   2.25   88       8.00   1.77
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between FY15 and FY12



G. Communication and Information Sharing

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the WBG will now disclose any information
in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
Percentage of Respondents                                                                      FY12               FY15
Yes                                                                                            30.3%              28.6%
No                                                                                             69.7%              71.4%

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?
Percentage of Respondents                                                                      FY12               FY15
Yes                                                                                            14.9%              8.8%
No                                                                                             85.1%              91.2%

Were you able to obtain this information?
Percentage of Respondents                                                                      FY12               FY15
Yes                                                                                            83.9%              92.6%
No                                                                                             16.1%              7.4%

Do you have access to the Internet?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                    FY12                 FY15
Yes                                                                                         100.0%                99.4%
No                                                                                                                0.6%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                      FY12               FY15
Yes                                                                                            85.2%              90.5%
No                                                                                             14.8%              9.5%




                                                                      116
                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


G. Communication and Information Sharing

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.
                                                                                                  FY12                 FY15
                                                                                           N      Mean    SD      N    Mean      SD
I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.                                  149      6.85   1.91   111      7.03   1.99
I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.                         154      7.49   1.87   111      7.65   1.49
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it                   168      7.12   2.55   112      7.65   2.07
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                                          114      7.07   2.48   74       8.14   1.74
inquiries*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between FY15 and FY12



H. Background Information

Which one of the following best describes your level of interaction with the World Bank Group in your country?
Percentage of Respondents                                                                      FY12               FY15
I currently collaborate with the WBG                                                           55.5%              56.8%
I am not currently collaborating with the WBG                                                  44.5%              43.2%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses combined)                                                                           FY12               FY15
Observer                                                                                       22.0%              18.3%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                              33.6%              35.5%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                                 31.8%              36.2%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                                  31.2%              36.3%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                             28.5%              24.2%




                                                                      117
                                                                                                                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia


Appendix E Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the World Bank Group
                                                                                  Which one of the following
                                                                                                                   Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                                  best describes your level of
                                                                                  interaction with the WBG?           Observer          Use WBG reports/data   Engage in WBG activities       Collaborate        Use WBG website
                                                                                       Not        Currently
                                                                                                                 No Mean    Yes Mean    No Mean     Yes Mean    No Mean     Yes Mean      No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean    Yes Mean
Indicator Question                                                                Collaborating Collaborating
Overa l l , pl ea s e ra te your i mpres s i on of the Worl d Ba nk Group’s
                                                                                      5.95           7.21         6.90           5.74     6.90        6.42        6.52         7.06        6.43        7.16      6.70        6.79
effecti venes s i n Croa ti a .
Overa l l the Worl d Ba nk Group currentl y pl a ys a rel eva nt rol e i n
                                                                                      5.48           6.52         6.18           5.77     6.29        5.84        5.82         6.67        6.07        6.18      6.11        6.11
devel opment i n Croa ti a
The Worl d Ba nk Group’s work i s a l i gned wi th wha t I cons i der
                                                                                      5.77           6.73         6.45           5.70     6.63        5.89        6.03         6.90        6.25        6.47      6.26        6.56
the devel opment pri ori ti es for Croa ti a
Res pons i venes s                                                                    5.98           7.18         6.82           5.94     7.14        6.00        6.44         7.15        6.27        7.31      6.78        6.46
Fl exi bi l i ty (i n terms of the i ns ti tuti on’s products a nd s ervi ces )       5.34           7.07         6.52           5.59     6.88        5.56        6.22         6.70        5.90        7.08      6.36        6.52
Fl exi bi l i ty (i n terms of cha ngi ng country ci rcums ta nces )                  5.55           6.89         6.49           5.47     6.72        5.77        6.13         6.73        5.92        6.96      6.35        6.33
Bei ng i ncl us i ve                                                                  5.89           7.16         6.73           6.00     6.99        6.12        6.32         7.20        6.41        6.98      6.78        6.15
Opennes s (s ha ri ng da ta a nd other i nforma ti on)                                6.62           7.73         7.37           6.44     7.46        6.90        6.96         7.73        7.00        7.60      7.26        7.18
Sta ff a cces s i bi l i ty                                                           6.95           8.00         7.68           6.88     7.80        7.17        7.29         8.04        7.19        8.11      7.69        7.19
Stra i ghtforwa rdnes s a nd hones ty                                                 6.53           7.84         7.36           6.78     7.46        6.98        6.83         8.02        7.08        7.57      7.36        7.03
Ea s e of a cces s to the peopl e a t the Worl d Ba nk Group who a re
                                                                                      6.32           8.17         7.56           6.85     7.91        6.68        7.11         8.09        6.98        8.12      7.64        7.03
ma ki ng deci s i ons i mporta nt to my work
Col l a bora ti on wi th ci vi l s oci ety                                            5.97           7.26         6.65           6.53     6.94        6.25        6.32         7.15        6.52        6.87      6.79        6.10
Col l a bora ti on wi th the Government                                               6.82           7.88         7.52           6.87     7.62        7.10        7.15         7.87        7.20        7.74      7.46        7.27
Col l a bora ti on wi th the Europea n Commi s s i on a nd
                                                                                      6.79           7.61         7.26           7.00     7.39        6.97        7.02         7.59        7.20        7.26      7.21        7.29
i nterna ti ona l pa rtners
Col l a bora ti on wi th the pri va te s ector                                        5.36           6.46         6.06           5.58     6.04        5.95        5.78         6.33        6.00        6.00      5.81        6.62
The s peed i n whi ch i t gets thi ngs a ccompl i s hed on the ground                 5.11           6.75         6.22           5.58     6.62        5.39        5.91         6.56        5.86        6.50      6.04        6.57
Bei ng a l ong-term pa rtner                                                          6.81           7.95         7.58           6.71     7.77        6.96        7.01         8.23        7.34        7.64      7.39        7.70
To wha t extent does the Worl d Ba nk Group’s work hel p to
                                                                                      5.11           6.45         6.05           5.47     6.20        5.60        5.82         6.23        5.77        6.24      5.99        5.90
a chi eve devel opment res ul ts i n Croa ti a ?
The WBG’s fi na nci a l i ns truments meet the needs of Croa ti a                     5.46           6.64         6.31           5.54     6.64        5.56        6.03         6.58        5.87        6.72      6.27        6.13
The Worl d Ba nk Group meets Croa ti a ’s needs for knowl edge
                                                                                      5.12           6.41         6.10           4.93     6.36        5.29        5.97         5.91        5.60        6.43      5.93        6.00
s ervi ces
Are a da pta bl e to Croa ti a ’s s peci fi c devel opment cha l l enges
                                                                                      6.40           7.30         7.08           6.23     7.06        6.87        6.72         7.41        6.91        7.09      6.94        7.10
a nd country ci rcums ta nces
Overa l l , how s i gni fi ca nt a contri buti on do you bel i eve the
WBG’s knowl edge work a nd a cti vi ti es ma ke to devel opment                       5.41           6.79         6.37           5.69     6.49        5.96        6.10         6.56        6.04        6.64      6.33        6.14
res ul ts i n your country?
Overa l l , how woul d you ra te the techni ca l qua l i ty of the WBG's
                                                                                      6.76           7.59         7.38           6.42     7.45        7.02        7.19         7.42        6.99        7.73      7.28        7.28
knowl edge work a nd a cti vi ti es ?
The WBG ta kes deci s i ons qui ckl y i n Croa ti a                                   6.96           7.60         7.49           6.67     7.61        7.04        7.25         7.69        7.32        7.55      7.48        7.26
 Where country s ys tems a re a dequa te, the WBG ma kes
                                                                                      7.48           7.81         7.78           7.29     7.96        7.32        7.57         8.00        7.80        7.66      7.63        8.12
 a ppropri a te us e of them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No means.



                                                                                                                           118
                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

Appendix F: Croatia FY 2015 Questionnaire




                           World Bank Group Country Survey FY15 – Croatia


The World Bank Group is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Croatia or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey will give the World Bank Group’s team that works in Croatia, greater insight into how the Bank’s work is
perceived. This is one tool the World Bank Group uses to assess the views of its stakeholders, and to develop
more effective strategies that support development in Croatia.

A local independent firm has been hired to oversee the logistics of this survey. This ensures anonymity and
confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid.

Finally, the survey relates to the World Bank Group’s work. The World Bank Group consists of IBRD, IDA, IFC,
MIGA, and ICSID. When responding to the survey, please consider the area of the World Bank Group with which
you are most familiar.

To complete the survey, please circle/check the response that most accurately reflects your opinion.
If you prefer not to answer a question, please leave it blank. If you feel that you do not have an
adequate amount of information on a subject, please check “Don’t know?.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING CROATIA

 A1. In general would you say that Croatia is headed in ... ?
 1   The right direction
 2   The wrong direction
 3   Not sure




                                                       119
                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Croatia.
Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in
Croatia? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1   Global/regional integration                          18    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 2   Gender equity                                        19    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 3   Private sector development                           20    Agricultural development
 4   Energy                                               21    Education
 5   Food security                                        22    Poverty reduction
     Public sector governance/reform (i.e., government
                                                                Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 6   effectiveness, public financial management, public   23
                                                                assistance)
     expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 7   Foreign direct investment                            24    Trade and exports
 8   Water and sanitation                                 25    Crime and violence
 9   Anti corruption                                      26    Economic growth
10   Urban development                                    27    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
11   Environmental sustainability                         28    Disaster management
12   European Union (EU) income convergence               29    Regional disparities
13   Job creation/employment                              30    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
14   Rural development                                    31    Regulatory framework
15   Financial markets                                    32    Communicable/non-communicable diseases
16   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
                                                          33    Information and communications technology
17   Health




                                                          120
                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

A3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas.
Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing
poverty in Croatia? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                 Public sector governance/reform (i.e., government
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 1                                                         17    effectiveness, public financial management, public
      assistance)
                                                                 expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 2    Rural development                                    18    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 3    Regional disparities                                 19    European Union (EU) income convergence
 4    Urban development                                    20    Environmental sustainability
 5    Regulatory framework                                 21    Disaster management
 6    Gender equity                                        22    Health
 7    Water and sanitation                                 23    Anti corruption
 8    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)               24    Private sector development
 9    Economic growth                                      25    Foreign direct investment
 10   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)        26    Education
 11   Global/regional integration                          27    Energy
 12   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)              28    Agricultural development
 13   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)     29    Job creation/employment
 14   Crime and violence                                   30    Financial markets
 15   Communicable/non-communicable diseases               31    Trade and exports
 16   Information and communications technology            32    Food security




                                                           121
                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
A4. The World Bank Group’s “Shared Prosperity? goal captures two key elements, economic growth
and equity. It will seek to foster income growth among the bottom 40 percent of a country’s
population. Improvement in the Shared Prosperity Indicator requires growth and well-being of the
less well-off. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the
following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Croatia? (Choose no more than
TWO)
 1    Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens
 2    Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized businesses)
 3    A growing middle class
 4    Better employment opportunities for young people
 5    Better employment opportunities for women
 6    Greater access to micro-finance for the poor
 7    Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability
 8    Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas
 9    Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas
 10   Consistent economic growth
 11   More reliable social safety net
 12   Greater equity of fiscal policy
 13   Education and training that better ensure job opportunity
 14   Better quality public services
 15   Other (please specify):_____________________________________




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                            122
                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Croatia?
         1            2          3        4       5         6             7          8            9                     10
Not familiar at all                                                                                               Extremely familiar



B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Croatia.
        1             2      3       4    5      6        7               8          9           10                     
Not effective at
                                                                                             Very effective         Don't know
all


B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
knowledge) to help Croatia solve its most complicated development challenges?
        1             2      3       4    5      6      7            8           9               10                     
To no degree at                                                                                   To a very
                                                                                                                    Don't know
all                                                                                      significant degree


B4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results
in Croatia, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its
resources (financial and knowledge services) in Croatia? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1   Health                                                     18       Economic growth
 2   Rural development                                          19       Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 3   Foreign direct investment                                  20       Regulatory framework
 4   Education                                                  21       Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 5   Energy                                                     22       Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 6   Job creation/employment                                    23       Anti corruption
 7   Financial markets                                          24       Information and communications technology
 8   Disaster management                                        25       Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 9   Crime and violence                                         26       Private sector development
10   European Union (EU) income convergence                     27       Regional disparities
11   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)           28       Water and sanitation
12   Agricultural development                                   29       Food security
13   Global/regional integration                                30       Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
14   Gender equity                                              31       Poverty reduction
     Public sector governance/reform (i.e., government
15   effectiveness, public financial management, public         32       Trade and exports
     expenditure, fiscal system reform)
16   Urban development                                                   Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
                                                                33
17   Environmental sustainability                                        assistance)




                                                                123
                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
B5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest
VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Croatia?
                                                                           Greatest Value             Second Greatest Value
                                                                    (Choose only ONE)             (Choose only ONE)
 1     Convening/facilitating                                                                                   
 2     Data                                                                                                     
 3     Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                                         
 4     Financial resources                                                                                      
 5     Capacity development                                                                                     
 6     Technical assistance                                                                                     
 7     Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                               
       Coordination with the European Commission and
 8                                                                                                              
       international partners
 9     Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., knowledge sharing)                                                  
10     Other (please specify): ________________________                                                         


How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in
each of the following areas in Croatia? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed
below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                 Not effective                                       Very    Don't
                                                                 at all                                          effective   know
        Project implementation (or other organizational
 B6                                                                 1      2     3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
        strengthening)
        Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B7                                                                 1      2     3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
        into development)
        Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B8                                                                 1      2     3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
        achieve development goals)


When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Croatia to help ensure better development
results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
aspects of capacity building? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed below,
please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                 Not important                                   Very        Don't
                                                                 at all                                      important       know
        Project implementation (or other organizational
 B9                                                                 1      2     3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
        strengthening)
        Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B10                                                                1      2     3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
        into development)
        Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B11                                                                1      2     3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
        achieve development goals)




                                                              124
                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
B12. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its
work in Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1   Arrogant in its approach
 2   Not client focused
 3   The credibility of its knowledge/data
 4   Staff too inaccessible
 5   Not exploring alternative policy options
 6   Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the Government
 7   Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving
 8   Not enough public disclosure of its work
 9   World Bank Group’s processes too complex
10   Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
11   Too influenced by developed countries
12   Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
13   World Bank Group’s processes too slow (e.g., too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures)
14   Not aligned with the European Commission’s and International Financial Institutions’ work
15   Not aligned with country priorities
16   Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Croatia
17   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
18   Don’t know


B13. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing pov erty
and promoting “shared prosperity? in Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1   Trust Fund management
 2   Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
 3   Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 4   Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)
 5   Capacity development
 6   Policy based lending / budget support to the Government
 7   Multi-sectoral approaches
 8   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 9   Don’t know


B14. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support help the poorest
(i.e., the bottom 40 percent of the population) in Croatia? (Select only ONE response)
 1   To a fully sufficient degree
 2   To a somewhat sufficient degree
 3   To a somewhat insufficient degree
 4   To a very insufficient degree
 5   Don’t know



                                                              125
                                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
B15. In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which TWO of the following
groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country?
(Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Academia/think tanks/research institutes                   8         NGOs/Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 2    European Commission                                        9         International Financial Institutions
 3    International partner community                            10        Youth/university groups
 4    Media                                                      11        Beneficiaries
 5    Local Government                                           12        Foundations
 6    Private sector                                             13        Other (please specify): _____________________
 7    Parliament                                                 14        Don’t know

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in
Croatia?
                                                                      Strongly                                                             Strongly      Don't
                                                                      disagree                                                                agree      know
       Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
B16                                                                    1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9       10         
       relevant role in development in Croatia
       The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
B17                                                                    1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9       10         
       consider the development priorities for Croatia
       The World Bank Group supports programs and
B18                                                                    1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9       10         
       strategies that are realistic for Croatia
       The World Bank Group treats clients and
B19                                                                    1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9       10         
       stakeholders in Croatia with respect

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Croatia, in terms of each of
the following?
                                                                        To no                                                               To a very
                                                                                                                                                           Don't
                                                                        degree at                                                          significant
                                                                                                                                                           know
                                                                        all                                                                   degree
B20    Responsiveness                                                      1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9     10         
       Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
B21                                                                        1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9     10         
       services)
       Flexibility (in terms of changing country
B22                                                                        1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9     10         
       circumstances)
B23    Being inclusive                                                     1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9     10         
B24    Openness (sharing data and other information)                       1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9     10         
B25    Staff accessibility                                                 1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9     10         
B26    Straightforwardness and honesty                                     1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9     10         
       Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group
B27                                                                        1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9     10         
       who are making decisions important to my work
B28    Collaboration with civil society                                    1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9     10         

B29    Collaboration with the Government                                   1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9     10         
       Collaboration with the European Commission and
B30                                                                        1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9     10         
       international partners
B31    Collaboration with the private sector                               1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9     10         
       The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the
B32                                                                        1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9     10         
       ground
B33    Being a long-term partner                                           1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9     10         

                                                                 126
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
B34. To be a more effective development partner in Croatia, do you believe that the World Bank Group
should have… ? (Select only ONE response)
                                       The current level of local
     More local presence                                                     Less local presence   Don't know
                                           presence is adequate


B35. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the
following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 2     Poor coordination with the European Commission and international partners
 3     The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
 4     Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 5     There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 6     The World Bank Group works too slowly
 7     The Government works inefficiently
 8     Political pressures and obstacles
 9     Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
10     Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                                127
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
C1. In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
areas of development in Croatia?
                                                               Not important                                 Very    Don't
                                                               at all                                    important   know
 1    Anti corruption                                              1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 2    Information and communications technology                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)             1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 4    Crime and violence                                           1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 5    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                      1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 6    Urban development                                            1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 7    Environmental sustainability                                 1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 8    Regulatory framework                                         1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 9    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                       1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 10   Poverty reduction                                            1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 11   Gender equity                                                1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 12   Private sector development                                   1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 13   Foreign direct investment                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 14   Water and sanitation                                         1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 15   Trade and exports                                            1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 16   Economic growth                                              1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 17   Energy                                                       1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 18   Disaster management                                          1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
      Public sector governance/reform (i.e., government
 19   effectiveness, public financial management, public           1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
      expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 20   Job creation/employment                                      1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 21   Financial markets                                            1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 22   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                       1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 23   Health                                                       1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 24   Rural development                                            1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 25   Global/regional integration                                  1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 26   Food security                                                1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 27   Education                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 28                                                                1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
      assistance)
 29   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 30   Agricultural development                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 31   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)         1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 32   Regional disparities                                         1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      
 33   European Union (EU) income convergence                       1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9     10      




                                                             128
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
C2. How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following
areas of development in Croatia? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in working in any of the
sectors listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                             Not effective                                    Very    Don't
                                                             at all                                       effective   know
 1    Anti corruption                                            1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 2    Information and communications technology                  1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)           1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 4    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 5    Urban development                                          1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 6    Environmental sustainability                               1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 7    Regulatory framework                                       1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 8    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 9    Poverty reduction                                          1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 10   Gender equity                                              1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 11   Private sector development                                 1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 12   Foreign direct investment                                  1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 13   Water and sanitation                                       1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 14   Trade and exports                                          1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 15   Economic growth                                            1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 16   Energy                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 17   Disaster management                                        1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
      Public sector governance/reform (i.e., government
 18   effectiveness, public financial management, public         1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
      expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 19   Job creation/employment                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 20   Financial markets                                          1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 21   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 22   Health                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 23   Rural development                                          1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 24   Global/regional integration                                1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 25   Food security                                              1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 26   Education                                                  1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 27                                                              1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
      assistance)
 28   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)              1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 29   Agricultural development                                   1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 30   Regional disparities                                       1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      
 31   European Union (EU) income convergence                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9        10      




                                                           129
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
C3. Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in
Croatia? (Select only ONE response)
 1   At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)
 2   In the Central Europe and the Baltics Office in Brussels, Belgium Office
 3   In the Istanbul Operational Center for IFC
 4   In the country
 5   Don’t know


C4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in
Croatia?
       1           2       3      4       5       6         7         8       9               10                   
To no degree at                                                                                To a very
                                                                                                               Don't know
all                                                                                   significant degree



To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Croatia?
                                                       Strongly                                            Strongly     Don't
                                                       disagree                                               agree     know
     The World Bank Group’s financial instruments
     (i.e., investment lending, Development Policy
C5                                                      1        2        3   4   5       6    7     8     9     10      
     Loan, Trust Funds, Program 4 Result, etc.)
     meet the needs of Croatia
     The World Bank Group meets Croatia’s needs
C6   for knowledge services (e.g., research,            1        2        3   4   5       6    7     8     9     10      
     analysis, data, technical assistance)


C7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its work in real time
in Croatia?
       1           2       3      4       5       6         7         8       9               10                   
To no degree at                                                                                To a very
                                                                                                               Don't know
all                                                                                   significant degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                                130
                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S KNOWLEDGE WORK AND ACTIVITIES (i.e., ANALYSIS,
STUDIES, RESEARCH, DATA, REPORTS, CONFERENCES)
D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work
you do?
1    Weekly
2    Monthly
3    A few times a year
4    Rarely
5    Never


In Croatia, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                         To no                                                 To a very
                                                                                                                            Don't
                                                         degree at                                            significant
                                                                                                                            know
                                                         all                                                     degree
D2    Are timely                                          1        2        3   4   5     6     7     8       9     10        
      Include appropriate level of stakeholder
D3                                                        1        2        3   4   5     6     7     8       9     10        
      involvement during preparation
D4    Lead to practical solutions                         1        2        3   4   5     6     7     8       9     10        
      Are accessible (well written and easy to
D5                                                        1        2        3   4   5     6     7     8       9     10        
      understand)
      Are source of relevant information on global
D6                                                        1        2        3   4   5     6     7     8       9     10        
      good practices
D7    Are adequately disseminated                         1        2        3   4   5     6     7     8       9     10        
D8    Are translated enough into local language           1        2        3   4   5     6     7     8       9     10        
      Are adaptable to Croatia’s specific
D9    development challenges and country                  1        2        3   4   5     6     7     8       9     10        
      circumstances


D10. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group's knowledge work
and activities make to development results in your country?
          1              2   3      4       5        6        7         8       9              10                        
Not significant at all                                                                     Very significant       Don't know


D11. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge work
and activities?
         1               2   3      4       5        6        7         8       9              10                        
Very low technical                                                                      Very high technical
                                                                                                                  Don't know
quality                                                                                             quality




                                                                  131
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                          Strongly                                                   Strongly   Don't
                                                          disagree                                                      agree   know
      The World Bank Group disburses funds
E1                                                        1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      promptly
      The World Bank Group effectively monitors
E2    and evaluates the projects and programs it          1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      supports
      The World Bank Group’s approvals and
E3                                                        1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      reviews are done in a timely fashion
      The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy?
E4                                                        1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      requirements are reasonable
      The World Bank Group’s conditions on its
E5                                                        1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      lending are reasonable
      The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly
E6                                                        1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      in Croatia
      Working with the World Bank Group increases
E7                                                        1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      Croatia’s institutional capacity
      Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
      financial management, etc.) are adequate, the
E8                                                        1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      World Bank Group makes appropriate use of
      them
      The World Bank Group provides effective
E9    implementation support (i.e., supervision of        1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      projects)


E10. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find solutions that
promote private public partnerships in Croatia?
         1             2      3      4      5         6       7         8        9               10                        
                                                                                         To a very significant
To no degree at all                                                                                                   Don't know
                                                                                                      degree


E11. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Croatia?
(Select only one response)
1    The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Croatia
2    The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Croatia
3    The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate
4    Don’t know


E12. Which of the following best describes the WBG’s support in Croatia?
(Select only one response)
     The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses on the most important development challenges in
1
     Croatia
     The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in Croatia, and it is involved in too many areas of
2
     development
3    Don’t know

                                                              132
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN CROATIA
F1. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in
Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1   Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Croatia’s economy
 2   Ensure greater selectivity in its work
 3   Offer more innovative financial products
 4   Increase availability of reimbursable advisory services (RAS)
 5   Assist in increasing European Union (EU) funds absorption
 6   Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, other terms)
 7   Reach out more to groups outside of Government
 8   Work faster
 9   Improve the quality of its experts as related to Croatia’s specific challenges
10   Offer more innovative knowledge services
11   Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., national, state, local)
12   Increase the level of capacity development in the country
13   Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing
14   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


F2. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Croatia,
and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe
the World Bank Group should offer more of in Croatia? (Select only ONE response)
 1   Financial services
 2   Knowledge products
 3   Convening services
 4   None of the above
 5   The combination is appropriate for Croatia
 6   Don’t know




                                                             133
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING
G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in
Croatia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1   Periodicals                                         6    International television
 2   International newspapers                            7    Local newspapers
 3   Local radio                                         8    Internet
 4   International radio                                 9    Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)
 5   Local television                                   10    Other (please specify): ___________________


G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?
(Choose no more than TWO)
     Direct contact with World Bank Group (i.e.,
 1                                                       5    World Bank Group’s website
     face to face meetings/discussions)
 2   e-Newsletters                                       6    Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)
     World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/
 3                                                       7    Mobile phones
     conferences
     World Bank Group’s publications and other
 4                                                       8    Other (please specify): ___________________
     written materials

     Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under which the
G3                                                                                                     Yes       No
     Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
     Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past
G4                                                                                                     Yes       No
     year? (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
G5   Were you able to obtain this information?                                                         Yes       No
G6   Do you have access to the Internet?                                                               Yes       No
G7   Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group websites?                                           Yes       No
     Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites (e.g., blogs, Facebook,
G8                                                                                                     Yes       No
     Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)?

G9. Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
 1   High speed/WiFi
 2   Dial-up




                                                             134
                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.
                                                                Strongly                           Strongly   Don't
                                                                disagree                              agree   know
      I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to
G10   navigate. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank       1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
      Group website)
      I find the information on the World Bank Group’s
G11   websites useful. (Only answer if you have used a World     1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
      Bank Group website)
      The World Bank Group’s social media channels (e.g.,
G12   blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr) are valuable    1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
      sources of information about the institution
      When I need information from the World Bank Group I
G13   know how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach    1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
      them, etc.)
      The World Bank Group is responsive to my information
G14                                                              1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
      requests and inquiries




                                                          135
                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?            (Select only ONE response)
 1   Office of the President, Prime Minister             11   NGO/Community Based Organization
 2   Office of Minister                                  12   Media (press, radio, TV, web, etc.)
                                                              Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory
 3   Office of Parliamentarian                           13
                                                              Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
     Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial
 4                                                       14   Trade Union
     Department or Implementation Agency
     Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing
     implementation of project/
 5                                                       15   Faith-Based Group
     Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank
     Group supported project/program
 6   Local Government Office or Staff                    16   Youth Group
 7   Bilateral/Multilateral Agency                       17   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 8   Private Sector Organization                         18   Judiciary Branch
 9   Private Foundation                                  19   European Commission
10   Financial Sector/Private Bank                       20   Other (please specify): ________________________


H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Select only ONE response)
 1   Water                                               12   Gender
 2   Social protection and labor                         13   Transport and ICT
 3   Fragility, conflict and violence                    14   Urban, rural, and social development
 4   Environment and natural resources                   15   Governance
 5   Public-private partnerships                         16   Poverty
 6   Education                                           17   Jobs
 7   Health, nutrition, and population                   18   Agriculture
 8   Energy and extractives                              19   Climate change
 9   Macroeconomics and fiscal management                20   Generalist (specialized in multiple sectors)
10   Trade and competitiveness
                                                         21   Other (please specify): ____________________
11   Finance and markets


H3. Which one of the following best describes your level of interaction with the World Bank Group
(IBRD, IFC, or MIGA) in your country? (Select only ONE response)
1    I currently collaborate with the World Bank Group
2    I have previously collaborated with the World Bank Group
3    Both of the above (I currently collaborate and previously have collaborated with the World Bank Group)
4    I have never collaborated with the World Bank Group




                                                              136
                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Croatia

SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION
H4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily engage with in
Croatia? (Select only ONE response)
 1   The World Bank (IBRD)
 2   The International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
 3   The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
 4   Other (please specify):___________________________


H5. Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?
(If YES please go to Question H6; If NO please go to H7)
1    Yes
2    No


H6. If yes, what was your view of how the two institutions work together in Croatia?
(Select only ONE response)
1    The two institutions work well together
2    The way the two institutions work together needs improvement
3    The two institutions do not work well together
4    Don’t know


H7. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Croatia?
(Choose no more than TWO)
1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
2    Use World Bank Group reports/data
3    Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities
4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
5    Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.


H8. What’s your gender?
1    Female
2    Male


H9. Which best represents your geographic location?
1    Zagreb area
2    Other urban areas
3    Rural areas



                               Thank you for completing the survey!



                                                              137
