THE RESEARCH TEAM
National AIDS Control Committee                   Field Team―Afrique en Marche
Dr. Jean Bosco Elat Nfetam                        Dr. Georges Nguefack-Tsague
Dr. Serge Clotaire Billong                        (Team Leader, Principal Investigator)
Raoul Anderson Fodjo Toukam                       Dr. Sylvie Kwedi
World Bank                                        Dr. Jerome Ateudjieu
                                                  Dr. Nsounfon Abdou Wouoliyou
Elizabeth N. Mziray
(Task Team Leader, Coinvestigator)                Dr. Laure Vartan Moukam
Dr. Zara Shubber                                  Anastasie Mapassion Mvogo Nga
Nejma Cheikh                                      Blaise Dupont Minkemdefo Tekougang
UNAIDS                                            Denise Ngatchou

Dr. Vincent Koubagnine Tapka                      Sandrine Nankia Djoumetio

Thomas Tchetmi                                    Stephanie Nouetchognou

Technical Support―University of Manitoba          Martin Yakum
                                                  Tigeoh Eric Ndi
Dr. Faran Emmanuel (Coinvestigator)
                                                  Ebile Akoh Walter
Dr. Shajy Isac
                                                  Mbah Philemon Ngoh
Dr. James Blanchard
                                                  Ghislain David Dongmo Kemkeng
                                                  Roger Nguefack
                                                  Estelle Eloumou Makamte
                                                  Hermine Sonna Teumo
                                                  Marie Nicole Ngoufack
                                                  François Dimitri Mbarga
                                                  Descartes Mbogning
                                                  Joseph Mounchipou
                                                  Chantal Ngo Sende




                                           –2 –
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was undertaken at the request of the Government of Cameroon to inform its national HIV
response. It was led and financed by the World Bank, with support from the University of Manitoba
(global technical support partner) and Afrique en Marche (local implementation partner). This study
was conducted in collaboration with the Government of Cameroon, the Joint United Nations Program on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID).

The authors express their sincere gratitude to the Government of Cameron, in particular, the authors
acknowledge the leadership of Dr. Jean Bosco Elat Nfetam (Permanent Secretary, National AIDS Control
Committee) and Dr. Serge Clotaire Billong (Head of Planning, Monitoring, and Evaluation, National AIDS
Control Committee). The authors would like to thank all the organizations which took part in this work,
particularly the study steering committee which provided input in the study protocol and tool design,
facilitated field operations and validated the study results.

The study was conducted in collaboration with UNAIDS and the authors acknowledge the support Dr.
Leopold Zekeng (Deputy Director of the UNAIDS Regional Support Team for West and Central Africa), Dr
Claire Mulanga Tshidibi (UNAIDS Country Director, Cameroon), Dr. Amadou Moctar Mbaye (Former
UNAIDS Country Director, Cameroon), Dr Hugues Lago (Strategic Interventions Adviser, UNAIDS Regional
Support Team for West and Central Africa), Thomas Tchetmi (Strategic Interventions Officer,
Cameroon), and Dr. Vincent Koubagnine Tapka (Strategic Information Advisor, Cameroon).

The study was conducted in collaboration with USAID and the authors acknowledge the support of Tisha
Wheeler (Senior HIV/AIDS Advisor for Key Populations), Peter Wondergem (Senior HealthAdvisor ) and
Laurent Kapesa (Senior Regional HIV Advisor).

The authors would like to extend their thanks to the women and men who contributed to this research
study. The strong mobilization of Female Sex Workers (FSW) was instrumental to the successful
implementation of this study. This study would not have been possible without the collaboration and
the leadership of this community. We offer special thanks to FSWs themselves for becoming social
mobilizers or respondents through associations such as Horizon Femmes, Association d'Assistance au
Développement (ASAD), and the Cameroon Medical Women’s Association (CMWA), without whom data
collection would also not have been possible.

We would also like to recognize the contributions of Marelize Görgens (World Bank), Shiyong Wang
(World Bank), Paul Jacob Robyn (World Bank), and Sosthene Nboudou Ngono (Afrique en Marde).




                                                 –3 –
–4 –
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Background
Female Sex Workers (FSWs) in Cameroon have an HIV prevalence of 36.5 percent and are a key
driver of the HIV/AIDS epidemic in the country. The Government of Cameroon has prioritized
FSWs in the national HIV response. The government currently offers a minimum package of HIV
related services for FSWs with support from the Global Fund and the United States government,
through the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and the Continuum of
Prevention, Care and Treatment of HIV/AIDS with Most-At-Risk Populations (CHAMP) projects.

According to the 2014 UNAIDS Global AIDS Response Progress (GARP) Report, only about one third
of countries report having risk reduction programs for sex workers, and these programs tend to
vary in quality and reach (UNAIDS, 2014). Most programs across Sub-Saharan Africa are limited in
scale, scope and coverage. For example, a review of 54 projects across Africa found that most
programs included small, local-level efforts to provide condoms and occasionally test for HIV
(Ashar, 2014). Very few countries invest sufficiently in HIV programs for sex workers. Even
countries that report investing in HIV prevention for sex workers may not allocate funds for
evidence-informed interventions (UNAIDS, 2014). Multiple studies have shown that targeting the
epidemic drivers is the most efficient and effective strategy to combating the HIV epidemic. The
practical guidelines issued by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV and AIDS (UNAIDS) for
intensifying HIV prevention recommend the use of strategic information to define key populations
(KPs) and risk settings, and match prevention measures, including the allocation of resources and
placement of interventions accordingly (UNAIDS, 2007). This is consistent with a ‘Program Science’
approach that systematically applies “theoretical and empirical scientific knowledge to improve
the design, implementation and evaluation of public health programs” (University of Manitoba,
2015). From a service delivery perspective, it is essential to first quantify the size of KPs,
understand their subtypes, and identify locations where they can be found, before proceeding
with interventions at either the macro (national/regional/city) or micro (local/lowest
administrative area/hotspot level) level.

Attempts to date to estimate the population size of sex workers in Cameroon have focused on a
limited number of areas in selected cities, and were conducted at the macro level providing
estimates at the city level. A recent study, for example, estimated that there are 98,102 (59,914-
135,978) FSWs (aged 15-49 years) in Cameroon with 38,582 (23,563-53,477) living in urban areas
(Papworth et al., 2014). The findings were extrapolated from seven cities in seven regions. While
such studies are useful, allowing for national or municipal target setting, for example, effective HIV
prevention programming requires the quantification, classification and mapping of KPs such as
FSWs at both aggregate and local levels (focusing on the lowest administrative levels within a city).
To this end, this study aimed to map and estimate the numbers and typologies of FSWs in
Cameroon at the hotspot or micro level to inform the planning and provision of HIV-related
services and align them to the local context. For the operational purpose of the mapping exercise,
a FSW is defined as: “any female who exchanges sexual activity with a man in return for money or
benefits, irrespective of site of operation (e.g. street, bars, home, hotel, etc.)”.


                                                 –5 –
This study is in line with Cameroon’s national strategy for HIV/AIDS, and was undertaken in the
context of a broader World Bank/USAID/UNAIDS joint technical support initiative for West and
Central Africa that aims to: (i) support priority countries to assess and identify service delivery
road blocks to effective FSW program implementation; (ii) support priority countries to plan,
design and implement solutions to improve quality, scope and coverage of service delivery; and
(iii) collect and disseminate good practices and lessons learnt in terms of HIV delivery solutions
globally. This study uses geographical programmatic mapping, which gathers data from FSWs
primarily in publicly-accessible locations, including their number, venues wherein they gather, and
their typologies (sub-groupings) to understand their dynamics. Programmatic mapping and size
estimation for FSWs is intended to inform HIV program design and implementation. The study’s
objective to strengthen the HIV prevention program was pursued by estimating the total number
of FSWs (population size), their typologies, and the availability of HIV services at FSW sites and in
surrounding communities. The results of this study are expected to be used immediately for both
planning and implementation of interventions.


Methodology
Cameroon’s National AIDS Control Committee (NACC) and its partners agreed that a
comprehensive programmatic mapping approach for FSWs is critical to the national HIV response,
and identified several criteria to prioritize cities for the mapping. The criteria included: (i) the size
of the city (both large and small cities); (ii) importance of the city in terms of HIV transmission; (iii)
political consideration (French and English cities); and (iv) the presence of existing programs for
FSWs that could be leveraged. Based on the aforementioned criteria, the cities Bafoussam,
Bamenda, Bertoua, Buea, Douala, Kribi, Limbé, and Yaoundé were chosen.

The programmatic mapping methodology used in this study was developed by the University of
Manitoba (UM) and adapted to the Cameroon context (summarized in Figure 1). The methodology
uses two sequential steps following the preparation phase to identify locations where key
populations (KPs) can be found and enumerated: Level 1 (L1) included systematic information
gathering from secondary key informants (KIs), who were persons in direct contact with FSWs or
those involved with KPs in a professional capacity, regarding the locations or “hotspots” where
FSWs seek sexual partners and engage in sexual activity, the characteristics of the spot including
the type of spot and peak hours of operation, and the estimated minimum and maximum number
of FSW who frequent each spot. Based on the answers provided, a list was developed identifying
every site named and the number of informants who named the site. Level 2 (L2) involved
validating and profiling identified spots through interviews and focus group discussions with FSWs.
Size estimations in the councils mapped were adjusted for FSW mobility and extended to other
councils not mapped using a Poisson regression model.

Ethical clearance was obtained from the Cameroon National Research Ethical Committee for
Human Health (N0 2015/07/617/CE/CNERSH/SP). Administrative authorizations were obtained
from local Minister of Public Health representatives for each of the cities involved.




                                                  –6 –
Figure 1. Summary of Programmatic Mapping Methodology




                                             –7 –
Results
The study identified a total of 2,194 hotspots (FSW sites): Yaoundé (622), Douala (760), Bamenda
(263), Bafoussam (194), Kribi (154), Bertoua (140), Limbé (35), and Buea (26). The estimated total
number (with range) of FSWs was 21,124 (16,079–26,170): Yaoundé 6,596 (4,712–8,480), Douala
7,557 (5,550–9,364), Bafoussam 2,458 (1,994–2,923), Bamenda 1,975 (1,605–2,345), Kribi 1,121
(832–1,408), Bertoua 1,044 (891–1,198), Buea 225 (185–266), and Limbé 148 (110–148). This
variability of estimates between cities was also observed between councils of a city. The predicted
estimates of the FSW population nationally was 112,580 (103,436–121,723), covering all councils
of Cameroon. It was estimated that approximately two percent (1.91 percent: 0.47 percent–3.36
percent) of the adult female
population in Cameroon
could be sex workers.

The      main    operational
typologies of hotspots
identified included: bar/bar
with rooms (45.3 percent),
lodge/hotel/brothel (21.1
percent),       street/public
places (13.8 percent), and
night club/casino (13.5
percent). Most hotspots
operated after 9 pm; most
FSWs in every city visited
hotspots      on     Fridays,
Saturdays, and Sundays.
Few hotspots had received
free HIV prevention services
during the last six months.
Lubricants      and      HIV
counseling      were     not
provided to FSWs in Buea
and Limbé. Very few
medical services providing
consultations            and
management of sexual
transmitted infections (STIs)
were available at hotspots
during HIV prevention
activities. Condoms were distributed in all hotspots. However, other services, such as behavioral
change communication and HIV education, referrals and linkages to other health facilities,
nutritional support, family planning, and information on mother-to-child-transmission (MTCT),
were rarely provided at hotspots. In addition, HIV treatment was generally not available in most
hotspots (0 percent–10.2 percent).

                                               –8 –
Discussion
This study identified FSW hotspots and their typologies in eight cities in Cameroon and estimated
the size of the FSW population at the hotspot level per city. As far as we are aware, this is the first
study of its kind in Cameroon. While previous studies estimating the size of the FSW population
have been carried out at the macro level in Cameroon, the resulting database from this study
includes details at the micro or hotspot level that enable the implementation of effective and
efficiently planned HIV interventions for FSWs in Cameroon. In addition, the maps developed for
each council show the distribution of hotspots and the typology of those spots. This information
allows for the design and implementation of targeted interventions that are responsive to the needs of
the specific community taking into account the most appropriate service delivery modalities.

The mapping data allows programme planners and policy makers to ensure that appropriate HIV
prevention services are optimally distributed across hotspots and enables them to prioritize
certain locations as required. The mapping data can also help policy makers coordinate the HIV
response in order to avoiding duplication of efforts among implementing partners and to identify
gaps that need to be filled.

This study points to the need to compare the geographical distribution of hotspots and the
location and scope of other services for FSWs including HIV prevention and treatment services,
and other health services. This will help demonstrate whether services are accessible to and
relevant for FSWs based on their needs.

Information on the operational typologies of the hotspots can be used to determine the best
service delivery modalities and intervention packages to be provided in specific areas, as well as
the ideal times for providing services to ensure access to the target population. Programmatic
mapping can also inform FSW program planning, implementation and evaluation by providing:
i) denominators used to set coverage targets, program reach and allocation of peer educators at
program sites; ii) information that can be included in the terms of references of implementing
agencies (e.g. expected number of FSW to be covered by services, typology of FSW and the best
strategy of reaching them, which councils to prioritize based on the FSW population density, etc.);
and iii) a sampling frame for planned research studies (detailed information of hot spots and key
informants can be instrumental in helping obtain representative samples). Finally, information on
HIV-related services at the micro level, and lack thereof, can inform priority interventions,
ensuring intervention sites and service delivery modalities are aligned with FSW population
densities and operational typologies, providing information to inform program scale up.
More specifically, the study’s results will inform the implementation of interventions planned
under the Global Fund and USAID projects. The results are also expected to identify priority areas
of intervention and guide the choice of community-based organizations (CBO) that are responsible
for implementation. In addition, for the eight cities where the mapping was done, the results will
complement the ongoing integrated biological and behavioral surveillance (IBBS) study that is
currently being conducted. In terms of priority interventions identified, lubricants and HIV
counseling should be integrated in prevention packages, especially in Limbé and Buea. In Douala
and other cities, medical consultations, behavior change communication and HIV education,
referrals to other health facilities, hygienic nutritional support, family planning, and MTCT should


                                                 –9 –
be reinforced at hotspots. Intervention strategies should prioritize the following types of locations:
bar/bar with rooms, lodge/hotel/brothel, street/public places, and night club/casino. Since FSWs
tend to be a mobile population, planned interventions should be initiated as soon as possible. In
addition, mapping activities should be conducted routinely during implementation, continuously
updating estimates as part of program monitoring, to help guide and improve service delivery. The
results from this study also underscore the need to have FSWs and other key stakeholders at the
community level, such as bar owners, managers and gatekeepers, involved in the planning and
design of interventions as well as in helping with linkages and referral to HIV services.

A limitation of the study is that it did not include internet based FSWs, or those working with
escort services who are mainly contacted through the telephone or social media. The numbers of
these “hidden” FSWs are not known. However, it is important to have a better understanding of
this typology of FSWs and to design targeted interventions to reach them. This may require a
combination of more conventional approaches, such as peer education, as well as the use of
technological innovations and social media.

Conclusion
This mapping and enumeration of FSW in eight cities in Cameroon provides important
information, at both the micro and the macro level, enabling program planners and policy makers
to prioritize the implementation and scale up of FSW HIV prevention programs. In addition, the
study, the first of its kind in Cameroon, provides an important baseline for monitoring and
evaluating HIV programs targeting FSWs.


REFERENCES
Ashar D., Luchters S., Moore L., Lafort Y., Roy A., Scorgie F., Chersich M. (2014). Systematic Review of Facility-based
   Sexual and Reproductive Health Services for Female Sex Workers in Africa. Global Health. 10:46.
Papworth E., Grosso A., Ketende S, Wirtz A., Cange C., Kennedy C., Lebreton M., Ky-Zerbo O., Anato S., and Baral S.
   (2014). Examining Risk Factors for HIV and Access to Services among Female Sex Workers (FSW) and Men who have
   Sex with Men (MSM) in Burkina Faso, Togo, and Cameroon. Baltimore: USAID Project Search: Research to
   Prevention. http://www.jhsph.edu/research/centers-and-institutes/research-to-
   prevention/publications/WA_FinalReport.pdf
UNAIDS (2014). Global AIDS Response Progress Reporting (2014).
   http://www.unaids.org/en/dataanalysis/knowyourresponse/globalaidsprogressreporting
UNAIDS (2007). Guidelines for Intensifying HIV Prevention. GENEVA.
   http://data.unaids.org/pub/Manual/2007/20070306_prevention_guidelines_towards_universal_access_en.pdf
University of Manitoba (2015). Program Science Concept Note
   http://umanitoba.ca/faculties/medicine/units/community_health_sciences/departmental_units/cgph/cgph_sci_con
   cept.html). Accessed on 11 December 2016.




                                                           –10–
