Vu l n e r a b i l i t y
non-communicable disease                                  remoteness
disaster risk management                              climate change
RISING                         SE A                   L E V EL
diseconomies of scale labor migration
volatile growth natural disasters

           Cluster Country Program Evaluation
                              on Small States
                                       Seychelles Country Case Study (FY07–15)
                      Enhancing Competitiveness and Private Sector Development
                 IEG Working Paper 2016




 CLUSTER COUNTRY PROGRAM EVALUATION ON SMALL
                   STATES

        Seychelles Country Case Study (FY07–15)
Enhancing Competitiveness and Private Sector Development



                       Florence Charlier
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org




This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of
Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

         The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
boundaries.


Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full
attribution to this work is given.

         Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-
mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                        ii
Contents
Abbreviations and Acronyms ................................................................................................ v
Acknowledgments .................................................................................................................. vi
Summary ................................................................................................................................ vii
    Bank’s Contribution .......................................................................................................... viii
    Assessment of the Bank Group’s Overall Strategy and Program for Enhancing
    Competitiveness .................................................................................................................. ix
    Conclusions and Lessons.................................................................................................... xii
1. Country Context and Purpose of the Evaluation ............................................................. 1
    Seychelles Development Challenges .................................................................................... 1
    Evaluation Objectives and Report Structure ........................................................................ 4
2. The Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy....................................................................... 7
    Context ................................................................................................................................. 7
    The World Bank’s Strategy and Program ............................................................................ 7
    Broad Assessment of Strategy and Program ........................................................................ 8
    Conclusion .......................................................................................................................... 13
3. Evaluation of World Bank Group’s Assistance in Enhancing Competitiveness and
Private Sector Development ................................................................................................. 15
    Liberalizing the Incentive Framework ............................................................................... 15
    Promoting a Business Friendly Environment ..................................................................... 18
    Strengthening the Financial Sector..................................................................................... 20
    Improving Infrastructure Services ...................................................................................... 21
    Fostering Fisheries Development ....................................................................................... 22
    Overall Assessment ............................................................................................................ 24
    Conclusion: Overall Ranking of Bank’s Performance ....................................................... 27
4. Conclusions and Lessons .................................................................................................. 30
    Conclusions ........................................................................................................................ 30
    Lessons ............................................................................................................................... 31

Tables
Table 3.1. Summary Assessment for Pillar 2—Improving Competitiveness ......................... 27




                                                                      iii
Figures
Figure 3.1. Seychelles Financial Deepening; 2005–14 ........................................................... 25
Figure 3.2. Seychelles Exports of Goods and Services, 2005–14 .......................................... 26
Figure 3.3. Market Share of Seychelles Exports in European Imports, 2005–14 ................... 26
Figure 3.4. FDI and Private Investment in Seychelles; 2005–14 ........................................... 27

Appendixes
Appendix A. Seychelles Economic and Social Indicators, 2005–14 ...................................... 35
Appendix B. World Bank Group Operational Program in Seychelles FY07–15 ................... 37
Appendix C. World Bank Group Program Organized Along the Evaluation Pillars ............. 47
Appendix D. Short Summary of Bank Contribution under Pillar 1—Improving Resilience . 51


All volumes of the Cluster Country Program Evaluation on Small States are found online at
http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/evaluations/cpe-smallstates.




                                                        iv
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AAA        analytic and advisory services
AfDB       African Development Bank
CEO        chief executive officer
CPS        country partnership strategy
DPL        development policy loan
DPO        development policy operation
DRM        disaster risk management
EEZ        exclusive economic zone
EFF        Extended Fund Facility
EU         European Union
FDI        foreign direct investment
FY         fiscal year
GDP        gross domestic product
GNI        gross national income
HFC        Housing Finance Corporation
IBRD       International Bank of Reconstruction and Development
ICT        information and communications technology
IFC        International Finance Corporation
IMF        International Monetary Fund
LME        large marine ecosystem
MDG        Millennium Development Goal
MIGA       Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
MTNDS      medium-term national development strategy
NLTA       nonlending technical assistance
OECD       Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
PBB        performance-based budgeting
PEMC       Public Enterprise Monitoring Commission
PFM        public financial management
RAS        Reimbursable Advisory Services
SFA        Seychelles Fishing Authority
SMB        State Marketing Board
SME        small- and medium-size enterprise
SOE        state-owned enterprise
STC        Seychelles Trading Company
SWIOFish   South West Indian Ocean Fisheries Governance and Shared Growth
SWIOFP     South West Indian Ocean Fisheries Project
TA         technical assistance
UNDP       United Nations Development Programme

All dollar amounts are U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated.




                                                 v
Acknowledgments
The Seychelles country case study was prepared by a team led by Florence Charlier and
Chandra Pant with analytic support from Swizen Rubbani. It was conducted under the
guidance and supervision of Nick York (director) and Mark Sundberg (manager) and the
overall direction of Caroline Heider (director-general, Evaluation). Aimée Niane, Yasmin
Angeles, and Gloria Soria provided administrative support. The report also benefitted from
comments provided by peer reviewers Alan Gelb (Center for Global Development), Ali
Mansour (International Monetary Fund), and Jyoti Shukla (World Bank Group).

IEG is grateful to the numerous representatives of the government, private sector entities,
and nongovernmental organizations who provided valuable insights into the Bank Group’s
program in Seychelles. The team is also thankful to the Bank Group management and
country team members, including both previous and current staff working on Seychelles,
who provided valuable time, information, and feedback to the evaluation team.




                                              vi
Summary
Highlights
Between 1976 and the mid-2000s, Seychelles had transformed itself from a poor subsistence
economy into a high middle income country with low levels of poverty and many social
indicators comparable to Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
countries. However, this growth could not be sustained and faced with a growing international
financial crisis, severe shortages of foreign exchange resulted in the government defaulting in
its international payment obligations in 2008. Starting that year, the government began
implementing a radical program of macroeconomic stabilization and structural reforms. The
centerpiece of these reforms was a strong fiscal adjustment to reduce the burden of external
debt and a progressive dismantling of the role of the state in allocating resources. These
reforms were supported by the Standby and Extended Fund Facility (EFF) arrangements of the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), and by the Bank through a series of development policy
loans (DPLs). Seychelles also benefited from debt relief provided by other official and private
international creditors. As a result of the reforms, macroeconomic imbalances were corrected,
the role of markets was enhanced, and economic growth restored. However, some important
measures such as privatization or SOE reforms (to improve their governance) were stalled or
progressing at a very slow pace and there are increasing pressures to reverse some key reforms
(such as reducing the size of government)

The Bank played an important role in Seychelles’ successful turn-around. Its support was
mainly in the form of a series of DPLs, which was complemented by demand-driven analytic
and advisory services (AAA) and capacity building initiatives. The Bank’s strategy was fully
consistent with the government’s reform agenda and addressed the twin challenges of
vulnerability and lack of competitiveness in the context of shrinking fiscal space. The Bank
made a valuable contribution to the design of a targeted social safety net which was an
important complement to the stabilization program and helped to sustain the reform program.
The Bank’s program was well harmonized with the work of the other development partners. In
particular, there was excellent cooperation between the Bank and the IMF in the design of the
reform programs. The Bank’s strategy was selective and flexible in response to changing
external conditions or government priorities. But perhaps the Bank was too accommodating
when important reforms such as privatization of state owned enterprises were stalled and state-
owned enterprise (SOE) reforms were proceeding very slowly. In addition to the two Public
Expenditure Reviews which included chapters on public administration and public enterprise
governance, a political economy analysis of these important reforms could have helped inform
and better address the reasons that led to a slow pace of the SOE reforms. The Bank Group
supported several areas for enhancing competitiveness and outcomes were moderately
satisfactory. Its interventions helped liberalize the incentive framework. The regulatory
framework for private businesses was also simplified and legislation adopted to ease entry and
exit of firms. However, limited progress was made in the later years, in promoting
privatization and in SOE reforms. The Bank played a useful role in making the fisheries sector
more transparent in order to improve its performance and strengthen accountability. Bank


                                              vii
 interventions in the energy and water sectors were instrumental in rationalizing tariffs to
 support the viability of the public utility company and enhance its ability to provide reliable
 supply. Bank involvement in the financial sector was largely confined to housing finance
 segment and in developing a leasing law to facilitate access to credit to small- and medium-
 size enterprises (SMEs). Going forward, a fresh impetus to reforms is required. These must
 accelerate reforms of state enterprises, including privatization; reforms in air, port, and
 information and communications technology (ICT) infrastructure to improve connectivity;
 skills development; and continuing reforms in governance to enhance transparency and
 accountability.


At independence in 1976, Seychelles was a poor subsistence level economy with huge disparities
in wealth. Through the 1980s and 1990s Seychelles followed a socialist-type model of
development characterized by a dominant role of the state in the economy and the establishment
of a generous welfare system. This orientation paid rich dividends. Pumped by high levels of
public spending, including on infrastructure, the economy grew strongly led by growth of
tourism and fisheries. By the early 2000s, Seychelles had surpassed all countries sub-Saharan
Africa in terms of both per capita gross domestic product (GDP) and human development
indices.

However, this model of development proved to be unsustainable. Severe shortages of foreign
exchange plagued the economy and in 2008, as the international financial crisis erupted, the
country was forced to default on its international debt obligations. Following the default, the
country embarked on a drastic course correction involving tough measures to cut back public
spending, and economic reforms to roll back the role of the state in the economy and increase the
role of competitive markets in resource allocation.

These reforms, which were supported by the IMF and the World Bank and benefitted from
generous debt relief from other private and official creditors, were largely successful in restoring
macroeconomic imbalances and allowing the resumption of growth. However, the external
environment remains fragile and renewed pressures to reverse the tide of reforms, including
fiscal restraint, could derail progress unless they are strongly resisted and further reforms
implemented.

Bank’s Contribution
The Bank played an important role in Seychelles’ recovery. It responded quickly to the
government’s request for assistance in helping design the reform program. Over the years the
Bank’s support has largely been provided in the form of a series of DPLs, complemented by
demand driven AAA and capacity building initiatives (including in pubic financial management,
design of social protection programs, health, education, fisheries and energy sectors, among
others). The Bank also managed some Trust Fund operations, including in the areas of renewable
energy and energy conservation. Since its reengagement in 2010, the activities of the
International Finance Corporation (IFC) have been limited and confined largely to the energy
sector (mainly for promoting renewable energy and energy efficiency) and the financial sector
(mainly for development of leasing). The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
has no active projects in Seychelles.


                                                viii
Assessment of the Bank Group’s Overall Strategy and Program for
Enhancing Competitiveness
BANK GROUP OVERALL STRATEGY

There was close alignment between the government’s objectives and the Bank’s strategy and
program. There was also a clear focus in the program, especially in the initial years. The main
priority was to restore macroeconomic stability and allow markets (and the private sector) a
dominant role in allocating resources. With respect to the former, the Bank made an important
contribution by helping the government design and implement a program of targeted subsidies to
protect the most vulnerable from the cuts in universal subsidies necessitated by the stabilization
program. With respect to the latter, the Bank program supported government’s efforts to
liberalize the incentive framework and improve the business environment for the private sector.
In later years, even as the reform agenda widened, the Bank resisted the temptation to intervene
in every important area, deferring to other development partners (for example, the European
Union [EU] in the education sector).

The Bank’s program was well harmonized with other donors’ activities. In particular, the close
collaboration with the IMF in the design of the reform program was acknowledged by the
authorities as an important reason for its successful implementation. In particular, both
institutions provided valuable support to the government in negotiating generous debt relief from
other creditors.

The Bank was flexible in implementing its program and responded timely, quickly and
appropriately to external economic shocks (such as the longer than anticipated slowdown in
European markets) and natural disasters (floods in 2013). In other areas, though, such as the
privatization and SOE reforms, Bank flexibility in adjusting the pace of the program lacked
strong underpinnings. The Bank conducted two useful public expenditure reviews in 2009 and
2011 that provided some guidance on public administration and public enterprise governance.
But in view of the very slow pace of SOE restructuring, a deeper analysis of the political-
economy underpinnings of reform ownership and constraints could have fostered an
understanding of critical bottlenecks and whether the Bank should continue to risk ‘reform
capital’ on SOE restructuring.

The emphasis on social protection and the fisheries sector in the Bank’s program was consistent
with the Bank Group’s twin corporate goals, adopted in 2013, of reducing poverty and promoting
shared prosperity.

The Bank’s program addressed the concerns of vulnerability (to external economic shocks and
natural disasters) and competitiveness and private sector development that inform the Bank’s
agenda across small states. However, in some sectors, less attention was paid to address issues of
lack of transparency, favoritism and abuse of power to which small states (where everyone
knows everyone else) are particularly vulnerable. While the Bank’s program sought to increase
transparency in some areas (such as in public financial management, fisheries), a more
comprehensive approach to subject government decision making to public scrutiny may be
desirable to curb arbitrariness.



                                                ix
THE BANK GROUP’S PROGRAM FOR ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS

The Bank Group supported several areas for enhancing competitiveness. With respect to the
incentive regime, significant progress was made in the early years of reform to enhance the role
of market forces and reduce state intervention in resource allocation. The foreign exchange
regime was liberalized, prices were largely decontrolled and interest rates liberalized.
Competition from imports was enhanced by maintaining low-import tariffs and reducing non-
tariff barriers by modernizing customs clearance procedures and simplifying procedures for
export and import permits. Tax reforms were implemented to make the playing field more even
by eliminating various exemptions.

The regulatory framework for private businesses was also simplified and efforts made to
accelerate settlement of commercial disputes. A new Licensing Act (2010) was enacted
providing for more transparent procedures and eliminating the number of commercial activities
requiring ex ante licenses to operate. A new Investment Code (2010) was adopted providing a
modern framework for the promotion, regulation and protection of investors and investments.
The Seychelles Investment Board was established to facilitate and promote investments.
Registration was simplified by implementing an on-line one-stop shop for starting a business. To
further save on time and cost, registration of property titles was computerized and a system put
in place allowing electronic payment of taxes. A new Insolvency Act was adopted which
establishes a modern framework to save viable businesses and enable non-viable businesses to
exit the market quickly. The Bank also supported reform to accelerate the process of settling
commercial disputes, including through the establishment of a specialized commercial division
and the set-up of a new mediation framework.

However the impact on the ground of these reforms is yet to be felt in any significant way.
Seychelles only slightly improved on its rank in terms of the Ease of Doing Business Index from
84 (out of 175 countries) in 2006 to 85 (out of 189 countries) in 2014. Anecdotal evidence
presented to the IEG mission suggested that notwithstanding formal rules to the contrary, there
remains substantial intervention by the state (and powerful politicians) in economic activities in
informal ways. This arbitrariness remains a constraint to private sector development which
would need to be addressed by promoting greater transparency in government interactions and
by strengthening independent institutions that can check arbitrariness. More could have been
done in this regard.

The Bank program aimed at reducing the state’s role in the economy and improving the
efficiency of SOE through state enterprise reform, privatization, and governance reform.

In the early years, efforts were made to shrink the role of the state by transferring some of the
non-core functions performed by state agencies on to the private sector. While this effort was
successful in eliminating a large number of government jobs (some of which got transferred to
the private sector), it also resulted in deterioration in the quality of some of the services provided,
and pressures to reverse the policy in some cases.

The Bank supported the restructuring of the former State Marketing Board, a state trading
conglomerate and supplier of basic consumer goods. Follow up privatizations of the majority
state-owned Seychelles Savings Bank and Nouvobanq did not take place as planned, and the


                                                  x
original privatization agenda appears to have been abandoned in favor of improving the
governance and oversight of state enterprises.

The Bank’s program to improve corporate governance in SOEs focused on creating a legal and
institutional framework for better monitoring and assessment of SOE performance. The Public
Enterprise Monitoring Act (2009) was amended to give more autonomy to the enterprise board
whose responsibilities were also clearly defined. An independent Public Enterprise Monitoring
Commission (PEMC) was created with responsibility for monitoring financial, governance, and
transparency issues in relation to public enterprises. Also, to improve government oversight of
investments made by public enterprises, a high-level committee was formed to review all
potential public projects of a magnitude greater than SR25 million and assess their
macroeconomic and fiscal risks. While these are useful first steps, the more important measures
to reward good performers and penalize poor ones are still pending. There is no evidence so far
to suggest that state enterprises face a ‘perform or perish’ environment necessary to improve
their performance.

Bank Group interventions in the financial sector were limited to the housing finance segment and
leasing. In the housing finance area, the Bank supported reforms to reduce the role of the state-
owned Housing Finance Corporation (HFC) and increase the role of private banks in housing
finance. A new housing finance strategy that increased private participation in housing finance
and reduced untargeted housing subsidies is being implemented. The Bank provided TA to
develop a system of ‘smart’ subsidies targeted to low income households. It is still too early to
tell if these changes will incentivize private banks to enter the housing finance market and
anecdotal evidence suggests they remain reluctant. With IFC support, a Financial Leasing law
designed to ease access to finance, especially for SMEs, was passed in November 2013.
However, the enabling regulations which will allow leasing companies to be formed are yet to be
adopted.

The Bank was not a major player in infrastructure, except in the electricity and water sectors
where its interventions supported tariff adjustments to improve the financial viability of the
public utility corporation and encourage energy (and water) conservation. Based on the
recommendations of a study funded through the RAS, the government adopted an automatic
mechanism to adjust price movements in line with key variables like the exchange rate and fuel
prices on a quarterly basis. The government also approved a tariff rebalancing program that
seeks to align electricity and water tariffs to cost-recovery levels over eight and ten years,
respectively. To ensure long run sustainability, the Bank supported the enactment of an Energy
Act 2012 which provided a roadmap to help remove crosssubsidization gradually across the
various client groups and gradually increase tariffs to cost-recovery levels over 7 years starting in
mid-2013. This Act also establishes the Seychelles Energy Commission to regulate the electricity
sector, license electricity activities, tender and award contracts to independent power producers,
and determine tariffs and charges.

The Bank’s program also sought to assist the government in pursuing its goal of diversifying its
energy mix by promoting private sector participation in renewable energy. Through a grant from
the Small Island Developing State DOCK Support Program (SIDS-DOCK), the Bank supported
the preparation of grid codes, feed-in tariffs, and model energy supply purchase agreements.
Some parts of this work (such as the grid penetration component) were useful while some other


                                                 xi
parts (such as preparation of grid codes) were too generic to be of use. The IFC’s initiative,
through the Seychelles Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Project, to promote efficient
use of energy in households by incentivizing commercial banks to lend for purchase of energy
efficient household appliances was unsuccessful.

Given the large share of the fisheries sector in GDP, exports and employment, its importance for
food security, and a significant involvement of the private sector, the Bank’s program sought to
improve the sector’s performance by promoting public disclosure of all fishing agreements,
fishing and aquaculture licenses, and authorizations that were issued (and will be issued in the
future) to foreign and national entities. As a result, this information is now public. The measures
to mandate full disclosure of details of fishing agreements and publication of key statistics on the
sector should enable more informed management decisions to be made and also maintain public
pressure to ensure that sector decisions are made consistent with the interests of the public.
However, this presupposes that there is adequate institutional capacity in the sector to understand
what the data are revealing and to design policies in line with emerging data. This may not be the
case, and the Bank may need to do much more in terms of capacity building in the SFA and other
sector institutions to ensure that the sector is managed more efficiently.

Conclusions and Lessons
Based on its contribution to various dimensions, the Bank Group’s performance in enhancing
competitiveness is assessed as moderately successful1. While the share of net inflows of foreign
direct investment (FDI) in GDP has fallen over the period, the share of domestic private
investment has increased. Other positive trends include the increased market share of exports to
the competitive European market, and growing share of world tourism arrivals. The strong
growth of exports of ICT services is another positive trend suggesting some success in
diversification. However, the ease of doing business between 2006 and 2014 only slightly
improved, and there was a decline in its ranking according to the Global Competitiveness Index
between 2012–13 and 2014–15.

On a broader level, the Bank’s strategy and program were in line with the priorities of the
government. The Bank’s program complemented the work of other development partners. Its
close partnership with the IMF in the design of the reform program was cited by authorities as an
important reason for its success. Consistent with the priorities of small states, the Bank’s
program addressed the two critical pillars of enhancing competitiveness and reducing
vulnerability. It was selective in its interventions and not overly ambitious. The Bank’s program
was timely, flexible and responsive to the changing external economic environment as well as
the government’s requests for specific kinds of assistance (in terms of AAA for example.
However, the Bank was perhaps too accommodating when it came to policy slippages. In recent
years, it could have pressed harder on some of the issues (such as SOE reforms) that are
important for enhancing competitiveness.

LESSONS

Lesson 1: It would be desirable for the Bank to be prepared to maintain at least a
minimum technical presence even when the policy dialogue is unsatisfactory. Technical staff
may have the opportunity to engage with policy makers that needs support and confidence in


                                                xii
pursuing good policies which alone they couldn’t do. This may open the door for an earlier
reengagement to adopt a more sustainable fiscal trajectory before the country descends into
crippling debt and bankruptcy.

Lesson 2: The Bank could make a greater effort at understanding political economy issues,
including identifying individuals who are championing or opposing politically contentious
reforms so that these are reflected in assessing political challenges and opportunities for
key reforms. This political economy analysis would be timely after Seychelles’ “closely fought”
Presidential elections in December 2015, and would help frame the new CPF, notably to (i)
prioritize the reform agenda; (ii) gauge the degree of ownership for different reforms, and
interests working for and against reforms within government and outside; and (iii) suggest entry
points and ways to neutralize or compensate those opposing key reforms. This analysis would be
updated as and when important political developments (such as fresh elections or major cabinet
reshuffles) occurred. Naturally, any such analysis would require the Bank to interact with
stakeholders including trade unions and opposition parties.

Lesson 3: The Bank needs to remain selective in the choice of areas to focus upon, given the
limited resources at its disposal. Fiscal restraint will remain an important macro compulsion in
the medium term and the Bank could provide useful inputs in improving the quality of public
spending, including public investment. Given its dependence on international trade and services,
improving the quality of infrastructure to enhance connectivity with the rest of the world in one
obvious priority area for Seychelles to which the Bank can contribute. Improving quality of
education and skills is another important area where other DPs are taking the lead. It would be
judicious for the Bank to keep a close eye on the results of these efforts and offer any expertise it
has to further these efforts. It would be wise for the Bank to continue to take a pro-active stance
in promoting trade, investment and exchange of ideas at the regional level.

Lesson 4: The Bank needs to remain flexible in the design of its program and be prepared
to modify it in size and substance if the external environment changes or priorities of the
government change. However, slippages in implementation of policy conditionality are to be
accommodated only in exceptional circumstances. This is important to ensure the Bank keeps its
credibility. Prior actions and targeted outcome in DPLs needs to be precisely worded and crafted
to ensure that there is a clear logical chain between the prior action and the ultimate objective of
reform and also that this chain is aligned with the programmatic cycle of the DPL.

Lesson 5: Wherever possible, the Bank could press for increased transparency and
accountability in government and help promote reforms that break the “cycle of
fraternity” which often plague institutions in small states. So far the Bank’s emphasis has
been largely in the area of public finance management. As noted by several stakeholders,
including former policy makers, the Bank’s appetite to challenge the government to deepen
reforms during the second wave of reform was weak. They felt the Bank should place greater
emphasis on good governance. Bank agenda to foster accountability should be widened to
include other areas (e.g., selection of the chief executive officers [CEOs] of public sector bodies)
where the government may be tempted to dispense favors to its favorites or penalize opponents.
The role of independent watch-dog bodies such as the press and the judiciary will be important to
hold the government to account, and the Bank should support any efforts to strengthen their role.



                                                 xiii
Lesson 6: It would be desirable for the Bank to look beyond standard prescriptions in
designing SOE reforms, including privatization in small states where the capacity of the
private sector may be very thin. It is therefore important to first assess the readiness of the
private sector to take on responsibilities of a retreating state and to re-calibrate the planned speed
of transition based on this assessment. At the same time, the Bank should be prepared to
strengthen design joint interventions, including support for institutions that can provide hand-
holding services to the private sector in the initial years.




                                                 xiv
1. Country Context and Purpose of the Evaluation
1.1      Like Mauritius, the Seychelles story of recent years is one of successful transformation,
but of a different kind. In 2006–07, the country was in crisis, unable to pay its foreign creditors
and faced with severe shortages of foreign exchange and essential commodities. Tough policies
were implemented, the crisis was overcome, shortages disappeared, and the country is on a
fragile, but more stable, path of economic recovery and growth. This transformation from crisis
to recovery was made possible by another equally important paradigm shift: the economy was
transformed from one which was principally directed by the state and where markets had a very
limited role, to one where market forces dominate (though the state remains an important player).
What was remarkable was that this transformation, which entailed severe hardships on some of
the population in the short term, happened without social strife.

1.2     These developments could not have happened without the strong and sustained support of
the IMF and the World Bank, and the debt relief provided by official and private international
creditors. This combination of the government’s firm resolve to implement policy changes, the
citizens’ acceptance of the necessity for change, and the timely support from international
creditors contributed to Seychelles’ economic recovery from the brink of disaster.

1.3    This Country Case Study evaluates the World Bank Group’s activities that seek to
improve competitiveness over FY07–15. This evaluation is part of a cluster of country
evaluations of small states, also including the OECS countries, selected Pacific islands, Cabo-
Verde, Djibouti and Mauritius.

Seychelles Development Challenges
COUNTRY BACKGROUND

1.4     Seychelles gained its independence from the United Kingdom in 1976. It is a small island
economy in the middle of Indian Ocean with a population of 88,000 people.1 The island is
vulnerable to natural disasters including floods, rising sea level, and tsunami. In recent years, it
has also been vulnerable to piracy in the Indian Ocean region. Seychellois descend from a mix of
French, African, Indian, Chinese, and Middle East ancestries, and speak a Creole language,
although English and French are also the official languages.

1.5     Following a coup soon after independence, Seychelles became a one party socialist state.
Though the country moved to a multi-party system in 1993, political power has remained in the
hands of the same ruling elite for almost the entire period since independence.2 Until the crisis in
2007, Seychelles followed a state-led socialist oriented economic program. Since then, market
forces play a much larger role in resource allocation, though the state remains an important
player.

1.6    "Seychelles is a high income country (with a per capita gross national income of $14,100
in 2014) with many social indicators comparable to those in OECD countries.3 Its economy is
predominantly service-based and largely dependent on the tourism sector and fisheries.4
Seychelles has the second-largest tuna cannery in the world. Bunkering (the re-export of fuel)
and fuel storage are profitable activities. Seychelles relies on imports for almost all raw


                                                 1
materials, products, and specialized services, and is therefore highly vulnerable to external
shocks. Initial oil exploration efforts have yielded successful results, and if fruitful this could be
a huge boost for the economy.

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS

1.7     At independence in 1976, Seychelles was a poor subsistence level economy with huge
disparities in wealth. Partly in response to the poverty and inequity, through the 1980s and 1990s
Seychelles followed a socialist-type model of development characterized by a dominant role of
the state in the economy and the establishment of a generous welfare system. This orientation
paid rich dividends. Pumped by high levels of public spending, including on infrastructure, the
economy grew strongly led by growth of tourism and fisheries. At the same time, the generous
welfare system, financed by buoyant tax revenues and domestic borrowing, ensured that benefits
of growth translated into benefits (such as universal primary education and access to health care
services, generous welfare payments and subsidies) for most of the population. Economic growth
averaged 6 percent during the second half of the 1980s and 5 percent during the 1990s. By the
early 2000s, Seychelles had surpassed all countries sub-Saharan Africa in terms of both per
capita GDP and human development indices.5

1.8      But these gains were unsustainable. The government’s expansionary fiscal stance led to
shortages of foreign exchange which persisted even as exchange restrictions were tightened.
These shortages had an adverse impact on growth. Despite periodic (but short lived) efforts at
partial reforms and expenditure restraint, the country continued to accumulate external debt (and
arrears) to finance high levels of public spending (on social programs, wages, support to public
enterprises).6 By 2008, as oil prices tripled and revenues from tourism contracted due to the
global financial crisis, foreign exchange shortages intensified. Essential commodities, including
medicines were in short supply, and the country defaulted on a coupon payment on a $230
million bond. Growth plummeted to -1.3 percent in 2008 after averaging 7.5 percent during
2005–07.

1.9     Following the default, the government embarked on a comprehensive economic reform
program supported by an IMF Standby Arrangement in November 2008.7 The Standby was
replaced in Dec 2009 by a four-year arrangement under the Extended Fund Facility, which was
followed by a successor EFF arrangement that expires in end 2017. The Bank provided funds
through a series of development policy operations (DPOs) in support of these reforms. In April
2009, the Paris Club creditors granted a face-value debt reduction of 45 percent, followed by an
agreement on similar terms with other private creditors in January 2010. Several non-Paris Club
bilateral deals were also concluded.

1.10 The reform program was implemented successfully. Foreign exchange restrictions were
removed and the exchange rate was allowed to be market determined.8 Price controls were lifted
and interest rates set free. New market driven monetary instruments to control liquidity were
introduced. Tight fiscal policies with positive primary surpluses were maintained throughout the
period. However, expenditures on social programs were maintained to cushion the impact of the
reforms on the population, including those whose jobs were eliminated. The government also
introduced a new social welfare system replacing universal subsidies with means tested welfare
benefits. The primary budget surplus averaged 7.2 percent of GDP per year during 2009–14.9


                                                   2
1.11 After the initial shock, the economy recovered quickly. Growth was restored and
macroeconomic imbalances progressively corrected. Led by a strong surge in FDI (mainly
tourism related) and the recovery of tourism, GDP growth averaged almost 5 percent during
2009–14. The spike in prices following the devaluation was quickly dampened by the tightening
of monetary policy and the fiscal adjustment.10 The external position also improved significantly
allowing for a modest build-up of reserves from about 0.6 months of imports in 2009 to 4 months
of imports by 2014. As a result of the restructuring of external debt that was initiated in 2009,
and the sustained primary surpluses achieved since then, the level of total public debt (which was
almost 124 percent of GDP in 2009) was brought down to 65 percent in 2014.

POVERTY, UNEMPLOYMENT, INEQUALITY, AND MDGS

1.12 With a gross national income per capita of $14,100 in 2014, Seychelles is classified as a
high-income country. Poverty in Seychelles is relatively low, with less than 2 percent of the
population living on less than $2 per day.

1.13 Seychelles has already achieved most of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs),
especially for education, health, poverty eradication, and the environment.

1.14 Gross enrollment in primary and secondary education is high (above 100 percent).
Education is free to the secondary level and subsidized at the tertiary level.

1.15 Seychelles has better indicators of health outcomes (such as life expectancy and child
mortality rates) than many other small island states.11 It ranked 71st out of 187 countries in terms
of the 2013 Human Development Index of the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), but its score has remained stagnant between 2005 and 2013.12

EMERGING ECONOMIC CHALLENGES

1.16 The consistent implementation of a tough macroeconomic stabilization program, and debt
relief, was responsible for a turn-around in economic fortunes in a remarkably short period of
time. However, the economic recovery remains highly fragile, vulnerable to policy slippages,
external economic shocks and natural disasters.

1.17 To sustain the gains achieved in the recent years, the country will have to maintain its
tight fiscal stance by ensuring that government expenditures stay within tight limits. More fiscal
space must be assured to build resilience to external shocks. In particular, pressures to expand
public sector employment (and wages) and transfers to state enterprises pose a real and
continuing threat to fiscal consolidation.

1.18 Within this over-arching framework, the policy emphasis will have to shift toward a real
structural transformation of the economy. The state continues to be an important player in the
economy, exercising its control through formal and informal mechanisms. To give the private
sector more space, privatization must be accelerated wherever strategic interests are not involved
and SOE reforms implemented to introduce greater accountability in functioning. Ample room
still exists for improving the regulatory environment for business and the quality of essential
infrastructure. The government also needs to place a greater focus on improving the quality of



                                                 3
education and skills, which are likely to emerge as the most important constraint to
competitiveness and diversified growth in the medium term.

1.19 Given the country’s open-ness and its vulnerability to natural calamities, a robust safety
net will remain a priority to protect the vulnerable from the inevitable shocks to which a small
open island economy is prone. Reforms to improve the efficiency of social sector spending and
delivery of essential public services, and reforms in the social assistance programs for targeted
groups (including the poor and the elderly, but also those most affected by natural disasters) will
have to remain a priority. Reforming the pension system is a priority.

1.20 Seychelles scores only about average in terms of governance indicators on corruption and
transparency. More reforms are necessary to ensure that public institutions function transparently
and there is lesser and lesser scope for discretionary interventions by the state, formally and
informally, in the economy. The role of non-state watch-dog institutions like an independent
judiciary and media needs to be strengthened.

Evaluation Objectives and Report Structure
1.21 Seychelles joined the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) in
1980, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) in 1981, and Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency (MIGA) in 1992. Between 1980 and 2009, only two IBRD loans for a total of
$10.7 million were approved: one loan in FY86 to finance port improvement and rehabilitation
of the road network on the main island; and another loan in FY93 on transport in Praslin Island
(the second most important tourism destination in Seychelles) and the environment. Following
payment arrears, IBRD loans were put into non-accrual status in August 2002. Seychelles repaid
both loans in full in October 2006. Thereafter, initial Bank support in 2007 was to deal with the
aftermath of the 2004 Tsunami and for regional fisheries.13 After 2009, the bulk of Bank lending
has been in the form of budget support financing for economic reforms. Lending has been
accompanied by AAA and local capacity building, financed partly by RAS and grant funding
from Trust Funds.

EVALUATION OBJECTIVES

1.22 This Country Case Study evaluates the World Bank Group’s operations in Seychelles
from FY07–15. It covers one interim Strategy Note (FY09–11), one on going Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY12–15, which was been further extended until FY16 in the
2014 CPS Progress Report to align with the elections of early 2016.

1.23 As noted earlier, this report is part of the cluster country program evaluation for small
states (see approach paper). Each country program evaluation assesses whether the Bank Group
assistance supported relevant objectives; if it achieved them effectively and efficiently; and
whether institutional development impact was achieved in a sustainable way. The approach
paper has defined two main broad pillars that will guide the evaluation to assess how Bank
activities contributed to (1) improve macro/environmental/social resilience and (2) foster
sustainable and inclusive growth.




                                                 4
1.24 In additional to a group of islands that were selected in the Caribbean (the OECS
countries) and in the Pacific, four African Countries have been selected for this evaluation,
namely Mauritius, Seychelles, Djibouti and Cabo Verde. These country case studies provide an
assessment of selected part of the Bank program over the evaluation period. These country case
studies provide an assessment of selected part of the Bank program over the evaluation period.
The case studies on Mauritius, Seychelles and Cabo Verde seek to assess how Bank activities
foster sustainable and inclusive growth (Pillar 2) while the Djibouti case study reviews measures
that were implemented to improve social and environmental resilience (under Pillar 1). The main
objective of this report is therefore to assess the contribution of the Bank’s assistance program in
Seychelles during FY07–15 in enhancing competiveness and promoting private sector
development. This is only one part of the Bank’s assistance program in Seychelles during this
period. The Bank’s role in strengthening the macro, social (in particular the important part the
Bank played to strengthen social protection) and environmental resilience (pillar1) is not
evaluated in this report. A short summary of Bank contribution under Pillar 1 is provided in
appendix D.

REPORT STRUCTURE

1.25 Chapter 1 provides a brief introduction to the economy and recent economic
developments, including progress in reducing poverty and meeting MDGs. Key challenges are
highlighted. It also includes a brief description of the Bank’s role in the country thus far, and
presents the evaluation objective and structure of the report.

1.26 Chapter 2 describes the Bank’s Country Strategy since 2009. (Details on the operational
programs are provided in appendix B.) The rest of the chapter gives a broad assessment of bank
activities at a “macro level to discuss the relevance of Bank objectives and design (notably in
light of specific features of small states, the political economy, capacity constraints), the
flexibility of the strategy to allow for unforeseen events, the harmonization with the plans and
programs of other DPs; the adequacy of the monitoring framework. These are some of the issues
addressed in this chapter.

1.27 Chapter 3 describes and evaluates the Bank’s contribution to enhancing competitiveness
and promoting the private sector. It includes the Bank’s role in liberalizing markets and
increasing competition through foreign competition; promoting domestic competition by
enlarging the space for private sector through privatization and facilitating entry of new
businesses; improving competiveness of SOEs through better governance; improving availability
and quality of essential infrastructure; facilitating access to credit; and improving the
performance of the fisheries sector. For each of these areas, various sections of the chapter
describe what was done through Bank interventions, and assess to what extent these
interventions were successful in delivering what they set out to achieve. Based on this analysis,
the chapter reviews the overall macro impact on competitiveness of all these interventions and to
what extent they have contributed to improved export performance and increased private
investment in the economy.

1.28 Chapter 4 summarizes the conclusions and provides some broad lessons from the
Seychelles experience and a set of lessons.



                                                 5
1
  Seychelles comprises 115 tropical islands (455.3 kilometers in land area) spread over 1.4 million square kilometers
in one of the world’s major tuna fishing grounds. Only 10 of the islands are inhabited . Around 90 percent of the
population lives on the largest island Mahe (60 percent is urbanized), where the capital, Victoria, and the main
fishing port are located.
2
 A first multi-party presidential election took place in 1993 in which the incumbent president, who had ruled the
country since the coup, Mr. France Albert Rene of the People’s Progressive Front, won. He governed the country
under a new constitution till April 2004 when he stepped down and appointed James Alix Michel as the interim
President. Michel was elected in 2006 for a five-year term, and re-elected for another 5-year term in the last
elections held in May 2011. Parliamentary election was held end September 2011 which was boycotted by the
Opposition parties. The ruling party won almost all seats.
3
    It has met most of the targets for the eight MDGs.
4
 Tourism accounted for 25 percent of GDP (and employment) and 70 percent of foreign exchange earnings in 2012.
Tuna fishing and processing alone accounted for 5 percent of GDP. Only 2.2 percent of the land area is arable.
5
 In 2003, per capita GDP in Seychelles was $8,404 compared to the sub-Saharan average of $505 (and Mauritius
$4,588). In 2000, with an HDI score of 0.743 it ranked 56th out of 158 countries according to the UNDP’s Human
Development Index, ahead of Mauritius (ranked 71st with a score of 0.686). Seychelles performed better than most
comparator countries in the region in terms of health and education indices. Source: Seychelles: How Classic
Policies Restored Sustainability (World Bank, 2013); Human Dev Report (UNDP, 2014, table 2).
6
  According to the World Bank’s PER (2009), between 2000 and 2005 public expenditure in Seychelles was about
20 percent higher than could be justified by per capita income. By end 2005, external arrears had risen from the
equivalent of $54 million in end 2001 (9 percent of GDP) to $184 million (25 percent of GDP). Public external debt
increased to 72 percent of GDP by 2007 from 47 percent in end 2005.
7
 The main elements of the program included: (i) full liberalization of the exchange rate regime; (ii) tighter fiscal
policy and good governance; (iii) tighter monetary policy; (iv) replacement of universal subsidies with a targeted
social safety net; (v) public sector reform to improve government efficiency, particularly in health and education
services; (vi) removal of constraints to private sector development and greater support to private sector investment;
and (vii) a debt workout aimed at putting public debt back on a sustainable path.
8
 The immediate effect was a 55 percent devaluation of the currency against the U.S. dollar after which it stabilized.
The initial depreciation in November 2008 was passed through to prices, with inflation jumping to 24 percent in that
month and finishing the year at 63 percent on a December-to-December basis.
9
 In the initial years, government expenditures were reduced by slashing indirect product subsidies (electricity,
water, gas), down-sizing the public sector, and restraining growth of public sector wages. In 2009, the number of
civil servants declined by 15 percent. Tax revenues were enhanced by removing a large number of exemptions,
broadening the tax base, and improving revenue administration. Source for data: IMF Reports 2013, 2014, 2015.
10
     Inflation declined sharply to the low single digits and averaged 7.5 percent per year during 2009–14.
11
  For instance, the country’s life expectancy at birth is 73 years, equal to that of Mauritius. The maternal health
MDG is largely achieved. Infant mortality was at 14 per 1,000 live births in 2010. For many years the Seychelles has
recorded zero maternal mortality; births attended by skilled health staff hovers between 99 and 100 percent; and
proportion of women receiving prenatal care has consistently been over 99 percent. Source: CPS, para. 19.
12
  The HDI index moved from 0.743 in 2000 to 0.757 in 2005 and 0.756 in 2013. In the same period, Mauritius
improved its score from 0.686 in 2000 to 0.771 in 2013. It ranked 63 rd in 2013.
13
   The Tsunami Emergency Grant for Rehabilitation of Fish Processing Quay (TF090482, $1.96 million) assisted the
fishing authority in rehabilitating the fish processing quay in the aftermath of the tsunami, and helped to restore the
livelihood of selected local communities and fishing businesses. The Strengthening the Capacity of the Seychelles
Fishing Authority to Undertake Tsunami Ecosystem Impact Assessment Project (TF09042 1 -SEY, $368,000) was
for strengthening the Seychelles Fishing Authority to identify ecosystem changes attributable to the tsunami and
determine how these changes reflect in the catches by artisanal and industrial fleets. Both these projects were funded
by grants from the Japan Social Development Fund.



                                                            6
2. The Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy
2.1    The Bank’s re-engagement with Seychelles began in 2007 with the signing of two grant
agreements for rehabilitation of infrastructure and fisheries seriously damaged by the 2004
tsunami. Apart from these projects, Bank interventions during 2007–09 were mainly in terms of
AAA to assess the economic situation in the country and for identifying needs for building of
capacity in the Ministry of Finance.

2.2   The Interim Strategy Note (November 2009) defined the Bank’s strategy for FY10 and
FY11. The Bank’s strategy during FY12–15 was articulated in the

2.3     Country Partnership Strategy Paper (April 2012). The CPS Progress Report (November
2014) reviewed the implementation of the program and broadened the scope of CPS objectives to
address emerging priorities in the government’s program, including enhancing regional
integration, addressing infrastructure gaps, and improving the ability to cope with natural
disasters. The CPS period was also extended till 2016 to coincide with the electoral calendar.

Context
2.4     By 2006–07 the economy was facing a macroeconomic crisis manifested in growing
public debt and severe foreign exchange shortages. The government recognized the need for
deep macroeconomic and structural reforms and initiated preparatory work on defining the
parameters of the reform program. Active Bank re-engagement with Seychelles began in the run-
up to preparation and the subsequent adoption and implementation of the IMF supported
macroeconomic stabilization program in late 2008. During this time, the Bank provided advice
for better public financial management, including assistance in developing better systems for
budget planning and implementation and the preparation of a medium term economic
framework. Recognizing that any stabilization program would involve sharp cuts in public
spending, the Bank was requested to help design a program of social spending that would protect
the most vulnerable for these cuts. The Bank was also requested to support the government in its
negotiations with other international creditors.

2.5     The adoption of the one year stabilization program in November 2008 was followed by a
series of IMF backed stabilization cum reform programs which continue till date.1 These
programs, which were jointly developed by IMF and the World Bank, defined the government’s
reform priorities in this period.2

The World Bank’s Strategy and Program
OBJECTIVES AND STRATEGY

2.6      Over FY10–11, the ISN had three main objectives. The first objective was to support the
comprehensive macroeconomic stabilization program that was being implemented by the
government. This entailed developing the analytic tools and strategies for addressing income
volatility and improving fiscal policy. The second objective was to help remove constraints to
private sector development and improve public sector governance, including strengthening the
civil service and other institutions to manage the transition to a new kind of economy. The third


                                                7
objective related to the longer-term challenge of climate change vulnerability and disaster risk
management. The ISN was expected to inform the development of a longer-term World Bank
engagement aligned with the evolving reform program and “Seychelles Strategy 2017” to the
extent possible.

2.7     Over FY12–16, the Bank’s objectives were aligned with the draft Seychelles Medium-
Term National Development Strategy 2013–17 (MTNDS), which presented the vision and goals
for the country. The core aim of the MTNDS was to reduce Seychelles’ vulnerability and to
provide the basis for long term sustainable development.3 Consistent with its new Africa
Strategy, the Bank’s strategic approach in Seychelles was structured around two pillars and one
basic foundation. The two pillars were (i) Competitiveness and Employment; and (ii)
Vulnerability and Resilience. The basic foundation was Governance and Public Sector Capacity.
The Bank’s program was focused on strengthening these three areas. Under the first pillar, the
Bank’s program addressed some of the major constraints to competitiveness and the growth of
the private sector including the limited role of markets in resource allocation and a burdensome
regulatory environment for business. Under the second pillar the Bank sought to create more
fiscal space to cushion the impact of external shocks and improve the social protection programs
to reduce the vulnerability of the poor and disadvantaged. The Bank also helped support the
strengthening of the government’s disaster and risk management policy and institutional
capabilities. Finally, the Bank supported the strengthening of public sector capacity in a wide
range of areas to provide better governance and public services.

THE BANK’S PROGRAM

2.8     The Bank’s assistance program was largely centered on a series of DPOs which provided
an appropriate umbrella for the reforms the government sought to implement during this period.
A large body of analytic and advisory services AAA was undertaken to provide the analytic
underpinning for the reforms. Technical assistance and capacity building were embedded in
some of the operations and also provided as stand-alone activities. Trust Fund resources were
utilized in some areas.4

2.9     Since its re-engagement in 2010, the IFC’s activities have been limited and confined
largely to the energy sector (mainly for promoting renewable energy and energy efficiency) and
the financial sector (mainly for development of leasing).5 The MIGA has no active projects in
Seychelles.

2.10 The description of the operational program of the Bank Group, including the list of
projects and AAA that were implemented during the period is provided in appendix B.

Broad Assessment of Strategy and Program
RELEVANCE OF BANK GROUP OBJECTIVES

2.11 There was close alignment between the government’s objectives and the Bank’s strategy
and program. There was also a clear focus in the program, especially in the initial years. The
main priority was to restore macroeconomic stability and allow markets a dominant role in
allocating resources. The Bank made an important contribution by helping the government


                                                 8
design and implement a program of targeted subsidies to protect the most vulnerable from the
cuts in social spending necessitated by the stabilization program. The Bank also provided its
expertise in the design of the government’s Voluntary Departure Scheme which allowed the
government to shed almost 3000 employees from the public sector. This support from the Bank
was appreciated by the authorities who saw them as instrumental in maintaining public support
for the reforms. In later years, while fiscal control remained central to reforms, other structural
reforms consistent with the government’s MTDS that addressed medium term challenges for
sustainable development got increasing prominence as well. These included private sector
development, infrastructure development, reform of SOEs, reform of social programs, natural
disaster management etc. The CPS program supported a sub-set of these challenges, based on its
areas of competence and the program of other donor partners.

2.12 In principle, the Bank’s strategy was aligned with the Bank Group’s twin corporate goals
of reducing extreme poverty and increasing shared prosperity. While poverty was very low in
Seychelles, the concern was that cuts in public spending necessitated by the stabilization
program would force more people into poverty. To prevent this outcome and to sustain public
support for the program, a key element in the Bank’s program was to establish a program of
targeted social assistance and strengthen the institutional capacity to implement social assistance
programs. The reforms toward targeted social assistance were also expected to improve income
distribution.6 Improving the effectiveness of social assistance programs and strengthening
institutional capacity in this area have remained a core element of the Bank’s program.
Substantial TA was provided and policy notes prepared to spell out the rationale for reforms and
build domestic consensus. This assistance was greatly appreciated. The Bank’s program to
improve fisheries management was also expected to support the livelihood and food security of
those most vulnerable.

2.13 Poverty reduction and employment generation were also the rationale for reforms aimed
at enhancing competitiveness and promoting private sector development. To the extent these
reforms succeeded in eliciting private investment, they were expected to generate employment
and incomes. However, the impact of these policies on income distribution is not clear: to the
extent growth takes place more in sectors such as ICT that are more skilled-labor intensive,
income distribution may well be adversely affected.

MEETING SPECIFIC SMALL STATES CHALLENGES

2.14 Seychelles is extremely vulnerable to external shocks. It is a very open economy (imports
are 90 percent of its GDP) and vulnerable to commodity price shocks. Its economy is highly
dependent on tourism and tuna exports, making it vulnerable to a global slow-down, particularly
in Europe. Already high level of public debt adds to the vulnerability as it limits the country’s
ability to borrow if need arises. The country is also vulnerable to climate change and natural
calamities, such as floods and rising sea levels.7

2.15 Addressing these vulnerabilities was one of the two pillars of the Bank’s CPS. To reduce
macroeconomic vulnerabilities, the Bank’s program was anchored to a stabilization program
whose main objective was to generate primary fiscal surpluses to reduce the burden of public
debt and accumulate resources to finance unforeseen contingencies. The program was also
geared to accumulate levels of international reserves that would provide adequate cover for


                                                 9
external economic shocks. Thanks in part to external assistance, in both respects, progress was
made.8 Also to reduce macro vulnerabilities, the Bank’s program for enhancing competitiveness
was expected to facilitate greater diversification of production and trade. Though this has not yet
happened in any substantial way and the economy remains highly dependent on tourism and
exports of tuna, the increasing share of exports of ICT services is a positive trend.

2.16 Social resilience was promoted in the Bank’s program through the establishment of a
targeted program of social assistance and reforms to improve their effectiveness. The fact that
social support was maintained for the tough austerity program the government implemented
suggests some success in this regard. With respect to resilience from natural disasters and
climate change, the Bank supported reforms to improve the government’s disaster risk
management (DRM) policy and enhance its capacity to efficiently respond to disasters.

2.17 Apart from promoting reforms that improve resilience, the Bank provided considerable
financial support to enable the country to shore up budget resources and to build sufficient
buffers. Following the 2013 tropical cyclone Felleng, in addition to the programmed series of
DPLs during FY10–15, an additional DPL with CAT-DDO amounting to $7 million was added
to the program to help meet Seychelles’ need for immediate, liquid assets in the aftermath of a
catastrophic disaster. The 2014 CAT DDO gave impetus to the DRM reform agenda by
incentivizing the government to adopt a number of measures that were prepared in 2011 through
environment grants but had not been endorsed (e.g., contingency plans, DRM act). But clearly,
the ultimate proof of its efficacy will be in the implementation of these measures. During
implementation, the lending program was enhanced in response to continuing adverse external
developments.

MONITORING PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION

2.18 The Results Framework presented in the CPS Progress Report to monitor program
implementation had about 22 milestones/process indicators covering 11 CPS outcomes for the
two the two pillars and one basic foundation of the strategy. This was not unreasonable. Also,
appropriately, many of the milestones were concrete actions on the ground with measurable
outcomes. For the most part the matrix covered the policy areas highlighted by the Bank’s
strategy. However, there was nothing in the matrix in the area of SOE reform, a critical area not
just for the budget but also for improving the competitiveness of the economy.

BUILDING FLEXIBILITY IN THE STRATEGY

2.19 The Bank’s program was flexible. The size of the program was timely increased to create
contingency financing in case of a natural disaster emergency and to address weaknesses in the
government’s disaster management system. The Bank was also prepared to respond positively to
the initiatives in support of promoting regional trade and investment which would benefit
Seychelles. The Bank’s AAA program had sufficient flexibility to allow the Bank to respond
quickly to requests from the government for help in thinking through various policy options (for
example on pension reforms). This flexibility was well appreciated and should remain an
important element in the Bank’s work.




                                                10
2.20 However, the Bank was too flexible in some areas of policy design and implementation
and targeted results in these areas are yet to be achieved. One such area was reform aiming at
liberalizing the incentives framework, notably through privatization and SOE reforms. In this
case, the rationale for change was not entirely clear and lacked stronger underpinnings. While we
do not question the need for flexibility in adjusting the pace of the privatization program or SOE
reforms, it is not clear why the whole privatization program was shelved and why the SOE
reforms are progressing so slowly. Two public expenditure reviews conducted in 2009 and 2011
provided broad guidance on these issues. But in face of the slow implementation of the program
a capacity assessment and political economy discussion could have provided useful input to
understand the bottlenecks in privatization and SOE reforms and assess the relevance of design
of the program supported by the Bank over the past years. Indeed, some stakeholders questioned
the Bank’s appetite to challenge the government during the second wave of reforms. For
example, one former policy maker noted that though the World Bank was instrumental in
promoting institutional reforms, over the past two years there has been limited change to carry
them out except for fiscal/monetary policies. They noted that: “the attitude of civil service looks
like we go back to the old way. We forgot about the need to be lean. We still do business as
usual despite the law, and we go back to the old days.” Several examples were given to the
mission related to this: the CEO feeling political allegiance after appointment by the President;
violation of the procurement law for big infrastructure projects; incomplete reform of the STC
which creates unfair competition for the private sector. Recent Bank documents and discussions
with the country team do not convey this sense of a not so rosy relationship with the client on the
implementation of some policies supported during the first wave of reforms.

ADDRESSING CAPACITY LIMITATIONS

2.21 The Bank recognized that weak institutional capacity was an important risk to program
implementation, and tailored AAA including TA for capacity building was an important
component of the Bank’s program. Even before lending was resumed in FY10, the Bank’s
experts provided TA to the ministry of finance in preparing the 2008 budget and in designing a
program for targeting subsidies to the poor. Subsequently TA was provided in the context of the
DPLs, or separately financed by Trust Funds. Some of the important capacity building initiatives
included: strengthening the capacity building at the Ministry of Finance to design and implement
performance-based budgeting (PBB); strengthening capacity to monitor SOE performance;
strengthening of the National Statistical Bureau; strengthening institutional capacity for disaster
preparedness and response; and strengthening institutional capacity of social protection agencies.

2.22 The government also used the Reimbursable Advisory Services of the Bank (RAS) to
fund some of its priority needs in capacity building, for example in the development of the PBB
to improve public financial management, and in the design of the social protection programs. A
policy note on public expenditures in the health sector was also produced under the RAS which
was of immense use to the authorities.

2.23 Useful analytic work was also undertaken by the Bank, often at the express request of the
government. As early as 2008 at the request of the government, the Bank financed an
independent assessment of the tuna cannery factory (IOT) where the government was a minority
partner. Based on this assessment the government was able to re-negotiate the terms with the
private partner. This successful intervention by the Bank enhanced its credibility as an


                                                11
independent expert. In 2013, the government requested the Bank to undertake a damage and loss
assessment following the floods. This work was also highly appreciated and led to the Bank’s
deeper involvement in disaster risk management. Other Policy notes prepared by the Bank at
government’s request (such as the one on health expenditures mentioned above) were useful
tools that the government utilized to inform stakeholders about the need for reforms and their
likely impact, which helped in consensus building. By and large, this assistance was greatly
appreciated and there is some willingness to pay for such services if they are made available.

ADDRESSING GENDER ISSUES

2.24 Seychelles society is largely matriarchal, and women enjoy the same legal, political,
economic, and social rights as men. There is no officially sanctioned discrimination in
employment, women are well represented in business, and inheritance laws do not discriminate
against women. The participation of women in decision making processes is quite good and
improving. There is little or no difference between net primary/secondary enrollment rates for
male and female children; the Gender Parity Index was close to 1 in 2008 (World Development
Indicators).

2.25 The Bank’s engagement under the CPS program was to have a particular focus on
gender. Capacity was to be developed in government agencies including the Statistics Bureau to
collect and analyze gender-disaggregated data on various issues. The Bank also proposed to
undertake a gender-disaggregated analysis on earnings and productivity gaps, which would
suggest policy interventions at a later date. The Bank would provide support in developing
appropriate activation measures for programs for single mothers. The Bank’s support for
professionalizing fisheries was also expected to have a positive impact on the large number of
women who are artisanal fishers. In actual fact, little seems to have been done. There is no
mention of gender in the CPS Progress Report (November 2014). The gender-disaggregated
study was dropped.

HARMONIZING DONOR SUPPORT

2.26 The Seychelles experience demonstrates the benefits that accrue from good cooperation
among development partners. Throughout the period, there was close collaboration between the
IMF and the Bank which served the country well. A Joint Management Action Plan ensured
complementarity in Bank and IMF activities. The Bank provided critical inputs in the
stabilization and reform programs supported by the IMF’s Standby and EFF arrangements. These
inputs included strengthening PFM and the design of a program of targeted subsidies to replace
universal subsidies. They played an important role in maintaining the integrity of the program
and helped maintain social support. Conversely, the IMF’s macro framework and its debt
sustainability analysis were important inputs in determining the size and composition of the
Bank’s assistance. The close collaboration between the IMF and the Bank was also valuable in
getting a good debt relief package from other official and private creditors.

2.27 Other multilateral development partners that are active include the African Development
Bank, European Union (EU), and the UNDP. Their areas of work do sometimes overlap with the
Bank’s.9 The Bank’s strategic approach took account of the areas of engagement by other
partners, and in areas where other donors were taking the lead, the Bank stepped in as a partner


                                               12
as and when required. Coordination is ensured by the Ministry of Finance, with allocates
responsibilities to the development partners in different sectors. There have not been any major
problems thus far, but it remains to be seen how the present arrangements will ensure that critical
issues such as in education and skill acquisition and infrastructure do not get short-changed
because of multiple donor involvement.

Conclusion
2.28 Overall, the Bank’s strategy and program were in line with the priorities of the
government. The Bank’s program complemented the work of other development partners. Its
close partnership with the IMF in the design of the reform program was cited by authorities as an
important reason for its success. Consistent with the priorities of small states, the Bank’s
program addressed the two critical pillars of enhancing competitiveness and reducing
vulnerability. It was selective in its interventions and not overly ambitious. The Bank’s program
was also flexible and responsive to the changing external economic environment as well as the
government’s requests for specific kinds of assistance (in terms of AAA for example). It was
also timely. However, the Bank was perhaps too accommodating when it came policy slippages.
It could have pressed harder on some of the issues (such as privatization and SOE reform) that
are important for enhancing competitiveness. Going forward, the Bank should pay greater
attention to enhancing transparency in all government actions and strengthen the capacities of
institutions to force accountability and check abuse of power.

1
 The on- year Standby Arrangement was followed by a 4-year EFF that ended in Dec 2013. A successor 4-year EFF
came into effect thereafter which ends in December 2017.
2
  In 2006, the government presented a new development orientation in its Seychelles Strategy 2017, emphasizing the
facilitating role of the state in the economy and assigning a greater role for the private sector. However, this program
lacked an implementation strategy and became redundant after the IMF’s program was adopted in end 2008. In
2012, a New Medium Term National Development Strategy (MTNDS) was adopted. The objective was to reduce
Seychelles’ vulnerabilities to external shocks and lay the basis for sustainable growth by increasing public
investment and establishing a well targeted social safety net, within a sustainable fiscal framework. It emphasized
the importance of improving the investment climate for private business; the quality of education and skills of the
work force; as well as better infrastructure such as ICT. These priorities were reflected in the reform programs
backed by the IMF and the Bank over the years.
3
  The five main goals of the MTNDS are: (i) to address development planning for vital infrastructure and utility
needs; (ii) to develop a strong human resource base by improving basic education and productivity; (iii) to improve
economic infrastructure through modernized ICT infrastructure (including greater connectivity and bandwidth); (iv)
to improve food security and the business and investment environment by creating a transparent, predictable trading
system and diversifying the economy (by developing the services sector); and (v) to further develop national
statistics to improve evidence-based policy making. However, it would be fair to say that the main operative
document setting out the government’s program was the IMF program articulated in the 2008 Standby Arrangement
and the subsequent EFFs.
4
  These included: the Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative, the Extractive Industries Technical
Advisory Facility, and SIDS DOCK respectively supporting housing finance, the hydrocarbon sector, and the
renewable energy sector. In the area of housing finance, the assistance focused on developing a “smart” subsidy
system. In the hydrocarbon sector, the assistance was to review the Petroleum Acts with respect to tax and fiscal
regime. In the area of renewable energy, the focus was on development of a grid code, the design of feed-in tariffs,
and the preparation of power purchase agreements for renewable energy.




                                                          13
5
  In 2010 IFC made a commitment for a $20 million senior loan in a hotel project. However, due to issues associated
with the lease of the land, no disbursements took place. Earlier, in 2004, the IFC’s FIAS reviewed the policy,
regulatory and administrative environment for investment in Seychelles and issued a report. In April 2006, IFC
approved a $10 million loan to Nouvobanq, the country’s leading bank, but IFC cancelled the credit line because
Nouvobanq was unable to comply with the disbursement conditions.
6
 Simulations suggest that the proposed reforms would increase the share of the first quintile among the beneficiaries
and reduce the share of the others.
7
  It is estimated that between 1980 and 2013, the impact of natural disasters totaled $40.1 million, affecting 21,328
people. The most recent Damage, Loss and Needs Assessment (DaLA) from tropical cyclone Felleng carried out by
the government in January 2013 estimated recovery and reconstruction needs at $30.3 million.
8
  International reserves had reached a level equivalent to 3.8 months of imports by 2013, up from less than 0.5
months in 2008. Given Seychelles’ unusual conditions—extremely open, tourism-dependent, remote island micro-
state, with a flexible exchange rate—the adequate reserve coverage range is higher than generally recommended by
reserve metrics. Reserves equivalent to about 4 months of imports are considered desirable for Seychelles by the
IMF. Funds equivalent to 0.5 percent of GDP were accumulated for contingencies.
9
  For example, the African Development Bank provided support, including a budget support operation, to enhance
the environment for private sector activity. The UNDP provides the government with support to develop and
strengthen the capacity of institutions and individuals in the public sector and civil society to promote good
governance, environmental protection, energy efficiency, water resource management, climate change adaptation,
and poverty alleviation. The EU supports the government’s PFM reform agenda and the e ducation sector, through a
sector budget support operation.




                                                         14
3. Evaluation of World Bank Group’s Assistance in
Enhancing Competitiveness and Private Sector Development
3.1     The Bank’s program was mapped into two areas: first, what did the Bank do to improve
the country’s resilience and second, what did the Bank do to enhance competitiveness and
private sector development for generating sustainable economic growth and jobs creation (see
appendix C). These areas are very similar to the pillars of the CPS.1 The rest of the chapter is
devoted to a description and evaluation of the Bank’s support to enhance competitiveness and
promote private sector development (Pillar 2). It also provides an overall assessment of the
macro impact (on exports, foreign and private investment) of the reforms undertaken during the
period to enhance competitiveness and promote private sector development. Throughout this
evaluation, it must be remembered that the government’s reform program and the Bank’s support
was implemented in a difficult external environment of adverse terms of trade shocks, the global
financial crisis and a slow-down of the world economy, especially Europe which is one of the
country’s main export markets. These adverse conditions would have a negative impact on some
of the macro indicators used in this evaluation (such as growth of exports, FDI flows, and growth
of new businesses).

3.2     Given the need for access to global markets, small economies generally need a higher
degree of openness and responsiveness to international markets than do larger states, where
businesses can achieve economies of scale through domestic markets. This requires a high
degree of resource mobility and competitiveness, which relies not only on a liberal trade regime,
but also on an improved business environment, access to credit, and quality and affordable
infrastructure especially transport and communication.

3.3     Most of these areas were part of the reform program that the Bank supported. The Bank
supported reforms (i) liberalizing the incentives framework (facilitating trade, privatization and
SOE reforms); (ii) promoting a business-friendly environment, (iii) fostering financial sector
regulation; (iv) improving the delivery of infrastructure services (energy); and (v) supporting
fisheries.

Liberalizing the Incentive Framework
PROMOTING EFFICIENT TRADE AND MONETARY POLICIES

3.4     A key element of the reform program initiated in 2008 was to reduce the role of the state
in the economy. At the time of the Bank’s re-engagement with Seychelles, not only did the
government play a dominant role in the economy through direct administrative interventions in
allocation of resources (for example foreign exchange), but it was also a major player in
manufacturing, distribution, and trade through a large number of state-owned enterprises (SOEs).
The emphasis on reforms was therefore on reducing the role of the state by (i) allowing market
forces to play a larger role in the allocation of scarce resources; (ii) privatizing state-owned
banks and enterprises.

3.5     Significant progress was made in the early years of reform to enhance the role of market
forces and reduce state intervention in resource allocation. The foreign exchange regime was


                                                15
liberalized, prices were largely decontrolled and interest rates liberalized. Competition from
imports was enhanced by maintaining low-import tariffs and reducing non-tariff barriers by
modernizing customs clearance procedures and simplifying procedures for export and import
permits. An online import and export permit application system was introduced to facilitate
international trade. Tax reforms were implemented to make the playing field more even by
eliminating various exemptions.

ASSESSMENT

3.6     Post 2008-09, the incentive regime was transformed completely, with market
mechanisms replacing state interventions in allocation of resources, including foreign exchange.
This was a clear paradigm shift and the Bank made a positive contribution. It may be noted,
however, that some of these reforms (such as the foreign exchange liberalization, decontrol of
prices and interest rates) were part of the IMF’s Standby Arrangement and were put in place
even before the Bank’s first DPL were approved (November 2009). Even the trade policy
reforms were not an explicit objective in the Bank’s policy-lending program. Nevertheless, the
Bank was an important behind-the-scenes player during the preparation of the Standby and there
was close collaboration between the two institutions. For this reason, the Bank’s contribution
was positive.

REDUCING THE STATE’S ROLE IN THE ECONOMY THROUGH PRIVATIZATION AND STATE
ENTERPRISE REFORM

3.7     Restructuring Public Sector: In the early years, efforts were made to shrink the role of the
state by transferring some of the non-core functions performed by state agencies on to the private
sector. The proximate reason for this reform was to reduce government spending by cutting back
public sector employment. While this effort was successful, it also resulted in deterioration in the
quality of some of the public services provided by the state, and pressures to reverse the policy in
some cases.2 The Bank then produced in 2009 and 2011 two public expenditure reviews that
provided some guidance and good practice on public administration reform and SOE
governance.

3.8     Privatization: Privatization of SOEs was an important component of the government’s
strategy to reduce the state’s role in the economy. The Bank supported the government’s plan to
privatize the government’s holdings in commercially-oriented SOEs and public sector banks. To
this end, the Bank’s program supported the restructuring of the former State Marketing Board
(SMB), a state trading conglomerate and supplier of basic consumer goods. Under the first DPL,
the SMB was restructured into 16 commercial units. Eight commercially viable units were sold
off, and all non-viable units were liquidated. The remaining units were combined into an
umbrella company still owned by the government called Seychelles Trading Corporation (STC).

3.9     The restructuring and partial privatization of the SMB was supposed to be first in a series
of privatization of state owned commercial enterprises and banks.

3.10 However, the proposed privatization of the majority state-owned Seychelles Savings
Bank and Nouvobanq did not take place as planned, and privatization does not appear to be part
of the government’s reform agenda anymore. Instead, the focus shifted to improving the



                                                16
governance and oversight of state enterprises, and on reducing their reliance on budget transfers.
The Bank supported this effort.

3.11 SOE Reform: The Bank’s support for SOE reform centered on establishing an
appropriate legal framework and institutional mechanism to improve corporate governance and
enable the government to monitor and assess the performance of SOEs, based on information
prepared in line with international accounting practices. The Public Enterprise Monitoring Act
(2009) was amended to give more autonomy to the enterprise board whose responsibilities were
also clearly defined. More authority was given to the ministries (but not to the board) in selecting
CEOs and less to the President. All public enterprises were required to adopt International
Accounting Standards within a three-year timeframe, to ensure the quality of reporting and
facilitate monitoring.

3.12 An independent Public Enterprise Monitoring Commission (PEMC) was created. This
commission was responsible for monitoring financial, governance, and transparency issues in
relation to public enterprises. Each public enterprise was required to submit an annual report on
its operations to the Minister of Finance, the responsible Minister, and the PEMC, with a copy of
its annual audited accounts and any report by the auditors on its management and accounting
practices three months after year end.3 It was also mandatory for public enterprises to report on
four standard performance targets each year, based upon which PEMC would design a set of
specific basic metrics to be used as benchmarks to measure performance. Also, to improve
government oversight of investments made by public enterprises, a high-level committee was
formed to review all potential public projects of a magnitude greater than SR 25 million and
assess their macroeconomic and fiscal risks. The Bank also provided assistance to senior
management teams (SMTs) of up to 14 public enterprises on developing a “Statement of
Corporate Intent.”

ASSESSMENT

3.13 The initial efforts to off-load inessential functions from the state was laudable. However,
the policy was implemented quickly, without sufficient strategic planning or functional review of
the ministries or state agencies to help identify their role and core functions. The ongoing
functional review, undertaken in the second phase of the reform process, is progressing very
slowly in part due to lack of capacity of line ministry.4 The World Bank provided TA on capacity
building for staff in the department of public administration and Ministry of Finance to carry out
the impact of the reform but one interlocutor noted that the technical quality of this TA was very
poor. The policy was also flawed because it assumed that the private sector had the capacity to
take over the functions that were hived-off. This was not always the case (see note 2). An
informed assessment of the state of readiness of the private sector, and what was needed to
strengthen its abilities to take on additional roles, would help calibrate the speed of the proposed
transition.

3.14 After a promising start with the restructuring of the SMB, the privatization program has
not gone far. The proposed privatization of other commercial public enterprises and some
commercial banks with majority state ownership was not pursued. In the 2009 PER, the bank
noted that while “the ongoing reforms measures are both necessary and appropriate, and
represent ‘quick win’ measures, it is important that future reform steps be based on a more


                                                17
strategic approach to public sector reform.” The report provided some guidance on what could be
the core function of the government. This analysis, together with the recommendations on SOE
restructuring provided in the second PER (2011) were to inform the second wave of reform. The
2011 PER recommended though that the government divest those companies where continued
ownership does not serve any public policy goals. Some interlocutors consider the Bank have
acquiesced too readily with the shelving of the program of privatization that were on the list of
the first wave of reform. The evaluation team is not arguing that privatization was the way to go
but it is not clear why the Bank acquiesced readily with the “seemingly indefinite shelving” of
some of these companies as well as the lack of development of a privatization strategy.5 Beyond
the two PERs that provided broad guidance and good practice, the team didn’t find any
quantitative and qualitative analysis done by the Bank or the government about the costs and
benefits of the privatization program done in the first wave of reforms. If the reasons were not
entirely political, what changed during the period to explain that the privatization process of
those potential candidates was put on hold? If after the crisis, there were no more champions
willing to spend their political capacity on SOE privatization, the Bank should have explained
this before moving forward. Perhaps a deeper engagement in this critical area would have helped
identify why the government was reluctant to pursue its own program, and whether the speed and
privatization strategy could have been modified to keep the program on the government’s reform
agenda.

3.15 SOE reforms have a rightful place in efforts to improve efficiency and competitiveness;
however Bank support did not achieve very much over the past few years in improving corporate
governance and market discipline. Bank’s program to improve corporate governance in SOEs
focused on creating a legal and institutional framework for better monitoring and assessment of
SOE performance. However, it is not clear how this information will be used to reward good
performance and penalize poor performers. There is no evidence to suggest that state enterprises
face a ‘perform or perish’ environment necessary to improve their performance.6 For example,
one of the aims of the reform of SOEs was to reduce their burden on the budget. There was some
progress in the early years of the reforms, but there have been slippages. State support for public
enterprises still remains substantial. Transfers from the central budget to the public sector were
cut from 5.5 percent of GDP in 2007 to 1.6 percent in 2009, but they have gone up significantly
since then to 4.4 percent in 2014. Overall, the Bank’s support in supporting these reforms was
weak.

Promoting a Business Friendly Environment
IMPROVING THE REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT FOR BUSINESS

3.16 For an upper middle income country, Seychelles ranked a relatively low 84th out of 175
countries in the 2007 Doing Business Report. Seychelles ranked particularly poorly in getting
credit (ranked 159 out of 175 countries) and closing a business (ranked 151), but it ranked badly
in other areas as well including employing labor (84th), trading across boundaries (81st),
enforcing contracts (73rd) and dealing with licenses (69th).

3.17 The Bank supported a number of initiatives to make it easier and less burdensome to start
and operate a business. A new Licensing Act (2010) was enacted providing for transparent
procedures for the issuance and renewal of licenses, streamlining licensing procedures and


                                                18
eliminating the number of commercial activities requiring ex ante licenses to operate.7 As a
result, the time it takes to obtain a new license or renew an old one has been shortened. A new
Investment Code (2010) was adopted providing a modern framework for the promotion,
regulation and protection of investors and investments. The Seychelles Investment Board was
established to facilitate and promote investments.8 Registration was simplified by implementing
an on-line one-stop shop for starting a business, and the Company Act was amended to make it
optional (rather than obligatory) for notaries or other third party intermediaries to participate in
the registration process. To further save on time and cost, registration of property titles was
computerized and a system put in place allowing electronic payment of taxes. Reforms were also
undertaken to rationalize the legal framework for exit. A new Insolvency Act was adopted which
establishes a modern framework to save viable businesses and enable non-viable businesses to
exit the market quickly.

3.18 Private investment was also constrained by the slow pace at which commercial disputes
were settled in the court system. To accelerate the process, the Bank supported the establishment
of a specialized commercial division within the Supreme Court. New Commercial List rules
were laid out with the objective of speeding up the hearing process by setting up time bound
procedures for commercial disputes. An online case management system was also introduced to
track progress in all active cases. To reduce the pressures of litigation on the court system, the
Bank also encouraged alternative dispute resolution mechanisms such as mediation. A new
mediation framework was put in place with new rules of mediation, a rigorous procedure for
referral to independent third party mediators for out-of-court dispute resolution, and a code of
conduct for mediators.

ASSESSMENT

3.19 These reforms were no doubt steps in the right direction. But their impact on the ground
is yet to be felt in any significant way. While the registration process for new businesses may
have been simplified, according to the Doing Business Reports, it still takes the same number of
days (38) and procedures (9) to start a business in 2014 as it did in 2006.9 There is no
improvement in the time it takes (33 days) to register property. In some areas, the environment
has deteriorated. Enforcing contracts has become a longer process: it now takes 915 days (2014)
compared to 720 days in 2006. Resolving insolvency took 2 years in 2014, unchanged since
2012 (the first year this data was reported). The one area where significant progress was made
was in trading across boundaries. Both the cost of exporting and importing came down
substantially between 2007 and 2014. The Bank did not address regulatory issues preventing
access to credit and electricity where Seychelles does very poorly compared to other countries.10
Overall, regulatory reforms have not improved significantly Seychelles’ ranking among
countries: its rank in terms of the composite Ease of Doing Business Index stagnated from 84
(out of 175 countries) in 2006 to 85 (out of 189 countries) in in 2014.11

3.20 Anecdotal evidence presented to the IEG mission also suggested that notwithstanding
formal rules to the contrary, there remains substantial intervention by the state (and powerful
politicians) in economic activities in informal ways. Such non-transparent interventions are used
to block entry of new enterprises or banks that are not favored by the ruling dispensation; or they
may be used to subvert sanctions against enterprises in favor. This arbitrariness remains a
constraint to private sector development which needs to be addressed by promoting greater


                                                 19
transparency in government interactions and by strengthening independent institutions that can
check arbitrariness. More could have been done in this regard and overall bank contribution in
improving the regulatory environment was negligible.

IMPROVING LABOR MARKET AND LAND REGISTRATION

3.21 Though difficulties in ‘employing workers’ including hiring and firing rules and
regulations were cited as important constraints to private sector development, and some ad-hoc
measures were implemented to reduce shortages of skilled workers, comprehensive reforms in
labor market policies were not prominent either in the government’s program or in the Bank’s.12

3.22 The Bank was fully aware of the need for improving the quality and skills of the labor
force for improving long term competitiveness of the economy. However the Bank was not a
player in the education sector or in skills development. Among development partners, the lead
was taken by the EU which has an education budget support operation to help in the preparation
and the implementation of the Education Medium Term Strategy (with a focus on both basic and
post-basic education up to the secondary level) to improve the alignment between the country's
training and manpower needs in an evolving national, regional and international environment.

3.23 To facilitate land transactions, land registration was computerized. A new Land
Registration Act is pending. Given the very limited role of the Bank in this area, no assessment is
made.

Strengthening the Financial Sector
3.24 The financial system is small and underdeveloped.13 While indicators of financial sector
stability and soundness have improved since 2010, limited access to credit and high lending
spreads, reflecting perceived risks of lending to the private sector and limited competition
continue to be issues. Other challenges include weak skills for serving micro-enterprise needs
and limited/doubtful capacity at commercial banks to serve the micro and small enterprise
segment, insufficient incentives for banks to look for lending opportunities, and a lack of a
coherent vision and strategy for developing the integrated financial sector.

3.25 The Bank has played a very limited role in sector reforms thus far. Its role was largely
limited to the housing finance segment, where it supported reforms to reduce the role of the
state-owned Housing Finance Corporation (which made more than 75 percent of housing loans
in 2012–13) and increase the role of private banks in housing finance. Following technical
assistance from the World Bank in 2010 to develop a restructuring framework, HFC’s property
management functions were spun off to a separate entity.14 In December 2011 a new housing
finance strategy that increased private participation in housing finance and reduced untargeted
housing subsidies, was approved and is being implemented.15 The government also provided tax
incentives to encourage commercial banks to participate in the Home Saving Scheme and extend
mortgage financing.

3.26 With IFC support, a Financial Leasing law designed to ease access to finance, especially
for SMEs, was passed in November 2013. However, the enabling regulations, which will allow
leasing companies to be formed, are yet to be adopted. With the support of the Bank’s Financial


                                                20
Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative initiative, the authorities have developed a Financial
Sector Development Implementation Plan, focusing on improving private sector access to credit.
The Bank may assist in its implementation.

ASSESSMENT

3.27 Access to finance was a critical constraint to private sector development, yet the Bank’s
program had very little in this area. Seychelles ranked poorly among countries in ‘getting credit’
before reforms were initiated, and it still remains at the bottom end of the Doing Business
rankings in 2014. The reform of housing subsidies was important for its fiscal impact, but it is
not clear if by itself it is likely to attract private commercial banks into mortgage finance.16 There
is little evidence of this so far. The Bank’s contribution in this sector was negligible.

Improving Infrastructure Services
3.28 The Bank’s role was largely confined to the energy sector. The Bank’s program aimed to
support the government’s efforts to improve financial sustainability of the public utilities by
reforming utility tariffs while encouraging increased energy efficiency and a shift toward
renewable energy. Progress has been made in improving the financial viability of the Public
Utilities Corporation (PUC). Based on the recommendations of a study funded through the RAS,
the government adopted an automatic mechanism to adjust price movements in line with key
variables like the exchange rate and fuel prices on a quarterly basis. As a result, PUC losses
decreased by nearly 90 percent between 2011 and 2012. To help ensure the long-term
sustainability of utilities, the government also approved a tariff rebalancing program that seeks to
align electricity and water tariffs to cost-recovery levels over eight and ten years, respectively.
To ensure long run sustainability, the Bank supported the enactment of an Energy Act 2012
which provided a roadmap to help remove cross-subsidization gradually across the various client
groups and gradually increase tariffs to cost-recovery levels over 7 years starting in mid-2013.

3.29 This act also deals with the establishment of an energy commission, whose role will be to
regulate the electricity sector, license electricity activities, tender and award contracts to
independent power producers, and determine tariffs and charges.

3.30 The Bank’s program also sought to assist the government in pursuing its goal of
diversifying its energy mix by promoting private sector participation in renewable energy.
Through a grant from the Small Island Developing State DOCK Support Program (SIDS-
DOCK), the Bank supported the preparation of grid penetration and codes, feed-in tariffs, and
model energy supply purchase agreements. To promote efficient use of energy in households,
through the Seychelles Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Project, the IFC helped
develop an incentive program for commercial banks to extend low interest loans (with
government guarantees) to households to acquire solar heaters and other household energy
efficiency equipment. The Bank did not play any role in other infrastructure sectors such as
transport or ICT.




                                                 21
ASSESSMENT

3.31 The Bank’s involvement in infrastructure was limited but useful. The RAS funded study
on utility pricing was valuable and the implementation of its recommendations were important to
ensure the long-run financial viability of the utility provider, thus strengthening its ability to
provide reliable electricity (and water and sanitation) in the medium term. The reform of tariffs is
also expected to reduce wasteful use of electricity, contributing to improved supply conditions.
The study financed by the SIDS-DOCK grant was useful in parts. According to interlocutors,
while the grid penetration component of the study was useful a first step in estimating how much
of renewable energy could be put on the grid, the grid code component was too generic and did
not provide country specific recommendations. The Purchasing Power Agreement template
could also be useful after some tweaking to make it more applicable to Seychelles. The IFC’s
initiative to incentivize commercial banks to lend to households for purchase of energy efficient
equipment did not have many takers and the government (with UNDP) is in the process of
reviewing the usefulness of the scheme. There was a sense that this initiative was not fully
thought through and was largely supply driven. Overall, the Bank’s contribution was small but
positive.

Fostering Fisheries Development
3.32 Fisheries (along with tourism) are one of the most important sectors in Seychelles
accounting for roughly 30 percent of GDP. Licenses fees for industrial tuna fishing provide the
government with a substantial source of revenue.17 The Indian Ocean Tuna factory (IOT), in
which the government owns a minority stake, is the largest single employer in the country with a
workforce of over 2,500 workers. Fisheries is of critical importance to the country’s commercial
balance: in 2012, the value of exports of consumable fish and fish products constituted 93
percent of the total value of domestic exports. Artisanal fisheries account for the vast majority of
domestic catches of fish, which is critical to the food security of the population and the
livelihood of coastal fishermen. The management of Seychelles marine ecosystems and fisheries
is hampered by insufficient legal and institutional frameworks, human capacity and
infrastructure. Weak governance and a poor investment climate also limit domestic and foreign
investment and contribute to poor sector growth.

3.33 Fisheries also have a significant regional dimension. They are a regional public good,
whose health and sustainability require regional coordination to limit negative and enhance
positive externalities yielded by national activities. Regional coordination is needed to avoid
conflicts and suboptimal sectorial investments, and to promote equitable distribution of wealth.
Furthermore, several technical aspects of the sector are regional in nature, and their
implementation would benefit from economies of scale if managed at a regional level
(monitoring, control and surveillance, safety at sea, etc.). The Bank’s program sought to address
both the national and regional dimensions.

3.34 In 2008, in the context of the fiscal pressures at the time, the Bank was requested by the
government to provide an independent assessment of the majority partner’s claim that without
the subsidies it had been receiving from the government until that time, IOT’s operations were
not financially viable. The Bank funded report contradicted this claim and helped the



                                                 22
government re-negotiate its agreement with the private partner on fair terms. This assistance
from the Bank was highly appreciated and helped build its credibility in the sector.

3.35 At the national level, the Bank promoted better management and governance of the
fisheries sector by supporting data collection and its transparent reporting so that policy makers
and civil society becomes fully aware of who the major domestic and foreign players are, and the
financial nature of their engagement in fishing in Seychelles. Thus under the DPL series on
Competitiveness and Sustainability (FY13–15), the authorities made public all Seychelles-
flagged fishing vessels, and the contents of all fishing agreements, fishing and aquaculture
licenses, and authorizations that were issued to foreign and national entities. As a result, in 2012,
a list of Seychelles-flagged fishing vessels was published and revealed the existence of 22 locally
flagged vessels that were largely unknown outside the fisheries administration. The first
publication of fishing agreement and license information in 2013 further enhanced discussions of
the sector’s contribution to the national economy and government revenues. Based on this
information and with the support of the Bank, the government is analyzing the fisheries value
chain to identify ways to increasingly harness the sector’s economic potential.

3.36 Moreover, the Seychelles Fisheries Authority (SFA) has made operational the basic
modules of a Fisheries Information System and discloses quarterly key information and regular
statistical bulletins on its website. These disclosures can be expected to foster the participation of
civil society and other stakeholders in the debate and design of sound policies related to efficient
allocation of access to fisheries, the best use of Seychelles’ fisheries resources, and their
sustainable management. Disclosure would also create a level playing field for the operators in
the sector and signatories to fishing agreements. It could secure public revenue collection, deter
corruption (and perceptions of corruption), curb illegal fishing, and gradually optimize resource
rents.

3.37 At the regional level, Seychelles participated in the South West Indian Ocean Fisheries
Project (SWIOFP) whose objective was to promote the environmentally sustainable use of fish
resources through adoption by countries riparian to the Southwest Indian Ocean of a Large
Marine Ecosystem (LME)-based approach to fisheries management in the Agulhas and Somali
LMEs that recognizes the importance of preserving biodiversity (FY07; closed FY13). The
SWIOFP provided financing to support regional and national fisheries resource management
initiatives, within the scope of the Project, and strengthened the framework within which the
governments and relevant institutions could collaborate more effectively to plan and manage
such resources. The Implementation Completion and Results Report rated project performance as
moderately satisfactory.

3.38 Building on the results of the SWIOFP project, the South West Indian Ocean Fisheries
Governance and Shared Growth (SWIOFish) series of projects were designed to build to develop
sustainable fisheries resource management through strengthening governance capacity to manage
fisheries, providing investments to harness sustainable fisheries to national economies and
strengthen further regional cooperation. The Bank is at an early stage of preparing a fisheries
development and shared growth World Bank and Global Environment Facility lending operation
for Seychelles (SWIOFish3), as part of the regional SWIOFish series of projects, which adopts a
regional and long term approach to supporting the South West Indian Ocean countries in
sustainably developing their fisheries sector. The objective is to enhance the contribution of


                                                 23
marine fish resources to the country’s social, environmental, and economic objectives. Apart
from the regional dimensions of the project, the three main ‘national’ components of this
proposed operation are: (i) expanding the coverage of sustainable-use marine protected areas and
their monitoring with a view to improving the management of the country’s maritime space; (ii)
addressing key institutional constraints to support the countries’ management of its vast
exclusive economic zone (EEZ) and foster sustainable fisheries, including supporting the
preparation of fleet management and development plan and promoting and developing co-
management of fisheries as a key policy and management tool; and supporting the creation of a
Fisheries Economic Intelligence Unit to produce and analyze key fisheries and marine
environment statistics.; and (iii) sustainable development of the blue economy by facilitating the
expansion of value-chains and promote synergies with other value chains (e.g., tourism); creating
the enabling environment for the development of aquaculture; and facilitating a sustainable,
economically-sound port development process; and (iv) increase the sanitary monitoring
capacity. The project also hopes to promote adoption of more environmentally sustainable
practices by the private sector in the seafood and fisheries sector.

ASSESSMENT

3.39 The Bank’s approach in the sector has been sensible, combining both regional and
national dimensions to address economic and environmental issues in the sector that are
sometimes best addressed regionally. However, it is still too early to assess the impact of the
Bank’s specific interventions in the sector. The measures to mandate full disclosure of details of
fishing agreements and publication of key statistics on the sector should enable more informed
management decisions to be made and also maintain public pressure to ensure that sector
decisions are made consistent with the interests of the public. However, this pre-supposes that
there is adequate institutional capacity in the sector to understand what the data are revealing and
to design policies in line with emerging data. This may not be the case, and the Bank may need
to do much more in terms of capacity building in the SFA and other sector institutions, including
the Ministry in charge of fisheries. Overall, the Bank’s contribution to fisheries development was
small but positive.

Overall Assessment
3.40 What was the overall impact of the reforms to enhance competitiveness and promote
private sector development? Is the economy any more competitive than it was before the
reforms, and how it is reflected in the performance of macro indicators such as exports and
private investment, domestic and foreign?

EASE OF DOING BUSINESS

3.41 The regulatory environment improved in some respects (for example in trading across
boundaries), but may have deteriorated in some other areas (such as enforcement of contracts). In
terms of the composite ‘Ease of Doing Business’ indicator, Seychelles’ rank improved to 85 (out
of 189 countries) in 2014 compared to its rank of 84 out of 175 countries in 2006. Though the
rankings in the two years are not strictly comparable because of methodological difference, it is
not likely that significant advances were made.18



                                                24
COMPETITIVENESS

3.42 According to the WEF’s Global Competitiveness Index, Seychelles ranked a lowly 92 out
of 144 countries in 2014–15, with a competitiveness score of 3.91. In 2012–13 (the first year for
which data on Seychelles is reported), Seychelles ranked 76 (out of 144 countries) with a
competitiveness score of 4.1. Thus, according to this indicator, Seychelles’ competitiveness has
declined in recent years.19

ACCESS TO CREDIT AND FINANCIAL DEEPENING

3.43 Financial sector reforms did not contribute to financial deepening during this period. In
fact, the share of broad money in GDP actually fell from 62.5 percent in 2007–09 to 54.6 percent
in 2012–14. The performance of the banking system in terms of credit is also disappointing. The
share of credit provided by the financial sector in GDP declined from 62.7 percent in 2007–09 to
35.2 percent in 2012–14. The share of credit to the private sector in GDP also fell from 27.4
percent in 2007–09 to 23.9 percent in 2012–14.

 Figure 3.1. Seychelles Financial Deepening; 2005–14

            120

            100

             80

             60

             40

             20

              0
                  2005   2006    2007    2008     2009     2010      2011      2012      2013   2014
                                                      Year

                                Broad    money    (%
                                Domestic of
                                         credit   GDP)
                                                  to       private    sector    (%
                                         of       GDP)
                                Domestic credit   provided by         financial sector     (%
                                         of       GDP)


 Source: IMF IFS (September 2015) and World Bank WDI (October 2015).


3.44 Clearly, reforms did not succeed in improving availability of credit, confirming the
perceptions from the Investment Climate assessment and the Doing Business Surveys. These
results are also strikingly different from the positive trends in Mauritius during the same period.

EXPORT PERFORMANCE

3.45 The performance of exports has fluctuated over the years and their strong performance in
any one year cannot be taken to mean that they are competitive.20 But overall, the share of
exports of goods and services in GDP increased from an average of 92 percent of GDP during
2007–09 to 101 percent during 2012–14. However, the increase occurred only for the service


                                                   25
exports. The share of merchandise exports in GDP dropped from about 45 percent during 2007–
09 to 43 percent during 2012–14. The share of exports of services on the other hand, increased in
the same period from 47 percent to about 58 percent. One silver lining has been the big increase
in exports of ICT services, whose share in total export of services increased from 3.3 percent in
2007–09 to 26 percent in 2012–13.

 Figure 3.2. Seychelles Exports of Goods and Services, 2005–14

                    120.0

                    100.0

                        80.0

                        60.0

                        40.0

                        20.0

                         0.0
                               2005      2006         2007        2008      2009         2010     2011      2012      2013       2014
                                                                                   Year

                                                         Exports of goods and services (% of GDP)
                                                         Exports of services (% of GDP)
                                                         ICT service exports (% of service exports, BoP)



 Source: IMF IFS (Sept 2015) and World Bank WDI (Oct 2015).


3.46 Another positive trend is that the market share of exports from Seychelles to EU
countries has increased in recent years.21 Seychelles remains competitive in the tourism sector,
especially high end tourism. Its share in world tourism arrivals has been growing gradually time.

 Figure 3.3. Market Share of Seychelles Exports in European Imports, 2005–14

                 0.30                                                                                                                   0.025
                 0.25                                                                                                                   0.020
                 0.20
    € Billions




                                                                                                                                        0.015
                                                                                                                                                Percent




                 0.15
                                                                                                                                        0.010
                 0.10
                 0.05                                                                                                                   0.005
                 0.00                                                                                                                   0.000
                           2005       2006       2007        2008        2009          2010     2011     2012       2013        2014
                                                                                Year


                                             Import Value to EU                 Seychelles EU Imports (% of total EU Imports)

 Source: IMF Eurostat.




                                                                                   26
INVESTMENT PERFORMANCE

3.47 The share of FDI in GDP has declined over the period, from an average of 18.8 percent in
2007–09 to 16.7 percent during 2012–14. This is consistent with the observation that there has
not been a substantial improvement in the business climate.22 However, domestic private
investment has risen sharply in the same period. The different response of private domestic and
foreign investors to changes in the business environment would need to be further investigated in
the Seychelles forthcoming SCD.

 Figure 3.4. FDI and Private Investment in Seychelles; 2005–14




 Source: World Bank WDI and IEG calculations based on data from IMF Staff reports.
 Note: Private investment data for 2012 and 2013 are based on IMF estimates.


Conclusion: Overall Ranking of Bank’s Performance
3.48 The Bank’s performance in different dimensions for enhancing competitiveness is
summarized in the table below. The macroimpact of the reforms also presents a mixed picture.
There was a disappointing FDI response and financial sector deepening did not happen.
However, on the plus side domestic private investment picked up and Seychelles increased its
market share in the competitive European market, and high end tourism and travel remained
highly competitive. Exports of ICT services, a new area of growth, was booming. Based on these
assessments, the Bank made a positive but small contribution to enhancing competitiveness.

Table 3.1. Summary Assessment for Pillar 2 – Improving Competitiveness
 World Bank Group Objectives                                        Outcome Assessment, FY05–15

 Promoting Efficient Trade and Monetary                                       Area of strength
 Policies
 Promoting Privatization and SOE reforms                                        Negligible
 Strengthening the financial sector                                             Negligible
 Improving Infrastructure Services (Energy)                                  Positive but small
 Fisheries                                                                   Positive but small




                                                           27
1
  As noted in Chapter 2, the Bank’s strategic approach in Seychelles was structured around two pillars and one basic
foundation. The two pillars were (i) Competitiveness and Employment; and (ii) Vulnerability and Resilience. The
basic foundation was Governance and Public Sector Capacity. Areas covered under the foundation of governance
and public sector capacity of the CPS were divided between the two pillars defined in the approach paper, depending
on their likely impact.
2
  For example, prior to the reforms the Ministry of Health was providing laundry and catering services for its
hospitals. These activities were transferred to the private sector. However, private operators were unable to provide
the quality of service at the scale required (for example, sterilization of hospital laundry, or nutrition requirement in
meals).
3
 Twelve SEs (out of 21) had submitted their audited financial statements for their last completed fiscal year to the
Ministry of Finance and the commission by June 2014. This was a prior action for the Third Competitiveness and
Sustainability DPL (FY2014).
4
    There is also a lack of policy analyst within the country to provide support to line ministries .
5
    This was one recommendation of the 2011 PER (para 4.42)
6
    Source: IMF reports.
7
  For example, under the new Act, the Seychelles Licensing Authority was to issue licenses for 27 activities, rather
than the 180 economic activities under the previous Act.
8
 By repealing the 2005 code, the government eliminated activities defined as “strategic,” “restricted,” or “sensitive”
areas for foreigners.
9
 No doubt, the registration of simple businesses now takes only 24 hours compared to 10 days it took in the past.
But other procedures to start a business including obtaining license and certifications for public health, fire safety
etc. still take considerable time and effort.
10
     In terms of getting electricity and credit, Seychelles ranked 130 and 171 out of 189 countries in 2014.
11
  By way of comparison, Mauritius’ rank improved from 32 (out of 175 countries) in 2006 to 28 (out of 189
countries) in 2014.
12
 For example, new streamlined regulations were put in place to obtain gainful occupational permits for expatriate
workers. Fees for gainful occupational permits were also harmonized across all commercial sectors.
13
     The ratio of domestic credit to GDP is 36.4 percent in Seychelles compared to 87.8 percent in Mauritius.
14
  The approval of a new finance strategy was a prior action under the first Sustainability and Competitiveness DPL
(2013). Subsequently, the functions of HFC were split into two distinct operations. HFC continues to maintain the
function of offering housing finance, while the function of managing social (rental) housing has been transferred to
the Property Management Company, which has an autonomous executive management structure.
15
   The Bank provided TA to develop a system of ‘smart’ subsidies targeted to low income households . The reformed
subsidy takes the form of a cash grant, available to first-time buyers earning less than SR 20,000 per month, paid as
a down payment on a mortgage loan to build or buy a house. The subsidy amount decreases steadily as income level
rises. To benefit from this scheme, the grant recipients must have contributed a minimum 10 percent of the value of
the loan toward the Home Saving Scheme.
16
  The IEG mission was given the impression that commercial banks still prefer to lend to the HFC (for on-lending
to home buyers) rather than to home buyers directly.
17
  During 2009, SCR55.6 million and another SCR100 million in European Union (EU) fishing agreements were
collected.
18
     By way of comparison, during the same period Mauritius improved its ranking from 32/175 to 28/189.
19
  The index is a composite of 12 aspects that influence competitiveness in an economy including quality of
institutions, macroeconomic management, infrastructure, health and primary education of population, higher
education and training, goods market efficiency, labor market efficiency, financial market development,



                                                              28
technological readiness, market size, business sophistication, and innovation. The Global Competitiveness Score
allows for comparing a country’s progress without reference to other countries. In contrast to Seychelles, Mauritius
improved its competitiveness score slightly from 4.2 in 2006–07 to 4.5 in 2014–15. Its ranking improved from 55
out of 125 countries in 2006–07 to 39 out of 144 countries in 2014–15. Switzerland, the top rated country in 2014–
15 had a score of 5.7 (out of a maximum score of 7).
20
  The strong growth of merchandise exports of close to 26 percent in 2013 was followed by a decline of 5 percent in
2014 and a likely fall by another 5 percent in 2015. The same trend was evident in tourism. Source: IMF Report
(July 2015).
21
  The share of imports from Seychelles in total imports of EU countries rose from about 1.1 percent in 2007–08 to
about 1.65 percent during 2013–14, almost a 50 percent increase. Source: WTO data.
22
     This result is in sharp contrast to the improved FDI performance in Mauritius during the same period.




                                                           29
4. Conclusions and Lessons
Conclusions
4.1     When Seychelles became independent in 1976, it was a poor subsistence economy with
significant disparities in income and wealth. By the mid-2000s, it had become a high middle
income country with low levels of poverty and many social indicators comparable to OECD
countries. This progress was achieved largely by following an economic model where the state
played a dominant role in allocating resources and controlling economic activity. It was also
predicated on large public spending, including on welfare programs, increasingly financed
through external borrowing.

4.2      This model became increasingly difficult to sustain. The worsening of the international
financial crisis in 2008 forced the government to default on its international payment obligations,
and to recognize the need for fundamental structural reforms. Starting in 2008 the government
began implementing a radical program of macroeconomic stabilization and structural reforms.
The centerpiece of these reforms was a strong fiscal adjustment to reduce the burden of external
debt and a progressive dismantling of the role of the state in allocating resources. These reforms
were supported by the IMF’s Standby and EFF arrangements, and by the Bank through a series
of DPLs. Seychelles also benefited from debt relief provided by other official and private
international creditors. As a result of the reforms, macroeconomic imbalances were corrected,
the role of markets was enhanced, and economic growth restored.1 However, as the crisis abates,
pressures to increase wasteful public spending are rising which could threaten macroeconomic
stability once again. Moreover, critical reforms aimed at improving public sector (including
SOEs) governance and performance, and insulating the private sector from arbitrary and non-
transparent interventions from the state need to be pursued with greater vigor.

4.3     The Bank was a valuable partner in Seychelles’ reforms. It acted quickly and effectively
on the government’s request for assistance at the time of the 2008 crisis, and helped in designing
a targeted social safety net to protect the poor from the sharp cuts in universal subsidies needed
as part of the IMF’s stabilization program at the time. It also played a big role in assisting
Seychelles in its negotiations with other international creditors. Since then, the Bank has
supported the country’s ongoing reforms largely through a series of DPOs, backed by analytic
reporting and some capacity building. The reliance on DPOs was appropriate given the need for
wide-ranging reforms and the clearly expressed preference of the government to avoid long
disbursement procedures. In line with the government’s priorities, the Bank’s strategy, sought to
strengthen fiscal consolidation and sustainability, enhance competiveness and private sector
development, and improve the economy’s resilience to external shocks. The Bank played an
important role in designing the social protection programs, which was a key element in
maintaining public support for the reforms and is a key to their medium term sustainability. The
Bank’s program was well harmonized with the work of the other development partners. In
particular, there was excellent cooperation between the Bank and the IMF in the design of the
reform programs, with each institution contributing in their areas of expertise. The Bank’s
strategy was flexible and when additional resources were required to strengthen the financial
buffer against natural calamities (as after the tropical cyclone Felleng in 2013), this was provided
by the Bank. But perhaps the Bank was too flexible when it came to assessing progress in


                                                30
important areas of reform. The shelving of the privatization agenda and the slow pace of public
sector reform, including SOE reform are two examples where the Bank could have pushed
harder. In supporting the second wave of reform, the Bank could also pay greater attention to
enhancing transparency in all government actions and strengthen the capacities of institutions to
force accountability and check abuse of power

4.4      The Bank Group supported several areas for enhancing competitiveness. Its interventions
helped liberalize the incentive framework. The regulatory framework for private businesses was
also simplified and efforts made to accelerate settlement of commercial disputes. However, very
limited progress was made in promoting privatization, and though state intervention in private
businesses has been significantly scaled down on paper, anecdotal evidence suggests that
arbitrary interference is not uncommon. Bank interventions in the financial sector were weak and
limited to the housing finance segment and to developing a leasing law to facilitate access to
credit to SMEs. The Bank was not a major player in infrastructure, where its interventions were
confined to help improve long term financial viability of the electricity provider and strengthen
its ability to provide reliable power. Likewise, the Bank did not play much of a role in the
education sector and skills development, given the active role of the EU in this area.

4.5     The macro impact of the reforms was mixed. The global indices for competitiveness and
ease of doing business have shown only a marginal improvement at best, and FDI inflows (as a
share of GDP) have fallen during the period. On the positive side, the market share of exports
from Seychelles to the competitive European market has increased and the tourism sector
remains highly competitive. The rapidly increasing share of ICT services in total services exports
also points to a successful diversification. Overall, the Bank’s performance in enhancing
competitiveness was positive but small (see table 3.1.)

Lessons
4.6    Based on the research carried out for this evaluation, the following lessons can be drawn
regarding the operational and strategic dimensions of Bank Group engagement in Seychelles.

4.7     For over 12 years, Seychelles didn’t pay its dues to the World Bank, and just participated
in Spring Meetings. As one interlocutor noted, “the door was closed” and there was no
interaction with the authorities. It was the willingness and ability of the Bank to respond
positively to the government’s request for assistance in 2007, following years of dis-engagement
that earned the Bank enormous goodwill that continues to this day.2

4.8      Close collaboration between the IMF and the Bank in the design of the reform program in
Seychelles was a big reason for its success. This cooperation allowed expertise in the two
institutions to work together to design a program that was fiscally and socially sustainable.
Similar cooperation may be sought with other development partners that have expertise and
experience to offer.

4.9     Another reason for the success of the program was the out-reach efforts of the public
officials, starting from the top leadership of the government. This effort went a long way in
explaining the rationale for reforms to the public, and to explain how the government planned to
ameliorate the impact on the poor. The Bank can play an important role in this out-reach by


                                                31
doing some of it directly, or providing the government with relevant material on Seychelles and
other countries.

4.10 The Bank’s work would benefit from a more informed assessment of the political
situation. Though Seychelles is a multi-party democracy and has had free and fair elections,
power has remained largely with one party and ruling elite. While on paper there are checks and
balances (in the form of a free press and an independent judiciary), the reality on the ground is
often different. In these circumstances, a nuanced assessment of the political compulsions of the
government and ruling elite, and how these can change over time would prove invaluable in
understanding the real reasons why some reforms were blocked or slowed down (such as
privatization, SOE reforms). It would also be useful for the Bank to identify, for every politically
contentious reform, those individuals within the government who are championing the reforms
and those that oppose it. This would help assess the chances for implementation and could also
provide some clues to un-blocking the resistance.

4.11 Compared to some other countries (for example Mauritius), the Bank’s program in
Seychelles was more focused and more in line with what it could deliver given the resources at
its disposal. The program was also flexible, allowing the Bank to respond to legitimate needs
when circumstances change. However, the Bank was sometimes guilty of being too flexible in
re-aligning its program to policy slippages. The shelving of the privatization program sent a
wrong signal about the government commitment to increase the space for private sector in
commercial activities, yet this does not seem to have elicited a strong response from the Bank.
Perhaps the Bank could have made a greater effort to understand why the government was
freezing its own program and whether other solutions were feasible. Also, the Bank could have
been more forthright when the spirit of reforms is violated, as in reported instances when the new
procurement law was ignored and large contracts were awarded without tendering.

4.12 For the most part, the Bank’s program in Seychelles was conventional, seeking to
maintain a stable macro framework and get market forces to play a greater role while improving
the quality of public spending on essential public goods. By and large this approach worked. But
it did not address some country-specific issues adequately, which could have improved
outcomes. For example, as already suggested there is a need to look beyond laws and rules and
regulations on paper to the reality on the ground. While laws may have been amended to remove
the state from many of the activities of the private sector, arbitrary interventions to reward or
harm private investors were not uncommon when their business threatened to hurt powerful
vested interests in the ruling elite. The Bank does not seem to have paid much attention to these
factors and to include them in its policy dialogue with the government. Similarly, with the
Bank’s blessings, institutions were created to promote competition (such as the Office of Fair
Trade) but they simply did not have the technical capacity or political backing to either identify
non-competitive behavior or to act against obvious cases which involved favorites of the ruling
elite. The Bank should be forthright and unequivocal in its assessments and continue to
emphasize increased transparency at all levels of government and seek to strengthen the
independence of other non-state actors (for example judiciary, media, Parliament) that can
identify and act against abuse of state power. It should also build in-country demand for good
governance by stepping up efforts to reach out to Parliament and civil society, including the
press.



                                                 32
4.13 A second area where the Bank needs to look beyond standard prescriptions is the
readiness of the private sector to take on the responsibilities of a retreating state. In the initial
years of the reform program, to reduce the state’s role in economy a number of activities
undertaken by state agencies were off-loaded to the private sector.3 However, it soon became
apparent that the private sector was simply unable to provide the quality of service required,
causing much hardship to the population. An informed assessment of the readiness of the private
sector, and support for strengthening its abilities, may help calibrate the planned speed of
transition from the state to the private sector.3

4.14 Despite its status as a high middle income country, local capacity in most government
agencies and outside government (including the private sector) is lagging behind what is required
to manage a modern economy. Awareness of international experience is also limited. The Bank
is best placed to provide such assistance. While there is huge demand within the country for such
assistance, the RAS and other mechanisms were found either too costly or too limited to meet the
needs of the country. TA involving hands-on support from experienced hands in the actual
implementation of reforms was as important, if not more important, than designing programs and
policies. TA involving peer reviewing by Bank staff of work done in line ministries could also be
an important source for knowledge transfer. Equally important, the Bank could foster inter-
regional exchange of ideas and best practices by partnering with regional institutions such as the
Regional Multidisciplinary Center of Excellence in Mauritius, the Indian Ocean Commission,
and the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa.

4.15 Taking the above findings into account, we have developed six lessons regarding
operational and strategic dimensions of Bank group engagement in Seychelles.

4.16 Lesson 1: It would be desirable for the Bank to maintain at least a minimum
technical presence even when the policy dialogue is unsatisfactory. Technical staff may have
the opportunity to engage with policy makers that need support and confidence in pursuing good
policies which alone they couldn’t do. This may open the door for an earlier reengagement to
adopt a more sustainable fiscal trajectory before the country descends into crippling debt and
bankruptcy.

4.17 Lesson 2: The Bank could make a greater effort at understanding political economy
issues, including identifying individuals who are championing or opposing politically
contentious reforms so that these are reflected in assessing political challenges and
opportunities for key reforms. This political economy analysis would be timely after
Seychelles’ “closely fought” Presidential elections in December 2015, and would help frame the
new CPF, notably to (i) prioritize the reform agenda; (ii) gauge the degree of ownership for
different reforms and interests working for and against reforms within government and outside;
and (iii) suggest entry points and ways to neutralize or compensate those opposing key reforms.
This analysis would be updated as and when important political developments (such as fresh
elections or major cabinet reshuffles) occurred. Naturally, any such analysis would require the
Bank to interact with stakeholders including trade unions and opposition parties.

4.18 Lesson 3: It would be judicious for the Bank to remain selective in the choice of
areas to focus upon, given the limited resources at its disposal. Fiscal restraint will remain an
important macro compulsion in the medium term and the Bank could provide useful inputs in


                                                 33
improving the quality of public spending, including public investment. Given its dependence on
international trade and services, improving the quality of infrastructure to enhance connectivity
with the rest of the world in one obvious priority area for Seychelles to which the Bank can
contribute. Improving quality of education and skills is another important area where other DPs
are taking the lead. It would be wise for the Bank to keep a close eye on the results of these
efforts and offer any expertise it has to further these efforts. The Bank should continue to take a
pro-active stance in promoting trade, investment and exchange of ideas at the regional level.

4.19 Lesson 4: The Bank needs to remain flexible in the design of its program and be
prepared to modify it in size and substance if the external environment changes or
priorities of the government change. However, slippages in implementation of policy
conditionality should only be accommodated in exceptional circumstances. This is important to
ensure the Bank keeps its credibility. Prior actions and targeted outcome in DPLs needs to be
precisely worded and crafted to ensure that there is a clear logical chain between the prior action
and the ultimate objective of reform and also that this chain is aligned with the programmatic
cycle of the DPL.

4.20 Lesson 5: Wherever possible, the Bank could press for increased transparency and
accountability in government and help promote reforms that break the “cycle of
fraternity” which often plague institutions in small states. So far the Bank’s emphasis has
been largely in the area of public finance management. As noted by several stakeholders,
including former policy makers, the Bank appetite to challenge the government to deepen
reforms during the second wave of reforms was weak. They felt the Bank should place greater
emphasis on good governance. Bank agenda to foster accountability should be widened to
include other areas (e.g., selection of CEOs of public sector bodies) where the government may
be tempted to dispense favors to its favorites or penalize opponents. The role of independent
watch-dog bodies such as the press and the judiciary will be important to hold the government to
account, and the Bank should support any efforts to strengthen their role.

4.21 Lesson 6: It would be desirable for the Bank to look beyond standard prescriptions
in designing SOE reforms, including privatization in small states where the capacity of the
private sector may be very thin. It is therefore important to first assess the readiness of the
private sector to take on responsibilities of a retreating state and to recalibrate the planned speed
of transition based on this assessment. At the same time, the Bank should be prepared to
strengthen design joint interventions, including support for institutions that can provide hand-
holding services to the private sector in the initial years.

1
 The level of public debt (which was almost 129 percent of GDP in 2009) was brought down to 65 percent in 2014.
GDP growth averaged 5 percent per year during 2009–14.
2
 The country economist went on mission in 2007 to start working with the authorities on fiscal issues at a time
when the country was still under sanction.
3
 For example, laundry and catering services were hived-off from hospitals. However, the private sector simply did
not have the ability to deliver these services of the quality required.




                                                         34
Appendix A. Seychelles Economic and Social Indicators,
2005–14
Series Name                2005    2006     2007      2008    2009     2010     2011     2012     2013     2014
Growth and inflation
GDP growth (annual %)        9.0    9.4      10.4     -2.1     -1.1     5.9      7.9      6.0      6.6      3.3
GDP per capita growth
                             8.5    7.2      9.9      -4.3     -1.5     3.0      10.8     5.0      4.7      1.5
(annual %)
GNI per capita, PPP
                          16,020   17,690   18,380   17,630   17,880   18,840   20,990   22,800   24,320   24,780
(current international $)
GNI per capita, Atlas
                          11,140   12,580   12,270   11,130   10,220   10,190   11,060   12,200   13,540   14,100
method (current US$)
Inflation, consumer
                             0.9    -0.4     5.3      37.0     31.8     -2.4     2.6      7.1      4.3      1.4
prices (annual %)
Composition of GDP
Agriculture, value
                             3.3    3.0      2.7      2.6      2.3      2.3      2.2      2.0      2.5      2.3
added (% of GDP)
Industry, value added
                            16.4    16.2     16.1     15.6     14.0     14.0     13.7     13.3     12.9     12.3
(% of GDP)
Services, etc., value
                            63.2    65.9     67.9     67.6     68.4     66.9     66.8     67.9     70.2     71.1
added (% of GDP)
External Accounts
Exports of goods and
                            78.3    84.4     90.6    101.4    108.0     93.8     95.8     92.8     85.5     83.1
services (% of GDP)
Imports of goods and
                           100.0   100.5     91.8    112.1    117.0    108.1    111.4    109.4     92.8     98.2
services (% of GDP)
Current account
                           -18.9   -13.2    -18.8     -27.2   -22.4    -22.1    -28.3    -14.5    -11.8    -22.0
balance (% of GDP)
Total reserves in
                             0.7    1.3      0.5      0.7      2.2      2.9      2.7      2.4      3.1      3.3
months of imports
External debt stocks (%
                             —       —        —           —     —        —        —        —        —        —
of GNI)
Present value of
external debt (% of          —       —        —           —     —        —        —        —        —        —
GNI)
Total debt service (% of
                             —       —        —           —     —        —        —        —        —        —
GNI)
Other macroeconomic indicators
Gross fixed capital
                             —      30.4     29.0     26.9     27.3     36.6     35.0     37.4     37.9     37.3
formation (% of GDP)
Gross fixed capital
formation, private sector    —      22.8     23.6     24.9     22.0     28.0     27.0     27.0     29.0     31.0
(% of GDP)
Gross savings (% of
                             —      19.6     18.1     7.1      12.5     17.2     13.1     17.5     26.5     16.3
GDP)
Gross domestic savings
                             —      14.3     27.8     16.2     18.2     22.3     19.4     20.7     30.5     22.2
(% of GDP)
Fiscal accounts
Cash surplus/deficit (%
                             2.4    2.2      -5.3     7.0      3.9      1.4      5.5      4.8       —        —
of GDP)
General government
final consumption           34.6    39.5     35.3     27.4     28.9     27.3     27.4     25.7     26.6     25.7
expenditure (% of GDP)




                                                     35
  Series Name                 2005       2006      2007      2008     2009      2010      2011         2012        2013     2014
  Gross national
                                —        116.2    101.2      110.7    109.0     114.3     115.6        116.6       107.4    115.1
  expenditure (% of GDP)
  Revenue, excluding
                               43.1       47.3     35.7       34.8     33.0      35.1      35.5         34.1         —        —
  grants (% of GDP)
  Social indicators
  Health expenditure,
                                3.6        3.5      3.1        2.4      2.4       3.2       3.2          4.2        3.7       —
  public (% of GDP)
  Out-of-pocket health
  expenditure (% of
                               97.2       83.7     72.9       71.0     67.7      38.1      88.2         35.4        36.8      —
  private expenditure on
  health)
  Life expectancy at birth,
                               72.1       72.2     73.2       73.2     73.0      73.2      72.7         74.2        74.2      —
  total (years)
  Immunization, DPT (%
  of children ages 12–23       99.0       99.0     99.0       99.0     99.0      99.0      99.0         98.0        98.0     99.0
  months)
  Improved sanitation
  facilities (% of             98.4       98.4     98.4       98.4     98.4      98.4      98.4         98.4        98.4     98.4
  population with access)
  Improved water source
  (% of population with        95.7       95.7     95.7       95.7     95.7      95.7      95.7         95.7        95.7     95.7
  access)
  Mortality rate, infant
                               12.3       12.2     12.2       12.2     12.2      12.2      12.2         12.2        12.1     11.9
  (per 1,000 live births)
  Gross enrollment ratio,
  pre-primary, both sexes     103.5        —      100.5      103.5    105.2     109.8     109.6        113.5       111.5      —
  (%)
  Gross enrollment ratio,
                              112.8        —      107.9      106.0    104.6     106.2     106.9        107.7       108.3      —
  primary, both sexes (%)
  Gross enrollment ratio,
  secondary, both sexes        85.0        —       81.5       78.1     77.2      74.8      76.0         79.5        71.7      —
  (%)
  Gross enrollment ratio,
                                —          —        —          —        —         —         2.5          1.3        3.3       —
  tertiary, both sexes (%)
  Population, total          82,900 84,600 85,033 86,956 87,298 89,770 87,441                         88,303       89,900   91,526
  Population growth
                                0.5        2.0      0.5        2.2      0.4       2.8      -2.6          1.0        1.8      1.8
  (annual %)
  Urban population (% of
                               51.1       51.3     51.5       51.8     52.0      52.3      52.6         52.9        53.2     53.6
  total)
  Population, female (%
                               50.0       49.8     49.6       49.3     49.1      49.0      49.0         49.0        49.1     49.2
  of total)
  Poverty headcount ratio
  at national poverty lines     —         37.8      —          —        —         —         —            —           —        —
  (% of population)
  Fixed telephone
  subscriptions (per 100       24.6       23.4     25.5       24.8     28.8      24.2      30.4         22.7        23.4     22.7
  people)
  Unemployment, total (%
  of total labor force)         5.5        —        —          —        —         —         4.1          —           —        —
  (national estimate)
Source: World Development Indicators database. Retrieved November 2015.
Note: DPT = diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus; GDP = gross domestic product; GNI = gross national income; ILO =
International Labour Organization; PPP = purchasing power parity.




                                                          36
Appendix B. World Bank Group Operational Program in
Seychelles FY07–15
Summary of Bank Activities
LENDING

FY12–15

1.      As planned, the Bank approved three Sustainability and Competitiveness DPOs, each
of $7 million. These operations supported reforms to strengthen fiscal sustainability, enhance
competitiveness, strengthen the economy’s resilience to shocks, and develop institutional
capacities in the public sector.

2.      However, during the course of implementation of the CPS, the planned lending
program was considerably enhanced. To provide additional financial buffer against natural
disaster, the lending program for FY15 was increased by the inclusion of a development
policy loan (DPL) with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (CAT-DDO)1 of $7
million. A regional DPO of $5 million in support of dismantling regional trade barriers was
also added to the program.2 The CPS period was also extended to FY16 with the inclusion of
a second Regional DPO (also of $5 million) and a fourth Sustainability and Competitiveness
DPL (of $4 million).

AAA

3.       Substantial AAA was implemented by the Bank during this period, largely according
to plan, but adjusted as required in response to specific requests by the government. The
Bank provided TA under a Reimbursable Agreement for Advisory Services framework. In
social protection, the Bank supported government efforts to improve efficiency in service
delivery and provided TA in support of reforms in social protection. The Bank is also
providing assistance to improve statistical capacity at the Ministry of Education and Ministry
of Health, through the development of a BOOST dataset for these two sector ministries, and
for capacity building for a National Health Account. In the public enterprise area, the Bank
supported drafting of the Board Appointment and Remuneration Policies. To improve the
statistical system, Bank support focused on building capacity for generating National
Accounts and the Tourism Satellite Account. TA was also provided to improve the business
regulatory environment. Analytical work that shaped the government’s ongoing reform
agenda includes Public Expenditure Reviews, a Strategy for Strengthening Budget
Management, a Public Financial Management Performance report, a review of
Administrative Barriers to Private Sector Development and Business Environment in the
Seychelles, and a Review of the Policy Regulatory and Administrative Environment.

FY10–11

4.     As planned, the Bank approved two DPOs of $9 million each. The first DPO (FY10)
supported a stable and sustainable fiscal adjustment underpinned by public administration
and civil service reform. It also supported reforms to reduce the state’s role in commercial


                                              37
activities and strengthen the social assistance system through improved targeting. The second
DPO (FY11) supported reforms to improve public sector effectiveness and the business
environment.

5.      The Bank also implemented four Trust Fund grants (for $4.5 million), largely for
capacity building. These included the National Disaster Preparedness and Response Project
($900,000) for early warning systems and strengthening the capacity for disaster
preparedness and response; the Transport Infrastructure Project ($1,960,000) to finance the
repair of one of three artisanal fishing quays damaged by the December 2004 tsunami; Public
Administration Reform and Fiscal Impact Capacity Building Project ($425,800) to enhance
capacity to effectively manage the implementation of the Public Sector Reform Program; and
Building Statistical Capacity Project ($376,200) to improve the organizational structure of
the National Statistics Bureau and build its capacity to develop and produce new economic
data series as part of the National Strategy for the Development of Statistics.

Detailed Portfolio Analysis
6.     World Bank Group financing commitments delivered over the evaluation period
amounted to about $70 million. From FY07–15 the World Bank Group committed a total of
$46 million in IBRD loans, $3.8 million in trust fund grants, and about $20 million in net
commitments by the IFC. IBRD disbursements during this period amounted to about $32
million.

 Figure B.1. IBRD Commitments and Disbursements to Seychelles, FY09–15

                    14.0
                    12.0
                    10.0
    US$, millions




                     8.0
                     6.0
                     4.0
                     2.0
                     0.0
                           2009   2010         2011                 2013       2014   2015
                                                      Fiscal Year


                                  IBRD Commitments        IBRD Disbursements

 Source: World Bank Business Intelligence database.



7.      IBRD financing for the implementation of reforms materialized largely as envisaged
in the country strategies, and was delivered exclusively through Development Policy
operations. Both the FY09–11 ISN and the FY12–15 CPS proposed a series of Development
Policy Operations (DPOs) as the main lending vehicle of support for the implementation of
reforms. Accordingly, an initial series of two $9 million operations were approved in FY10
and FY11. These were followed by a series of three $7 million programmatic DPOs in FY13,


                                                           38
14 and FY15 (figure B.1). The Bank also approved in FY15, a $7 million Disaster Risk
Management DPL with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option. The main objective of
this operation is to strengthen the government’s Disaster Risk Management policy and to
provide access to contingent financing that would address immediate needs in the event of a
disaster.3 Trust fund support mobilized during the period helped to reinforce the Bank’s
engagement and was deployed in activities that included; the rehabilitation of the fish
processing quay in in the main fishing port of Victoria, mainstreaming disaster risk reduction
into national plans, strengthening the regulatory framework for renewable energy systems,
enhancing the capacity to manage the implementation of public sector reform, and enhancing
transparency in the oil sector.

8.      The sectoral focus of the Bank’s financing commitments was well aligned with the
objectives of the DPL series and mostly focused in the area of economic policy. The sector
composition of IBRD’s lending portfolio greatly reflected the Bank’s objectives and was
mostly concentrated in the area of economic policy, with commitments classified under the
macroeconomics and fiscal management practice, accounting for more than half of total
commitments (Fig. 2). Other key areas of engagement included; building resilience and
reducing poverty.

 Figure B.2. Sector Allocations of IBRD Commitments to Seychelles (US$, millions)



                           7
                                                           Macro Economics & Fiscal
                          15%
                                                           Management
                    9
                                                           Poverty and Equity
                   20%
                                      30
                                     65%
                                                           Social, Urban, Rural and
                                                           Resilience Global Practice



 Source: World Bank Business Intelligence database.



9.     A range of knowledge products and technical assistance helped inform key areas of
the Bank’s engagement and also contributed to building capacity. Between FY07 and FY15,
the Bank delivered a total of 17 Analytical and Advisory service Activities (AAA); 12 of
which were in the form of nonlending technical assistance (NLTA). About $2.5 million in
Bank (administrative) budget and $0.5 million trust fund finance was spent on delivering the
AAA products. Key analytic reports delivered during the period included; a fiscal Public
Expenditure Review with a focus on social sectors and civil service, a report on the
administrative barriers to private sector development, a report on management of the tuna
industry, and a social protection study. Non-lending technical assistance was instrumental in
building capacity in areas such as disaster risk management, private sector development, and
insurance regulation.



                                                      39
 Figure B.3. Number of AAA Products by Practice, FY07–15

                                 Finance & Markets
               Macro Economics & Fiscal Management
                                        Governance
    Practice




                           Trade & Competitiveness
                   Environment & Natural Resources
                                          Education
                           Social Protection & Labor

                                                       0   1          2           3      4   5
                                                                    Number of Products


 Source: World Bank Business Intelligence database.



10.     Trust fund resources and a Reimbursable Agreement for Advisory Services
arrangement were instrumental in the delivery of the Bank’s AAA activities. Overall, about
16 percent of the total cost of AAA delivery during the period, was provided by trust funds,
notably from the Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative and the Global
Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR). In addition, under a Reimbursable
Agreement for Advisory Services agreement, the Bank was able to deliver technical
assistance in three key areas: social protection, public enterprise, and health financing. In
social protection, the Bank supported government efforts to improve efficiency in service
delivery and advised on policy options with respect to enhancing the targeting system. In
health financing, the Bank was involved in building capacity for National Health Accounts
and in the public enterprise area, the Bank supported drafting of the Board Appointment and
Remuneration Policies.

Investments by the International Finance Corporation
11.     IFC support to Seychelles was delivered primarily through advisory services. IFC
reengaged with the Republic of Seychelles in 2010 and in the same year approved a $20
million investment to help facilitate the development of tourism on the island.4 However,
due to issues associated with the lease of the land, disbursement did not take place. Through
its advisory services work, IFC supported the Central Bank during the preparation of
legislation on financial leasing which was ultimately passed in November 2013. The new
legal framework is designed to ease access to finance especially for SMEs and is expected to
achieve completion with the issuance of supplementary regulations, further to which, the
Central Bank of Seychelles will start processing applications for authorization/licensing of
financial leasing entities. Through the Seychelles Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
Project, IFC supported the government’s effort to develop an incentive program for
commercial banks to extend credit to households for the acquisition of solar heaters and other
household energy efficiency equipment. IFC also undertook a preliminary assessment of the
government’s proposed port modernization project, with a view to attracting private




                                                               40
investment in alliance with a strong port operator under a Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
scheme.

12.       There were no MIGA guarantees provided to Seychelles during the evaluation period.

Portfolio Performance and Risk
13.     IEG validations during the evaluation period were limited to assessments of the first
series of two DPLs. The assessments resulted in satisfactory development outcome ratings
for both projects which is a much better performance than the average for Sub-Saharan
Africa (65 percent) and for the Bank as a whole (70 percent). The satisfactory outcome rating
for the DPL series was attributed to factors that included (i) a well-designed communication
strategy that helped build public support for reforms, and (ii) the selective inclusion into the
reform program, of only policy areas underpinned by knowledge, partnerships and
consultation.

14.     IEG’s review of closed projects also found a moderate risk to development outcome
in one (50 percent) of the two instances where risk was assessed. The assessed risks assessed
stemmed from two main factors: (i) the economy’s vulnerability to external shocks
associated with the uncertainties in the global economic environment, and (ii) uncertainty
regarding the ability of the government to maintain macroeconomic stability, keep up the
momentum of reforms and, address capacity constraints. The assessment concluded that a
negative external environment would affect tourism, aid and foreign investments in the
economy and thus impact development outcomes.

15.      The riskiness of the Bank’s Seychelles portfolio under implementation remained
below average for most of the evaluation period. For the entire evaluation period, no Bank
operations in Seychelles (and none of the commitments) were considered to be at risk. This
was in contrast to an average of 26 percent of projects and 27 percent of commitments at risk
in AFR, and a World Bank average of 23 percent of projects and 19 percent of commitments
at risk over the same period.

Table B.1. Seychelles—List of World Bank Approved Projects, FY07–15
                                                                                              Total Project    IBRD Trust Fund
                                                           Len                                Commitmen       Commit Commitment     IEG
                            Agreement Fiscal Project                Rev Closing
Proj ID   Project Name                                 Instrument               Practice             t         ment     Amount    Outcome
                              Type     Year Status                     Date
                                                          Type                                   (US$,         (US$,     (US$,     Rating
                                                                                                millions)     millions) millions)
       SC-Transport
P10647                                                                           Transport
       Infrastructure ERL     RETF     2007   Closed INVESTMENT 06/30/2011                         2.0         0.0       2.0
  1                                                                               and ICT
       (FY07)
                                                                                 Environme
       SC:GFDR
P11147                                                                             nt and
       National Disaster      RETF     2008   Closed INVESTMENT 09/30/2012                         0.9         0.0       0.9
  4                                                                               Natural
       Preparedness Prj
                                                                                 Resources
       SC:PAR and
P11235
       fiscal impact           IDF     2010   Closed       #        08/25/2013     MFM             0.4         0.0       0.4
  8
       reform
P11482                                                                            Poverty                                        Satisfactor
       SC DPL                 IBRD     2010   Closed ADJUSTMENT 05/31/2010                         9.0         9.0       0.0
  2                                                                              and Equity                                           y
P12094                                                                                                                           Satisfactor
       SC-DPL 2               IBRD     2011   Closed ADJUSTMENT 05/31/2011         MFM             9.0         9.0       0.0
  7                                                                                                                                   y




                                                               41
                                                                                                   Total Project    IBRD Trust Fund
                                                            Len                                    Commitmen       Commit Commitment     IEG
                            Agreement Fiscal Project                  Rev Closing
 Proj ID   Project Name                                 Instrument                Practice                t         ment     Amount    Outcome
                              Type     Year Status                       Date
                                                           Type                                       (US$,         (US$,     (US$,     Rating
                                                                                                     millions)     millions) millions)
       SC-Sustainability
P12520 and
                              IBRD     2013   Closed ADJUSTMENT 06/30/2013              MFM             7.0            7.0       0.0
  2    Competitiveness
       (FY13)
       Sustainability and
P13242
       Competitiveness        IBRD     2014   Closed ADJUSTMENT 06/30/2014              MFM             7.0            7.0       0.0
  5
       DPL 2
                                                                                     Energy
P14325 SC-Feed-in Tariff
                              RETF     2013   Closed INVESTMENT 08/31/2014             and              0.3            0.0       0.3
  4    and Grid Co
                                                                                    Extractives
       Sustainability and
P14656
       Competitiveness        IBRD     2015   Active ADJUSTMENT 12/31/2015              MFM             7.0            7.0       0.0
  7
       DPL 3
P14886 SC-DPL with a
                              IBRD     2015   Active ADJUSTMENT 09/30/2017              SURR            7.0            7.0       0.0
  1    Cat DDO
                                                                                     Energy
P15059 Seychelles: EITI
                              RETF     2015   Active INVESTMENT 12/31/2015             and              0.2            0.0       0.2
  5    Implementation
                                                                                    Extractives
  Total                                                                                                49.8         46.0         3.8
Source: Business Intelligence database.
Note: MFM = Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management, SURR = Social, Urban, Rural, and Resilience Global Practice.

Table B.2. Number and Total Commitment Amount of IBRD commitments, FY07–15
(US$, millions)
                                                2010             2011             2013                   2014                  2015             Total
                Practice                           Amt              Amt              Am                     Amt                   Amt              Amt
                                              No.              No.              No.                    No.                   No.              No.
                                                     .                .               t.                      .                     .                 .
 Macroeconomics and Fiscal
                                              —         —       1         9         1          7        1          7         1         7       5     30
 Management
 Poverty                                       1        9      —          —         —         —         —          —         —         —       1     9
 Social, Urban, Rural, and
                                              —         —      —          —         —         —         —          —         1         7       1     7
 Resilience Global Practice
 Total                                         1        9       1         9         1          7        1          7         3         14      7    46.0
Source: Business Intelligence database.
Note: There were no IBRD commitments between FY07 and FY09.


Table B.3. IEG Project Ratings for Seychelles, Exit FY07–15
                                                                                         IEG Risk to
                                        Net                             IEG
 Exit                     Project                      Approval                         development             IEG Bank                     IEG Bank
           Proj ID                   Commitment                       Outcome
 FY                        Name                          FY                               objective           Quality at entry              Supervision
                                     Amount ($M)                       rating
                                                                                            Rating
                        SC                                                              NEGLIGIBLE
 2010      P114822                  9.0                 2010         Satisfactory                             SATISFACTORY                 SATISFACTORY
                       DPL                                                                 TO LOW
                        SC-
 2011 P120947                       8.7                 2011         Satisfactory       MODERATE              SATISFACTORY                 SATISFACTORY
                      DPL 2
Source: Business Intelligence database.




                                                                     42
Table B.4. Bank Budget by Cost Structure Category, FY07–15 (US$, thousands and
percent)
 World Bank Global                             Project                               Country Program
                                Total                           Lending      AAA
 Practice                                    Supervision                                Support
 Agriculture                       74                               74
 Education                         28                                         28
 Energy and Extractives            40             26                 1        13
 Environment and Natural
                                  173             32                19       121
 Resources
 Finance and Markets              180                                        180
 Governance                       690                               22       668
 Macroeconomics and
                                2,908             36               875       1,998
 Fiscal Management
 Not assigned                     534             71                67                     395
 Other                            531                                                      531
 Poverty and Equity               265             30               167        68
 Social Protection and
                                  119                                        119
 Labor
 Social, Urban, Rural and
                                  178              5               171        2
 Resilience Global Practice
 Trade and
                                  269                                        269
 Competitiveness
 Transport and ICT                 66             60                 6
 Total                          6,053            260              1,402      3,465         926
 Cost structure (percent)
 Agriculture                      100              0               100         0            0
 Education                        100              0                 0       100            0
 Energy and Extractives           100             66                 1        33            0
 Environment and Natural
                                  100             19                11        70            0
 Resources
 Finance and Markets              100              0                 0       100            0
 Governance                       100              0                 3        97            0
 Macroeconomics and
                                  100              1                30        69            0
 Fiscal Management
 Not assigned                     100             13                13         0            74
 Other                            100              0                 0         0           100
 Poverty and Equity               100             11                63        26             0
 Social Protection and
                                  100              0                 0       100            0
 Labor
 Social, Urban, Rural and
                                  100              3                96        1             0
 Resilience Global Practice
 Trade and
                                  100              0                 0       100            0
 Competitiveness
 Transport and ICT                100             91                 9         0            0
 Total                            100              4                23        57           15
Source: World Bank Business Intelligence database as of November 23, 2015.




                                                      43
Table B.5. Total Net Disbursements of Official Development Assistance and Official
Aid, 2005–2013 (US$, millions)
                                                                                                      Percentage
                                                                                         Cumulative     of total
   Donor(s)        2005   2006   2007    2008    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013
                                                                                          2005–13     disbursed
                                                                                                       2005–13
     France        5.01   2.52   0.67    2.93    2.31    10.48   2.39    1.56    4.13        32            15
      Japan        1.26   1.91   0.76    1.62    9.06     9.57   1.24    1.75    0.55      27.72           13
       Italy                             0.05             8.31                              8.36            4
     Belgium       0.55   2.02                            1.02           0.01                3.6            2
    Australia      0.01   0.05                                   0.88    0.51    1.82       3.27            2
     Canada        0.78   0.23   0.51    0.24    0.21                                       1.97            1
      United
                   0.02   0.02   -0.86   0.07    0.06    0.04    0.07    1.81    0.48       1.71          1
    Kingdom
    Germany        0.09   0.07   0.08    0.06    0.08    0.52    0.58    0.02    0.03       1.53          1
      Spain                                              -0.77   1.66                       0.89          0
 United States     0.01   0.11   0.14    0.01    0.01    0.01    0.02    0.03    0.23       0.57          0
 New Zealand       0.01          0.03    0.03    0.05    0.06    0.05    0.04    0.02       0.29          0
      Korea        0.03   0.02   0.08    0.01            0.01    0.02     0.1               0.27          0
    Portugal              0.19                                                              0.19          0
     Sweden                                                              0.17               0.17          0
  Switzerland      0.16                                                                     0.16          0
     Greece        0.01   0.01   0.05    0.01                    0.02    0.02               0.12          0
     Austria                     0.03                                                       0.03          0
    Slovenia                                                             0.01               0.01          0
    Denmark                                                      -0.29                     -0.29          0
  DAC -Total       7.94   7.15   1.49    5.03    11.78   29.25   6.64     6.03    7.26     82.57         38
 EU Institutions    1.4    4.4    0.8    0.74    11.98    4.62   6.39    14.23   10.32     54.88         25
       GEF                         6     6.17     0.9     3.38   1.42     2.05             19.92          9
     BADEA         2.77   1.25   -0.09   -0.14    -1      2.36    2.4     1.54   0.92      10.01          5
      UNTA         1.05   0.46   0.95    0.44                                                2.9          1
      OFID         1.36   0.99   0.54    0.03    -0.31   -0.31           -0.31   -0.31      1.68          1
      WHO                                                        0.55    0.47    0.58        1.6          1
      IAEA                0.01   0.05    0.18    0.13    0.22    0.16    0.16    0.17       1.08          1
 AfDB (African
                                                                 0.09    0.42     0.4       0.91          0
   Dev. Bank)
     UNFPA         0.05   0.04   0.03    0.09    0.05    0.11    -0.01   0.05    0.06       0.47          0
      UNDP                                                       0.07    0.02    0.04       0.13          0
    UNAIDS                0.02   0.04                                                       0.06          0
      IFAD                                       -0.12                                     -0.12          0
 AfDF (African
                                 -0.43   -0.2    -0.7    -0.72   -0.75   -0.74   -0.74     -4.28          -2
   Dev.Fund)
  Multilateral
  institutions     6.63   7.17   7.89    7.31    10.93   9.66    10.32   17.89   11.44     89.24         41
       total
  United Arab
                    2            2.06                    17.44   5.86    12.21   7.22      46.79         22
    Emirates
     Turkey                              0.11                    0.01    0.01    0.06       0.19          0
     Cyprus        0.02   0.01   0.02    0.05    0.03                                       0.13          0
      Israel       0.02   0.01           0.02    0.01    0.01    0.01    0.02    0.03       0.13          0
    Thailand                                     0.01                    0.01    0.02       0.04          0
    Romania                                                              0.01               0.01          0
     Russia                                                              0.01               0.01          0
     Kuwait
                   0.12   -0.7   -0.42                   -0.33   -0.74   -0.6    -0.64     -3.31          -2
    (KFAED)


                                                   44
                                                                                                                                    Percentage
                                                                                                                   Cumulative         of total
      Donor(s)        2005           2006    2007     2008     2009        2010      2011      2012     2013
                                                                                                                    2005–13         disbursed
                                                                                                                                     2005–13
   Non-DAC
                    2.16     -0.68     1.66      0.18    0.05    17.12  5.14     11.67    6.69      43.99                              20
     TOTAL
  Overall Total    16.73 13.64 11.04 12.52 22.76 56.03                  22.1     35.59 25.39        215.8                              100
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD); data extracted on November 23, 2015 from
OECD Stat.
Note: DAC = Development Assistance Committee; EU = European Union; GFATM = Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis, and Malaria; IAEA = International Atomic Energy Agency.

Table B.6. Analytical and Advisory Services Support to Seychelles, FY07–15
                                                                                                                        AAA Cost
                                                                                                          AAA Cost                    Total Cost
                                                                                                                         (Trust
                                                      Fiscal                                           (Bank Budget)                    of AAA
    Proj ID   Project Name                                     Prod Line     Practice                                    Fund)
                                                       year                                                 (US$,                        (US$,
                                                                                                                          (US$,
                                                                                                         thousands)                   thousands)
                                                                                                                       thousands)
              Seychelles: Business Environment
    P107376                                           FY09       ESW         Finance and Markets           130             0             130
              Update
    P107923   Seychelles Fiscal PER                   FY09       ESW         Governance                    148             0             148
    P079619   SC PER /SOES AND EMPLOYMENT             FY10       ESW         Governance                    84              0             84
              Seychelles #9023 Review of Pub Owned
    P123612                                           FY11      NLTA         Finance and Markets            0             149            149
              FIs
                                                                             Environment and Natural
    P118247   Tuna Industry Management                FY11      NLTA                                       110             0             110
                                                                             Resources
    P112525   SC-FBS TAP                              FY12      NLTA         Governance                    233             0             233
                                                                             Macroeconomics and
    P125775   SC-FBS Social Protection                FY13      NLTA                                       320             0             320
                                                                             Fiscal Management
                                                                             Social Protection and
    P127102   SC-Social Protection                    FY13      NLTA                                       119             0             119
                                                                             Labor
              Seychelles #10040 Stren. Insurance
    P125204                                           FY14      NLTA         Finance and Markets            0             99             99
              Reg
                                                                             Environment and Natural
    P145337   Seychelles Disaster Risk Management     FY14      NLTA                                        0             74             74
                                                                             Resources
              SC-Programmatic Public Expenditure                             Macroeconomics and
    P132465                                           FY15       ESW                                       178             0             178
              Rev                                                            Fiscal Management
                                                                             Trade and
    P151778   SC-PPP Outsourcing and PSD dialogue     FY15       ESW                                        37             0             37
                                                                             Competitiveness
                                                                             Trade and
    P123351   SC-PSD Reforms                          FY15      NLTA                                       232             0             232
                                                                             Competitiveness
    P130867   Seychelles #10254 Housing Finance       FY15      NLTA         Finance and Markets            0             160            160
                                                                             Macroeconomics and
    P130899   Sustainability and competitiveness TA   FY15      NLTA                                       745             0             745
                                                                             Fiscal Management
    P149436   StAR - Study of the Seychelles OFC      FY15      NLTA         Finance and Markets            123            0             123
    P153239   JIT support for ECD                     FY15      NLTA         Education                      28             0             28
     Total                                                                                                 2,487          482           2,969
Source: World Bank Business Intelligence database.

1
 The DPL with CAT-DDO supported the government’s efforts to strengthen its inst itutional capacity to plan for
and cope with natural disasters. The contingent financing for disaster response provided by the CAT-DDO
served as an important element of Seychelles’ national disaster risk financing strategy to manage the impact of
natural disasters without compromising fiscal stability and other development objectives.
2
  The regional DPO (Accelerated Program for Economic Integration) supports an initiative by five African
countries (Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Seychelles, and Zambia) to eliminate trade barriers fragmenting the
African market and promote deeper regional integration. The project is currently stalled because of differences
in perspectives of the countries involved.
3
  The development policy loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO) is a contingent credit
line that provides immediate liquidity to IBRD member countries in the aftermath of a natural disaster. In
response to widespread flooding in early 2013, the government sought Bank Group support for strengthening



                                                               45
the technical capacity for DRM and put in place a disaster risk financing strategy. The contingent financing for
disaster response provided by the CAT-DDO serves as an important element of Seychelles’ national disaster
risk financing strategy to manage the impact of natural disasters without compromising fiscal stability and other
development objectives.
4
    The $20 million investment involved financing the development of a hotel resort on the island.




                                                         46
Appendix C. World Bank Group Program Organized
along the Evaluation Pillars
Pillar 1—Strengthening Resilience
1.1 STRENGTHENING FISCAL AND DEBT SUSTAINABILITY AND PUBLIC SECTOR
PERFORMANCE

The Bank Group sought to help make progress on the objectives/outcomes detailed below.

Objectives/Outcomes Sought                         Associated Indicator(s)
Strengthened budget management practices          •Full inclusion of recurrent costs of capital into the
adopted.                                          recurrent budget by 2015 compared to no linkages in
                                                  2011.
                                                  •Reduction in the difference between budgeted and
                                                  executed
                                                  budget from 4.2% in December 2011 to 2.5% by
                                                  December 2015.
                                                  •Full adoption of Program and Performance based
                                                  budgeting by
                                                  2017.
government expenditure on health as a share of •Development of sustainable health financing strategy.
total health expenditure falls from 87% (2009
baseline) to 80% by 2016.
Strengthened capacity of National Bureau of       •Quarterly National Accounts report is released to the
Statistics to provide economic and                public by 2014.
demographic data.
Macroeconomic stabilization: fiscal               •Maintain fiscal targets.
adjustment, civil service reform                  •GFS budget classification adopted.
                                                  •Budget of line ministries include sector ceilings.
                                                  •Public sector downsized by at least 12.5 percent and
                                                  staffing rationalized in education and health.

What instruments did the Bank Group use in seeking to help make progress on these
objectives/outcomes?1

                                                                            Nonlending Technical
         Lending Operation               Analytical Work                    Assistance
PAR and fiscal impact reform (P112358;   SC-Debt Mgmt Study (P090908;      Seychelles #9023 Review of Pub
2014;$0.43M)                             FY06)                             Owned FIs (P123612; FY11)
SC-DPL 2 (P120947; 2011;$9M)             SC-Programmatic Public
                                         Expenditure Rev (P132465; FY15)
SC-Sustainability and Competitiveness    SC PER /SOES AND
(FY13) (P125202; 2013;$7M)               EMPLOYMENT (P079619; FY10)




                                                  47
                                                                                Nonlending Technical
          Lending Operation                 Analytical Work                     Assistance
Sustainability and Competitiveness DPL 2 Seychelles Fiscal PER (P107923;
(P132425; 2014;$7M)                      FY09)
Sustainability and Competitiveness DPL 3
(P146567; 2016;$7M)
SC DPL (P114822; 2010;$9M)

1.2 STRENGTHENING ENVIRONMENTAL AND DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT AND CLIMATE
CHANGE

The Bank Group sought to help make progress on the objectives/outcomes detailed below.

 Objectives/Outcomes Sought                              Associated Indicator(s)
Addressing the impact of climate change and           •Improved disaster risk management capacity and restored
infrastructure                                        infrastructure affected by the 2004 tsunami.
Strengthened institutional/legal framework for disaster •National DRM Act adopted by the National Assembly and
risk                                                    updated DRM Policy approved by the Cabinet of Ministers.

What instruments did the Bank Group use in seeking to help make progress on these
objectives/outcomes?

                                                                              Nonlending Technical
                 Lending Operation                        Analytical Work     Assistance
SC-GEF NGO Mgmt Nature Rsrvs SIL (FY04)                                       Seychelles Disaster Risk Management
(P070457; 2008; $0.814M)                                                      (P145337; FY14)
SC:GFDR National Disaster Preparedness Prj
(P111474; 2013;$0.9M)
SC-DPL with a Cat DDO (P148861; 2018;$7M)

1.3 ENHANCING HUMAN CAPITAL AND SOCIAL RESILIENCE

The Bank Group sought to help make progress on the objectives/outcomes detailed below.

 Objectives/Outcomes Sought                           Associated Indicator(s)
Safety net system operationalized.
Improved targeting, administration and financial     •Multiple agencies providing welfare assistance merged into a
sustainability of the social protection system.      single Agency for Social Protection by 2012.
                                                     •A single robust social protection Management Information
                                                     System (MIS) in place by 2013.
                                                     •The pension contribution rate is increased to 5% by 2014 from
                                                     3% in 2011.




                                                    48
What instruments did the Bank Group use in seeking to help make progress on these
objectives/outcomes?

          Lending Operation                        Analytical Work        Nonlending Technical Assistance
SC-Sustainability and Competitiveness                                    SC-FBS Social Protection (P125775; FY13)
(FY13) (P125202; 2013;$7M)
Sustainability and Competitiveness DPL 2                                 SC-FBS TAP (P112525; FY12)
(P132425; 2014;$7M)
Sustainability and Competitiveness DPL 3                                 SC-Social Protection (P127102; FY13)
(P146567; 2016;$7M)
SC DPL (P114822; 2010;$9M)

Pillar 2—Enhancing Competitiveness
2.1 STRENGTHENING THE DOMESTIC FINANCIAL SECTOR

There were no objectives under this pillar.

What instruments did the Bank Group use in seeking to help make progress on these
objectives/outcomes?

                                                                                                  Nonlending Technical
                 Lending Operation                                 Analytical Work                     Assistance
IFC Investment - Nouvobanq - Seychelles International
Mercantile Banking Corp. Ltd. (20424; FY06; $10M)

2.2 STRENGTHENING THE LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK, SECTOR LINKAGES,
AND VALUE CHAINS FOR PRIVATE BUSINESS

The Bank Group sought to help make progress on the objectives/outcomes detailed below.

 Objectives/Outcomes Sought                          Associated Indicator(s)
Reduced time and cost to start a business.           • Number of days to register business falls from 39 in 2011 to 1 in
                                                     2016.
                                                     • An online system for registration of companies is set up by 2016.
Increased competition and a reduced role for the     • Government has approved a housing subsidy policy that better
public sector in the housing finance market.         targets low-income households in need of assistance.
                                                     • Housing Finance Company (HFC) has been reformed to address
                                                     challenges related to its conflicting mandates.
Adoption of a modern legislative framework for       • Commercial Division at the Supreme court established and
insolvency and alternative dispute resolution.       operational by 2013.
                                                     • The backlog of commercial cases registered by December 2011 is
                                                     processed by December 2016.
Removing constraints to private sector               • Business licensing process streamlined.
development                                          • Privatization program ongoing.
and supporting private sector investment


                                                     49
                                                          • Promoting FDI through a MIGA guarantee.
                                                          • Improved operations of tuna cannery.
What instruments did the Bank Group use in seeking to help make progress on these
objectives/outcomes?

                                                                                             Nonlending Technical
                  Lending Operation                      Analytical Work                     Assistance
    SC-DPL 2 (P120947; 2011;$9M)                         Seychelles: Business                Tuna Industry Management
                                                         Environment Update                  (P118247; FY11)
                                                         (P107376; FY09)
    SC-Sustainability and Competitiveness (FY13)                                             SC: PSD and Tourism TA (P119899;
    (P125202; 2013;$7M)                                                                      FY11)
    Sustainability and Competitiveness DPL 2                                                 Seychelles #10040 Stren. Insurance
    (P132425; 2014;$7M)                                                                      Reg (P125204; FY14)
    Sustainability and Competitiveness DPL 3                                                 IFC AS -Administrative Barriers
    (P146567; 2016;$7M)                                                                      (537765; FY06)
    SC DPL (P114822; 2010;$9M)
     IFC Investment – Universal II (resort hotel)
    (28604; FY10; $20M)

2.3 IMPROVING INFRASTRUCTURE SERVICE DELIVERY

The Bank Group sought to help make progress on the objectives/outcomes detailed below.

    Objectives/Outcomes Sought                                      Associated Indicator(s)
    Electricity tariffs and regulatory framework are revised        •Market based utility rates applied by 2014 compared to ad hoc
    to encourage efficiency, reduce losses and promote              subsidized rates in 2011.
    renewable energy.                                               •Grid Codes and Feed in Tariffs for renewable energy are in
                                                                    place by 2016.
    Increased transparency and strengthened regulation in •Petroleum Regulatory Authority is established and petroleum
    thepetroleum sector.                                  legislation revised by 2014.
                                                          •EITI report submitted to EITI Secretariat for evaluation by end

What instruments did the Bank Group use in seeking to help make progress on these
objectives/outcomes?

                                                                              Analytical           Nonlending
    Lending Operation                                                           Work           Technical Assistance
    SC-Feed-in Tariff and Grid Co (P143254; 2015;$0.28M)
    SC-Transport Infrastructure ERL (FY07) (P106471; 2011;$2M)




1
    Includes operations approved before the evaluation period but active during any part of the evaluation period.



                                                               50
Appendix D. Short Summary of Bank Contribution under
Pillar 1 – Improving Resilience

        Seychelles: Bank’s Contribution to Strengthening Resilience
Macroeconomic Resilience: objective was to create adequate fiscal space and international
reserves to meet emergencies by improving public financial management, reducing
wasteful public expenditures and transfers to SEs including Public Utilities.
     reduction by 12.5 percent in public sector employment by voluntary retirement
       schemes and early departures to cut public spending.
     adoption of new wage grading system to align remuneration to skills and
       responsibilities of civil servants.
     enactment of new Public Procurement Act 2008 to bring greater transparency in
       public procurement. A National Tender Board was established to administer the
       policy.
     initiation of pilot PBBs in two ministries in 2015, with a full rollout planned for
       2017.
     adoption of Public Enterprise Monitoring Commission Act (2013) establishing a
       commission to monitor performance of SEs based on up-to-date audited financial
       statements, to ensure accountability to Parliament and better corporate governance.
     adoption of tariff rebalancing program to increase electricity and water tariffs to
       cost recovery levels, to strengthen financial autonomy of Public Utilities and
       reduce their claims on the budget

Social Resilience: objective was to improve the safety net for the poor by better targeting
of social benefits, expanded coverage and improved efficiency in implementation of the
programs to discourage work shirking. Pension reforms were geared to ensure long run
sustainability.
     introduction of targeted cash assistance program for the poor, establishment of
        Social Welfare Agency to administer program and strengthening of its capacities.
     strengthening of the social protection system by :limiting discretion in determining
        level and duration of social assistance; including all incomes in calculating
        benefits; inclusion of mental health related disabilities for disability payments;
        implementing revised regulations for certification of disability and sickness
        benefits, consistent with WHO classification of functioning; tightened monitoring
        and control of medical doctors certifying sick leave as well as workers on sick
        leave; limiting sick leave payments by government to 15 days per person per year;
        consolidation of Home Careers and Family Support Programs into one means
        tested program.
     increase in Pension contribution rate to Pension Fund from 3 to 4 percent, shared
        equally between employees and employers. Limit yearly increase in pension
        benefits to CPI, and no more than 5 percent.
     implementation of new regulations strengthening link between level and duration
        of contributions to pension benefits from the Pension Fund.


                                            51
Resilience to Natural Disaster: the objective was to improve the government’s capacity
for disaster management and response.
     adoption by the National Assembly of the Disaster Management Act, which
        provides a legal framework for disaster risk management including both a national
        disaster risk management plan and an integrated emergency management system.
     adoption by Cabinet of updated policy for disaster risk management which
        establishes a fully functional early warning system, increases preparedness through
        updated sector contingency plans, and provides for the carrying out of information
        dissemination activities.
     establishment of a historic loss and damage database in collaboration with the
        United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction and the Indian Ocean
        Commission, which is updated annually and fully accessible to all.




                                            52
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction   This work is a product of the staff of The World   RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
and Development / The World Bank               Bank with external contributions. The findings,    The material in this work is subject to copyright.
1818 H Street NW                               interpretations, and conclusions expressed in      Because The World Bank encourages
Washington, DC 20433                           this work do not necessarily reflect the views     dissemination of its knowledge, this work
Telephone: 202-473-1000                        of The World Bank, its Board of Executive          may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
Internet: www.worldbank.org                    Directors, or the governments they represent.      noncommercial purposes as long as full
                                                                                                  attribution to this work is given.
                                               The World Bank does not guarantee the
                                               accuracy of the data included in this work.        Any queries on rights and licenses, including
                                               The boundaries, colors, denominations, and         subsidiary rights, should be addressed to
                                               other information shown on any map in this         World Bank Publications, The World Bank
                                               work do not imply any judgment on the part         Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC
                                               of The World Bank concerning the legal             20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail:
                                               status of any territory or the endorsement         pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                               or acceptance of such boundaries.
