Vu l n e r a b i l i t y
non-communicable disease                                   remoteness
disaster risk management                               climate change
RISING                         SE A                    L E V EL
diseconomies of scale labor migration
volatile growth natural disasters

           Cluster Country Program Evaluation
                              on Small States
                                         Mauritius Country Case Study (FY07–15)
                      Enhancing Competitiveness and Private Sector Development
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction   This work is a product of the staff of The World   RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
and Development / The World Bank               Bank with external contributions. The findings,    The material in this work is subject to copyright.
1818 H Street NW                               interpretations, and conclusions expressed in      Because The World Bank encourages
Washington, DC 20433                           this work do not necessarily reflect the views     dissemination of its knowledge, this work
Telephone: 202-473-1000                        of The World Bank, its Board of Executive          may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
Internet: www.worldbank.org                    Directors, or the governments they represent.      noncommercial purposes as long as full
                                                                                                  attribution to this work is given.
                                               The World Bank does not guarantee the
                                               accuracy of the data included in this work.        Any queries on rights and licenses, including
                                               The boundaries, colors, denominations, and         subsidiary rights, should be addressed to
                                               other information shown on any map in this         World Bank Publications, The World Bank
                                               work do not imply any judgment on the part         Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC
                                               of The World Bank concerning the legal             20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail:
                                               status of any territory or the endorsement         pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                               or acceptance of such boundaries.
                   IEG Working Paper 2016

   Cluster Country Program Evaluation on Small States

         Mauritius Country Case Study (FY07–15)
Enhancing Competitiveness and Private Sector Development




                       Florence Charlier
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org


This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of
Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

         The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
boundaries.


Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full
attribution to this work is given.

         Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-
mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                        ii
Contents
Abbreviations and Acronyms ................................................................................................ v
Acknowledgments .................................................................................................................. vi
Summary .................................................................................................................................. 7
1. Country Context and Purpose of the Evaluation ........................................................... 15
   Mauritius Development Challenges .................................................................................... 15
   Evaluation Objective and Report Structure ........................................................................ 17
2. The World Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (FY07–15) ........................................ 20
   Context ................................................................................................................................ 20
   The Government’s Response .............................................................................................. 20
   The World Bank’s Strategy and Program ........................................................................... 21
   Broad Assessment of Strategy and Program ....................................................................... 23
3. Evaluation of Bank Group Assistance in Enhancing Competitiveness and Private
Sector Development .............................................................................................................. 30
   Facilitating Efficient Trade Policies ................................................................................... 30
   Promoting a Business Friendly Environment ..................................................................... 32
   Strengthening the Financial Sector ..................................................................................... 37
   Improving Infrastructure Services ...................................................................................... 38
   Fostering SME Development .............................................................................................. 43
   Encouraging Tourism.......................................................................................................... 44
   Overall Assessment ............................................................................................................. 44
   Conclusion: Overall Assessment of Bank’s Performance .................................................. 48
4. Conclusions and Lessons .................................................................................................. 48
   Conclusions ......................................................................................................................... 52
   Lessons ................................................................................................................................ 53

Tables
Table 3.1. Summary Rating for “Promoting a business friendly environment” ..................... 37
Table 3.2. Evaluation Assessment for “Improving Infrastructure Services” .......................... 42
Table 3.3. Evaluation Assessment for Pillar 2 “Improving Competitiveness” ....................... 48

Figures
Figure 3.1. Number of New Businesses Registered in Mauritius; 2005–14 ........................... 33


                                                                     iii
Figure 3.2. Mauritius Financial Deepening, 2005–14 ............................................................ 45
Figure 3.3. Mauritius Exports, 2005–14 ................................................................................. 46
Figure 3.4. Mauritius Share of Imports and Exports, 2005–4 ................................................ 47
Figure 3.5. FDI and Private Investment in Mauritius; 2005–14 ............................................. 47

Appendixes
Appendix A. Mauritius Economic and Social Indicators, 2005–13 ....................................... 57
Appendix B. Bank Group Operational Program in Mauritius FY07–15 ................................ 59
Appendix C. World Bank Group Program Organized Along the Evaluation Pillars ............. 69
Appendix D. Short Summary of Bank Contribution under Pillar 1—Improving Resilience . 73




All volumes of the Cluster Country Program Evaluation on Small States are found online at
http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/evaluations/cpe-smallstates.




                                                            iv
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AAA        analytic and advisory services
AFD        Agence Française de Développement
AfDB       African Development Bank
CHCL       Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd.
CLR        Country Learning Report
CPE        country program evaluation
CPEE       Certificate of Primary Education examination
CPS        country partnership strategy
CPSPR      Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report
DBM        Development Bank of Mauritius
DDO        Deferred Drawdown Option
DPL        development policy loan
DTF        distance to frontier
EPZ        export processing zone
ESW        economic and sector work
EU         European Union
FDI        foreign direct investment
GDP        gross domestic product
GNI        gross national income
IBRD       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICA        Investment Climate Assessment
ICT        information and communications technology
IEG        Independent Evaluation Group
IFC        International Finance Corporation
IMF        International Monetary Fund
LAVMIS     Land Administration Valuation Information Management System
MCIB       Mauritius Credit Information Bureau
MDG        Millennium Development Goal
MFA        Multi-Fiber Agreement
MIGA       Multilateral International Guarantee Agency
MSME       micro-, small, and medium-sized enterprise
MTEF       Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
NLTA       nonlending technical assistance
OECD       Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OECS       Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States
TA         technical assistance
PFM        public financial management
PKI        public key infrastructure
RAS        Reimbursable Advisory Services
ROSC       Report On the Observance of Standards and Codes
SBM        State Bank of Mauritius
SCD        Systematic Country Diagnostic
SME        small and medium-sized Enterprise
SOE        state-owned enterprise
TVET       technical and vocational education and training
UNDP       United Nations Development Programme


All dollar amounts are U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated.



                                                v
Acknowledgments
The Mauritius country case study was prepared by a team led by Florence Charlier and
Chandra Pant with analytic support from Swizen Rubbani. It was conducted under the
guidance and supervision of Nick York (Director) and Mark Sundberg (Manager) and the
overall direction of Caroline Heider (Director-General, Evaluation). Aimée Niane, Yasmin
Angeles, and Gloria Soria provided administrative support. The report also benefitted from
comments provided by peer reviewers Alan Gelb (Center for Global Development), and Jyoti
Shukla.

IEG is grateful to the numerous representatives of the government, private sector entities, and
nongovernmental organizations who provided valuable insights into the World Bank Group’s
program in Mauritius. The team is also thankful to the Bank Group management and country
team members, including both previous and current staff working on Mauritius, who
provided valuable time, information, and feedback to the evaluation team.




                                              vi
Summary
 Highlights
 After nearly two decades of strong economic growth, in 2005 the economy was in difficulties. The loss
 of trade preferences in textiles in 2005, the anticipation of prospective reform to the European Union’s
 sugar protocol for 2006–10, and higher international oil prices had contributed to a slow-down in
 growth, rising unemployment and widening fiscal and current account deficits. A new government was
 elected in 2005 which implemented a series of bold economic reforms (such as the elimination of the
 export processing zone (EPZ) regime, a progressive liberalization of the foreign trade and investment
 regime and simplification of labor laws) to redress the macro-economic imbalances and enhance
 competitiveness to facilitate efficient restructuring of the economy. This was achieved in large
 measure. Good policies also allowed the government to deal effectively with the global financial crisis
 of 2008. Following elections in 2010, a new (and fragile) coalition government was elected which
 emphasized fiscal stimulus and the pace of reforms slowed. Following a period of political instability, a
 new government was elected in 2014 with an overwhelming majority. However, as fiscal pressures
 mount, a sense of policy drift continues, threatening the gains achieved in recent years.
 The World Bank Group supported the government’s reform efforts throughout the evaluation period.
 Support was provided largely in the form of development policy loans (DPLs), complemented by
 analytic work and technical assistance (TA) for capacity building in various parts of the government.
 The World Bank’s strategy was aligned with the government’s priorities during 2005–10, but it failed
 to adapt when the appetite for reforms waned after a new coalition government took office following
 elections in 2010. The World Bank’s strategy was flexible and the program underwent significant
 changes to respond to changing government priorities and unfavorable external conditions. The World
 Bank’s program addressed the twin challenges of building resilience (macro-economic and social) and
 enhancing competitiveness that are common to other small states. Perhaps the World Bank could have
 been more selective in its areas of interventions.
 The World Bank supported a wide range of reforms to enhance competitiveness and promote private
 sector development. Over the whole review period, the Bank Group response helped improve the trade
 policy regime and investment climate (e.g., business and land registration) and contributed to small and
 medium-sized enterprise (SME) development and the regulatory framework of information and
 communications technology (ICT). Its interventions were also useful in developing institutional
 capacity in the roads, energy and water-supply sub-sectors. However the lack of appetite for reforms
 since 2011 may jeopardize the sustainability of some of these achievements. Moreover, Mauritius is
 now losing ground in some sectors (e.g., ICT, regional transhipment in Port Louis port, tourism)
 compared to some neighborhood countries, underscoring the need for accelerating reforms.


The Mauritian economy performed remarkably well since independence. Benefiting from
preferential trade arrangements in terms of guaranteed sugar exports to the European Union and
preferential access to consumer markets for exports of textiles and clothing under the Multi-Fiber
Agreement (MFA), growth was spearheaded by production in EPZ created to facilitate
diversification from sugar production into manufacturing for the export markets. Faced with the
dismantling of preferential trading arrangements starting in the early 2000s, and growing fiscal
and current account imbalances, in 2005 the government initiated a largely successful reform
program to strengthen fiscal consolidation and competitiveness and create a more diversified
manufacturing and services sector. The external financial crisis of 2008–09 was also weathered


                                                    7
successfully. However, by 2010 as the economic picture improved, the impetus for reforms has
slowed. The new government’s ability to implement reforms was also increasingly constrained
by pressures of coalition politics. Unless this trend is reversed, the huge gains made by Mauritius
in recent years may be lost.

Bank Contribution
The Bank Group supported the government’s reform efforts. This support was largely in the
form of fast-disbursing development policy loans (DPLs), which included four Trade and
Competiveness DPLs between FY07 and FY10, and another four in support of private sector
competitiveness and public sector efficiency between FY12 and FY13. Only one investment
project (mainly for road transport, but also including TA for energy and water subsectors) was
approved. Lending was complemented by TA and capacity in various areas (including budget
management, public investment, procurement, social protection programs, trade policy,
investment climate assessment, financial sector assessment, etc.) and analytic studies that formed
the basis for defining some of the reform priorities that were supported by the World Bank. The
World Bank also managed and implemented several Trust Fund operations, including in the
areas of environment, renewable energy and energy conservation.

Assessment of Bank Strategy and its Program in Area of Enhancing
Competitiveness
BANK GROUP STRATEGY

At the start of the program, the World Bank’s strategy was closely aligned with the government’s
strategy. The four pillars of the country partnership strategy (CPS) coincided with the priorities
of the government’s strategy and the program was adapted to changing government priorities
over time. However, the World Bank’s strategy did not adequately recognize, or factor in its
strategy, the waning appetite for reforms after a new government took office in 2010. The CPS
Progress Report (2011) largely continued with the previous government’s priorities, merely
noting the new government’s preference for increased social expenditure’s program was
harmonized with the work of other development partners. The CPS was prepared jointly with the
EU and the African Development Bank (AfDB), and the Agence Française de Développement
(AFD, French Agency for Development) participated in joint missions with the World Bank in
the preparation of DPLs.1 One of the major benefits of the DPLs cited by authorities was that it
provided a forum for coordinating the activities of various sector ministries in pursuit of the
reform agenda, as well as brought all DPs together to focus on the key reforms and their role.

The World Bank’s strategy was also perhaps too ambitious in terms of its coverage given the
limited resources on offer. A narrower but more in-depth and sustained focus on one or two
critical areas (such as education and skills enhancement) may have been more appropriate.
Flexibility was built into the design of the CPS program which changed considerably over the
course of the CPS period as the government’s priorities changed and/or the external environment
deteriorated more than expected. The World Bank’s response was timely and helped the country
in the context of macroeconomic deterioration. The extension from three to four operations of
the original DPL series, and the increase in the amounts under the third DPL helped to
accommodate a deteriorating fiscal and external account balance. Similarly, the Deferred


                                                 8
Drawdown Option (DDO) offered by the World Bank helped to provide better terms of
financing. All in all, this was a good response to a worse than anticipated external situation
caused by sluggish European growth following the 2008 crisis. The same accommodation was
also in evidence in analytic and advisory services (AAA) where the World Bank was quick to
respond to urgent requests from the government for TA and just in time policy advice. By
contrast, the World Bank was perhaps too flexible when it came to accommodating shortfalls in
implementation of prior actions under the DPLs especially in recent years. This flexibility
contributed to maintaining a robust lending program but may have diverted attention from
difficult but necessary reforms. It also damaged the World Bank’s credibility. Prior actions were
also sometimes defined loosely and focused on preparatory first steps and processes that could be
implemented without any reforms taking place on the ground.

Conceptually, the World Bank’s strategy was aligned with the corporate goal of delivering
inclusive growth. However, it did not sufficiently reflect the reality that poorer households (who
were also more likely to be unskilled and less educated) could not get jobs in the fast growing
skill intensive sectors (ICT, financial services) and were likely to fall behind those that were
better educated. In the meanwhile, the burden of reducing the gap between rich and poor would
fall on the social assistance programs and other programs such as the flexi-security system that
provided transitional assistance to eligible workers. While there is some evidence that these
programs may have contributed to reducing the gap, inequality increased during the period.

The strategy and program was also largely consistent with the World Bank’s policy agenda in
small states of reducing vulnerabilities and enhancing competitiveness. The program sought to
strengthen macro-economic and social resilience, but did not address vulnerability to natural
disasters or climate change. One aspect of small states’ that the World Bank did not fully
appreciate was the danger of decision-making being subverted by the fact that (as one senior
interlocutor put it) ‘everyone knowing everyone else’. To be sure, the World Bank’s program
supported reforms to introduce transparency in some limited spheres such as public financial
management and procurement practices. But a more comprehensive approach to open
government decisions to public scrutiny is needed.

THE BANK GROUP’S PROGRAM FOR ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS

The Bank Group provided sustained support for enhancing competitiveness and promoting the
private sector. The World Bank’s engagement in Mauritius was mainly through a series of four
DPLs promoting economic reforms and institution building. Investment lending—about one-
fourth of the portfolio—was unusually low, along with modest IFC involvement. Two sector
investment technical assistance operations were launched to support competitiveness, but were
subsequently canceled early in their implementation and replaced by DPL series. Under the
circumstances, the heavy use of DPLs was appropriate given the government’s early ownership
of wide-ranging reforms, strong institutions, and clear preference of the government to avoid
long disbursement procedures. Financial assistance was complemented by analytic work to
identify constraints and areas for reform and technical assistance.

Incentives and trade policies were reformed to intensify competition by moving toward a largely
tariff-free regime and by scaling back non-tariff barriers. The distinction in the incentive and



                                                 9
regulatory regime between firms in the EPZ and outside it was largely eliminated. Customs and
excise procedures were simplified.

The regulatory environment for businesses was also streamlined by fast-tracking the registration
process, liberalizing hiring of foreign skilled workers, facilitating labor hiring and firing, and
accelerating the process of closing down un-viable firms. Land registration was also made easier
and quicker. These were positive steps and contributed to Mauritius improving its ranking in the
Ease of Doing Business from 32nd out of 175 countries in 2006 to 28th out of 189 countries in
2014. Bank activities to support labor reforms were an area of weaknesses in the overall Bank
program that should have received greater attention given the emphasis on support for policy
reform and competitiveness in Bank support.

Limited efforts were made by the Bank Group to improve the quality and spread of education at
all levels and improve vocational training to close the skills gap. Supported by the World Bank, a
National Education Strategy was adopted in 2010 to increase output and improve quality at all
levels of education. The World Bank also supported the development and implementation of a
comprehensive reform of the pre-vocational stream aimed at increasing retention and enhancing
the quality of education outcomes at that level. However, these initiatives have had no
appreciable impact on education quality and the vocational training system remains small,
fragmented and flawed.

The Bank Group was not a major player in the financial sector. The World Bank supported
reforms to facilitate the use of movable and intangible assets as collateral and the establishment
of a modern movable collateral registry. Necessary amendments to laws were drafted but these
have yet to be adopted by Parliament. Also, with the World Bank’ support the coverage of the
Mauritius Credit Information Bureau was expanded to include not just banking institutions and
insurance and leasing companies, but also non-financial institutions and utility companies. It is
still too early to assess the impact of these measures on the quality of credit decisions. Despite its
long involvement, the Bank Group’s proposal for transforming the Development Bank of
Mauritius (DBM) into a commercial bank with private sector participation is yet to see the light
of day. An innovative market driven platform implemented by the government for providing
financing to SMEs for business development services, can partly be credited to the World Bank’s
design of an initial scheme under one of its project. The IFC helped build capacity and trained
staff in selected commercial banks to expand their SME segment. This assistance was welcomed.

In the area of infrastructure, the World Bank’s focus was mainly on the ICT sector where it
supported institutional and policy reforms to attract foreign investment in ICT infrastructure and
improve broadband connectivity to enhance the competitiveness of Mauritian firms. The World
Bank provided valuable assistance in drafting the National Broadband Policy aimed to facilitate
large private sector investment in broad-band networks, and to signal a predictable long term
business environment in the sector. The ICT Act was amended to bring licensing and regulation
closer to international best standards. However, amendments to the Act to create a framework for
spectrum auctions, spectrum sharing and secondary spectrum trading have yet to be ratified by
Parliament. To promote e-commerce, the World Bank supported revisions to the legal framework
governing e-commerce, e-legislation and online activity, especially with respect to data
protection. As a result of some of these measures, the prices of fixed broadband and mobile
broadband services have fallen considerably. The ICT sector has been growing strongly and the


                                                 10
share of exports of ICT services in total services exports has more than doubled between 2007
and 2013. However, in more recent years, Mauritius failed to amend its licensing act to improve
spectrum management and as a result broadband services price remains relatively high and
Mauritius is now lagging behind more liberal markets in neighboring countries such as Kenya.

In the transport sector, the World Bank funded the up-grading and routine maintenance of an
important section of the road network, which may have helped reduce travel time and improve
road safety. The Bank Group also provided useful TA to strengthen capacity in the Ministry and
the Road Transport Authority. In the ports sector, the IFC was involved over a prolonged period,
in identifying a private strategic partner for Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd. (CHCL) to
improve port operations. However, due in part to lack of government commitment, no agreement
was reached with the private partner and CHCL was retained as the operator, with potentially
damaging consequences for competitiveness. In the energy sector, the Bank Group played a
small role in promoting renewable sources of energy and energy conservation, as well as in
strengthening institutional capacity in the Ministry of renewable energy and the Central
Electricity Board. In the water sector, the World Bank financed the development of a Water
Sector Master Plan and a study on the drainage system. It also funded capacity building in the
Pollution Control Laboratory. While all these initiatives were useful to varying degrees, their
impact on enhancing competitiveness was limited.

The Role of IFC
The IFC’s investments were limited largely to the financial sector. One reason for their limited
presence was that interlocutors believed that funding from other commercial sources were
cheaper than IFC resources. There was also a sense that decision-making in IFC was too slow.
However, interlocutors were highly appreciative of the quality of technical expertise of IFC staff.
In some cases (DBM restructuring, port project), there was a perception that the IFC’s advisory
services and recommendations did not factor in political preferences.

Conclusions and Lessons
Based on its contribution to various dimensions, the World Bank Group’s performance in
enhancing competitiveness was moderately successful. The reforms promoted by the World
Bank contributed to improving Mauritius’ ranking in terms of various global indicators such as
the Ease of Doing Business Index, the Trade Logistics Performance Index, and the WEF’s
Global Competitiveness Index. These improvements were also reflected in better outcomes in
terms of increased foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows and greater diversification of exports.
However, private domestic investment still remains sluggish, and competitiveness remains
constrained by shortages of skilled labor and quality infrastructure services (e.g., in ports). More
work is needed to identify the remaining constraints to private investment and to implement the
necessary reforms. On a broader level, the World Bank’s strategy was aligned with the
government’s reform priorities, especially during 2005–10. The strategy was flexible in design
and practice. It also addressed specific vulnerabilities of small states and sought to strengthen
macro-economic and social resilience. But there were short-comings. First, the World Bank’s
strategy and program were too ambitious. Perhaps it should have focused on a few critical areas
(such as skills enhancement and education) and ensured concrete building blocks were in place
for narrowing the skills gap over time. Second, the World Bank failed to recognize the


                                                 11
government’s waning commitment to reforms after 2010 and did not adapt its strategy
adequately to the new reality even when the quality of policy dialogue was deteriorating and
there were clear signs of a slow-down in reforms. A better understanding of political economy
issues, including specific features of small states (such as a more fraternal environment where
everyone knows everyone else) may have helped in designing the program better. Finally, the
World Bank was perhaps too accommodating when agreed upon policy reforms were either
postponed or shelved. Some red lines would have helped force the pace of reforms.

LESSONS

Lesson 1: The World Bank could make a greater effort to understand political economy
issues, including identifying reform champions or opponents of politically contentious
reforms, in order to better incorporate political risks into reforms, especially in coalition
governments. The decision to extend the CPS in 2010, was a missed opportunity to reflect the
slowdown in reforms after a new coalition was formed. This would have made more sense to
prepare a new CPS rather than trying to adjust the program through ad hoc bilateral dialogue and
actions that are insufficient to meet targeted objectives. The World Bank also failed to properly
grasp the political risk of a program depending on the leadership of very few policy makers. A
political analysis piece at the time of the election could have generated insight into government
ownership of the reform agenda.

A detailed political economy analysis could have served as a base for monitoring of political
developments and risks to reform. This analysis would help (i) identify for key reforms policy
makers willing to fight for it, recognize the risks to the reform agenda of failed ownership, and
based on these findings prioritize and sequence the supported policy agenda accordingly; (ii)
gauge the degree of ownership and progress on targeted outcomes at the progress report stage to
thereby inform more accurately and honestly revisions to the on-going program.

If there is a change of government over the CPS period, the Bank Group would prepare a new
full or interim strategy to reflect the priorities of a new government if the lack of political
support make the former strategy obsolete. The World Bank could still continue advocacy work
through policy dialogue on ‘dropped outcomes’ related to key reforms for which government
support has waned (see lesson 4).

Lesson 2: The Bank Group needs to ensure the objectives and scope of the Bank Group’s
strategy and program are commensurate with the size of its program and be highly
selective in the areas it decides to support. The analysis conducted in this case study points
toward two major areas where the Bank Group could focus its work together with other DPs to
increase competitiveness: (i) improving the legal and regulatory framework to promote public-
private partnerships and improve transport and ICT infrastructure; (ii) overhauling the education
system to widen its base and improve quality to help meet the shortages of skilled labor
constraining the growth of the high skill, high technology economy of the future. The Bank
Group should continue to take a pro-active stance in promoting trade, investment and exchange
of ideas at the regional level. These suggestions would need to be further confirmed by the
findings of the Country Learning Report (CLR) and Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
(under preparation) which aim at informing this selectivity choice



                                                12
Lesson 3: The World Bank needs to remain flexible in the design of its program and be
prepared to modify it in size and substance if the external environment changes or
priorities of the government change. However, slippages in implementation of policy
conditionality (as in prior actions) are to be accommodated only in exceptional circumstances.
Prior actions in DPLs need to be precisely worded. They need to be crafted to ensure that there is
a clear logical chain between the prior action and the ultimate objective of reform and also that
this chain is aligned with the programmatic cycle of the DPL.

Lesson 4: The World Bank could take advantage of the new Systematic Country Diagnostic
(SCD) to reposition itself as a more visible and credible partner of the Mauritian
government and foster demand for good policies. The World Bank needs to make more effort
in informing public debates, sharing other countries’ experience, organizing forums to discuss
policy trade-offs on national development policies including on supporting state-owned
enterprise (SOE) reform, improving environmental resilience and supporting capacity building of
key stakeholders—government, parliament and civil society organizations. Brainstorming
sessions on key critical challenges could be a very effective mechanism for policy reform.

Lesson 5: Demand for innovative advisory services typically exceeds what can be financed
through RAS. The introduction of a programmatic joint economic analytic program could
provide room for a more sustained and adapted sector policy dialogue,2 help maintain strategic
focus and identify interconnected activities. In Mauritius, peer reviewing by Bank staff and
experts of important work undertaken by line ministries was found useful and could be
formalized. Embedding expertise in line ministries for a reasonable length of time was seen to be
useful for building in-house capacity.

1
 The Results Matrix in the CPS outlined the objectives and outcomes expected from the programs of the EU and the
World Bank. Differences in how to respond to the 2008–09 financial crisis led to the abandonment of the joint
Results Matrix.




                                                      13
1. Country Context and Purpose of the Evaluation
1.1      The Mauritian development experience since the country’s independence is a rare story
of a successful transformation of a poor, one crop economy into an upper-middle-income,
diversified, manufacturing and service-oriented open economy. This transformation happened in
a relatively short period of time, and it happened in the face of (or maybe because of?) serious
adverse external shocks to the economy. It also happened without recourse to exceptional
financing from the International Monetary Fund (IMF). This Country Case Study evaluates the
World Bank Group’s activities that seek to improve competitiveness over FY07–15, an
important component of the reform program in this period. This evaluation is part of a cluster of
country evaluations of small states, also including the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States
(OECS) countries, selected Pacific islands, Capo-Verde, Djibouti and Seychelles.

Mauritius Development Challenges
COUNTRY BACKGROUND

1.2     Mauritius, an island nation covering 2000 square kilometers with a population of about
1.2 million, acquired independence from the British in 1968. It is located in the Indian Ocean
about 2000 km off the south east coast of Africa and comprises the island of Mauritius and
several outlying islands including Rodrigues and Agalega.1 The country is rated among the top
10 percent of countries most exposed to natural disasters such as floods, cyclones and climate
change. In recent years, threats from piracy in the Western Indian Ocean are an added
vulnerability.

1.3    Mauritius has a multi-party democracy in which the President is the Head of State and the
Prime Minister is head of government. For most of its recent history, there has been a large
degree of political stability, with power shifting between two parties, the Labor Party (currently
headed by Navin Ramgoolam) and the MSM (led by Anerood Jugnauth). This situation changed
in 2010 when elections ushered a new era of fragile coalition politics and uncertainties, which
slowed down decision making and economic reforms.2 A new coalition government was elected
with an overwhelming majority in end 2014. However, the momentum for reforms has not yet
recovered.

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS

1.4     Mauritius has done remarkably well economically. At independence, the country was
poor (with a nominal per capita income of $260) and largely dependent on sugar production
making it highly vulnerable to cyclones. Between 1970 and 2000, the annual income of the
average Mauritian increased tenfold in nominal terms as the economy successfully diversified
away from sugar and into manufacturing (mainly textiles) and services. This growth was
spearheaded by production in the export processing zones EPZs, a competitive exchange rate and
by savings and investment rates exceeding 20 percent of GDP. During this period, Mauritius
benefited from preferential trade arrangements in terms of guaranteed sugar exports to the
European Union and preferential access to consumer markets for exports of textiles and clothing
under the MFA.



                                               15
1.5     Mauritius continued to perform well even as preferential trade agreements were
progressively eliminated from the early 2000s. Exports of textiles and sugar were badly affected
when the MFA was terminated in end 2004 and sugar prices were cut by the EU starting in
2007.3 The government responded by further liberalizing the economy, reduced import tariffs,
simplified the tax system and labor regulations, and created a more conducive business
environment. These reforms, prudent macro-economic policies and international financial
support enabled the country to weather the severe terms of trade shocks that hit the economy
between 2002 and 2006 (due to the threefold increase in price of imported oil), and the sluggish
growth in Europe (its main export market) following the financial crisis in 2008. Despite these
shocks, the economy grew at an average annual rate of 3.8 percent during 2005–13 (and 5.3
percent per year since independence). The transformation of a low income agriculture based
economy into a diversified upper middle income country based largely on tourism, textiles,
seafood, sugar and ICT and financial services is no mean achievement.4

POVERTY, UNEMPLOYMENT, INEQUALITY, AND MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS

1.6     Poverty has declined dramatically since independence. In 1968, most of the population
lived on less than $1 a day. Today, extreme poverty based on $ 1.25 per day is negligible.
According to national statistics, absolute poverty, defined as percentage of population in
households living with less than R 3821 per adult equivalent in 2007 prices, was down to 6.9
percent in 2012.5

1.7     This progressive decline in absolute poverty since independence has, however, been
accompanied by an increase in inequality in recent years. The Gini coefficient based on
household disposable income increased from 0.388 to 0.414 between 2007 and 2012. Other
indices, such as the increasing gap between consumption expenditures of the richest decile and
the poorest decile of the population, confirm this trend. However, Mauritius still remains among
the top 25 percent of middle income countries in terms of Gini equality.

1.8     Rising unemployment also poses an emerging threat. The unemployment rate has risen
from 3 percent in 1991 to 8 percent in 2013. The unemployment rate among the youth (16–24
years) is as high as 25 percent and youth unemployment is 40 percent of total unemployment.6
Twenty one percent of the unemployed come from poorer households.7

1.9     Mauritius has made good progress in social indicators and has achieved most of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). There is universal primary education, and health
conditions of the population have improved significantly. Most of the population has access to
safe drinking water. Life expectancy has increased from 62 years at the time of independence in
1968 to 73 years (2005), and infectious diseases such as malaria, polio, diphtheria, typhoid and
cholera have been virtually eradicated. The only MDG which is unlikely to be met is the
reduction by two-thirds of the infant mortality rate.

EMERGING ECONOMIC CHALLENGES8

1.10 While the economy has performed well over the past few decades, the recent slowdown
in growth, rising unemployment especially among the youth, and increasing inequality pose
serious challenges for the future. To sustain economic growth and remain competitive, Mauritius



                                               16
will need to do a number of things. In the short term, it will be important to continue to maintain
an open economy; further improve the regulatory environment for business; improve efficiency
in trade logistics and enhance the quality and operational efficiency of infrastructure services,
especially ports and air-transport. There still remains a considerable gap between Mauritius and
the best performers in all these areas suggesting much scope for economic growth through
efficiency gains. However, for sustainable and equitable growth in the medium term, the key lies
promoting the use of new technologies and in improving the quality of education, starting from
the primary to the tertiary levels, and ensuring its accessibility to poor families. This will be the
only way the country can continue to compete internationally and ensure that the benefits of
growth are shared equitably.

1.11 Given the country’s openness and its vulnerability to natural calamities, measures to
strengthen resilience will have to remain a priority. Fiscal consolidation through better
management of public resources and public debt, and improved revenue generation must remain
top of the agenda to not only provide the fiscal space for a buffer against catastrophic events, but
also to meet increased demands on public resources from an ageing population. Reforms to
improve governance of the public sector at all levels will remain essential not only to provide
better quality social programs and social assistance, particularly to those most vulnerable, and
reduce wasteful expenditures, but also to strengthen the state’s capacity to implement disaster
management and relief programs.

Evaluation Objective and Report Structure
1.12 The World Bank has been supporting Mauritius since its independence. In the 1980s, The
World Bank provided quick-disbursing loans to accelerate implementation of macro-economic
and sectoral reforms. Thereafter the World Bank has focused on project lending (including for
transport and financial sector). Policy based budget support operations became the focus of
Bank’s assistance after 2007–08 as the country struggled to cope with adverse terms of trade
shocks following the oil price increases during this period and the economic downturn following
the international financial crisis in 2008. Throughout, the World Bank has also complemented its
financial assistance with AAA and capacity building support in a wide range of areas including
trade, investment climate assessments, public financial management, investment planning,
reforms of social assistance program, education reforms and SME development. The World
Bank also managed and implemented several Trust Fund operations, including in the areas of
environment, renewable energy and energy conservation. The IFC and MIGA have played a
limited role thus far. Signaling a deeper level of engagement with the country, the World Bank
established a liaison office in Port Louis in 2007.

Evaluation Objective

1.13 This Country Case Study evaluates the World Bank Group’s operations in Mauritius from
FY05–13. It covers one completed Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY05–13, which was
been further extended until FY15 in the 2011 CPS Progress Report (CPSPR)to align with the
elections of end 2014.

1.14 As noted earlier, this report is part of the cluster country program evaluation (CPE) for
small states. Each CPE assesses whether the World Bank Group assistance supported relevant


                                                 17
objectives; if it achieved them effectively and efficiently; and whether institutional development
impact was achieved in a sustainable way. The approach paper has defined two main broad
pillars that will guide the evaluation to assess how Bank Group activities contributed to (1)
improve macro/environmental/social resilience and (2) foster sustainable and inclusive growth.

1.15 In additional to a group of islands that were selected in the Caribbean (the OECS
countries) and in the Pacific, four African countries have been selected for this evaluation,
namely Cabo Verde, Djibouti, Mauritius, and Seychelles. These country case studies provide an
assessment of selected part of the World Bank program over the evaluation period. The case
studies on Cabo Verde, Mauritius, and Seychelles seek to assess how Bank Group activities
foster sustainable and inclusive growth (Pillar 2) while the Djibouti case study reviews measures
that were implemented to improve social and environmental resilience (under Pillar 1).

1.16 The main objective of this report is therefore to assess the contribution of the World
Bank’s assistance program in Mauritius during FY07–15 in enhancing competiveness and
promoting private sector development. This is only one part, though a very important part, of the
World Bank’s assistance program in Mauritius during this period. The World Bank’s role in
strengthening the economy’s resilience to external economic shocks and natural calamities is not
evaluated in this report, except for its support for diversification of its external trade, an
important aspect of risk management. A short summary of the Bank Group contribution under
Pillar 1 is provided in appendix D.

Report Structure

1.17 Chapter 1 provides a brief introduction to the economy and recent economic
developments, including progress in reducing poverty and meeting MDGs. Key challenges are
highlighted. It also includes a brief description of the Bank Group’s role in the country thus far,
and presents the evaluation objective and structure of the report.

1.18 Chapter 2 describes the World Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy during 2007–15,
locating it within the ambit of the country’s economic development objective and strategy in this
period. (Details on the operational programs are provided in appendix B.) The rest of the chapter
gives a broad assessment of Bank activities at a “macro level”. For example, what was the scope
of the World Bank’s assistance program? What were the major areas of focus? Was the World
Bank’s overall country strategy aligned to the government’s strategic objectives? Was it
harmonized with the plans and programs of other DPs? Were these priorities appropriate in the
light of the World Bank’s analysis of the economy and its past experience in the country and
elsewhere? Was the strategy tailored to the specific features of small states? Was the strategy
flexible to allow for unforeseen events? Was there an appropriate monitoring framework? These
are some of the questions addressed in this chapter.

1.19 Chapter 3 describes and evaluates the Bank Group’s contribution to enhancing
competition and promoting the private sector. It includes the World Bank’s role in promoting
competition through liberalization of international trade; improving trade logistics, creating a
level playing field between different sectors; improving the business environment to encourage
domestic and foreign investment; strengthening the financial sector to improve access to credit;
addressing the scarcity of skilled labor; improving the supply of critical infrastructure such as


                                                 18
telecommunications, electricity and transport; and promoting SMEs. For each of these areas,
various sections of the chapter describe what was done through Bank Group interventions, and
assess to what extent these interventions were successful in terms of delivering what they set out
to achieve. Based on this analysis, the chapter reviews the overall macro impact on
competitiveness of all these interventions and to what extent they have contributed to improved
export performance and increased private investment in the economy.

1.20 Chapter 4 summarizes the conclusions and provides some broad lessons from the
Mauritian experience and a set of lessons.

1
 Mauritius is multi-religious (Hinduism is the major religion, almost 50 percent of the population) and multi-ethnic,
but a secular state. English and French are the official languages and Creole is the native language.
2
 Snap elections were called in December 2014 by the ruling coalition government (headed by Navin Ramgoolam of
the Labor Party) seeking to amend the Constitution to strengthen the role of the President at the expense of the
Prime Minister. However, this was opposed by a new political alliance (called Alliance of the People) headed by
Anerood Jugnauth of the MSM which won the elections by an overwhelming majority.
3
  The sugar protocol ended in 2009 and the coming abolishment of EU sugar-import quotas from African, Caribbean
and Pacific (ACP) is expected to reduce as of 2017 prices for Mauritius sugar 45 percent below the 2013 price
(source SCD, box 5).
4
 At the time of independence, agriculture, mainly sugar cane production, accounted for more than 22 percent of
Mauritius’ GDP; by 2013 economic transformatio n has brought it to merely 3 percent, compensated by a boom in
manufacturing in the 1980s and the subsequent development of the services sector.
5
  Mauritius does not have a national poverty line. However, on the basis of Household Budget Survey (HBS) data,
the poverty situation in the country is assessed using the relative poverty measurement based on monetary approach.
The Relative Poverty Line (RPL) is set at half of the median monthly household income per adult equivalent. At the
last HBS in 2012, the RPL was estimated at MUR 5,652 for a one adult member household compared to MUR 3,821
in 2006/07.
6
 Based on the 2012 Continuous Multi-Purpose Household Survey data, the unemployment rate among youth (16–24
years) is estimated at 25 percent.
7
  Figures shown are based on the 2012 Household Budget Survey which defines poor households as those living in
relative poverty (relative poverty line defined as half median monthly household income per adult equivalent —Rs
5,652 in 2012).
8
    This section draws on the recently completed Systemic Country Diagnostic (SCD).




                                                         19
2. The World Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (FY07–
15)
2.1     The World Bank’s assistance strategy during this period was articulated in the country
partnership strategy (CPS) document of October 2006. It covered the period 2007 to 2013. A
CPS Progress Report (CPSPR) in April 2011 adjusted the World Bank’s strategy and program in
line with the priorities of a new government that took office in 2010. It also extended the
program until FY15 to align with fresh elections that took place in end 2014.

Context
2.2     Despite satisfactory growth performance since independence, serious challenges were
emerging by early to mid-2000s. The preferential trade agreements were expected to wind down
starting in 2005–06, which were likely to have an adverse impact on exports of sugar and
textiles, the country’s main exports.1 Already in anticipation of these changes, private investment
in these sectors was being cut back and production reduced, resulting in slowdown in growth and
rising unemployment. Growth in knowledge intensive sectors (ICT, financial services) had not
picked up sufficiently. The slowdown in overall growth in turn exacerbated the fiscal deficit and
public debt increased to almost 70 percent of GDP. The widening fiscal deficit and high public
debt were narrowing the fiscal space to address external (weather, terms of trade, world
economic slowdown) and internal (slow growth) vulnerabilities.

The Government’s Response
2.3     To address these challenges, the government laid out a reform program in its 2006
budget. The reform program had four pillars/objectives: (i) Fiscal Consolidation and Improved
Public Sector Efficiency; (ii) Enhanced Trade Competitiveness; (iii) Improved Investment
Climate; and (iv) Greater Democratization of the Economy through participation, social
inclusion and sustainability. The government’s program emphasized the need for diversification
toward new sectors and markets, improved efficiency and productivity at the firm level, speeding
up infrastructure projects and diversifying skills to conform to a knowledge-based economy. To
achieve these goals, it presented a road map to liberalize the economy, improve the performance
of the public sector, reform the tax base, promote private investment and improve social
programs.

FISCAL CONSOLIDATION AND IMPROVED PUBLIC SECTOR EFFICIENCY

2.4    The objective was to reduce the government’s fiscal deficit and public debt and re-orient
expenditures toward the government’s priorities. To achieve this, tax exemptions were to be
narrowed and the structure of direct taxes was to be reformed to improve incentives for
investment and employment. The government’s Medium Term Expenditure Framework was to
be used to anchor annual budgets within an aggregate multi-year framework and enable the
government to set priorities and resolve budgetary trade-offs. Capital spending and recurrent
expenditures were to be closely scrutinized to reduce waste and improve their efficiency.




                                                20
IMPROVING TRADE COMPETITIVENESS

2.5     The government’s program included changes in the incentive regime as well as measures
to reduce cost of essential services to improve competitiveness. A three-year program to
liberalize tariffs and turn Mauritius into a duty-free island was aimed at levelling the playing
field between producing for the domestic and export markets. In addition, the incentive regime
for EPZ and non-EPZ firms was to be unified. The program to reduce cost of essential
infrastructure services included steps to improve efficiency of telecom services, liberalizing air
access, improving ports infrastructure and strengthening financial institutions.

IMPROVING INVESTMENT CLIMATE

2.6     To make Mauritius one of the top 10 business friendly countries in the world, the
government proposed to streamline the regulatory framework to make it more transparent and
reduce the time and effort it took to start a new business. More flexibility was to be introduced in
the labor market by incentivizing workers to move to viable activities and businesses and by
modifying the minimum wage setting mechanism to link wage revisions to changes in labor
productivity. The system of work permits for foreign workers was to be modified to make it
easier to hire skilled workers.

DEMOCRATIZING THE ECONOMY

2.7     The government initiated an Empowerment Program to assist the unemployed by
providing wage subsidies for on-the-job training or retraining for 20,000 unemployed and
redeployed workers over the next five years. It also included special programs for women who
were particularly affected by the downsizing of the textile sector. Other components were
planned to make land available for small entrepreneurs, provide social housing and increase
financial and technical support for SMEs. The program also supported education and training to
broaden workers’ access to jobs and increase the skills base available to employers. The tourism
and ICT sectors were identified as priority areas for skills development and upgrading. The
program also included measures (such as training of teachers, revision of curricula) for
improving the quality of education at all levels. To ensure sustainability of social spending,
social subsidy programs were to be re-configured to target income support to the needy, and the
pension age increased progressively from 60 currently to 65 years. Another objective was to
ensure access to high quality health care for all.

2.8    In August 2010, a new coalition government modified the reform program to take
account of the continuing slow growth in the EU. The revised program placed greater emphasis
on social programs and included a new fiscal stimulus package to stimulate growth.

The World Bank’s Strategy and Program
OBJECTIVES AND STRATEGY

2.9    The main objective of the CPS was to help the government deal with short-term trade
shocks and facilitate the transition to a more competitive and sophisticated economy while
minimizing negative social impacts. The World Bank’s strategy was closely aligned with the



                                                 21
government’s and the starting points of the CPS were the four pillars of the government’s
strategy.

2.10 To promote fiscal consolidation, the World Bank’s assistance was to be aimed at
improving the quality and effectiveness of public expenditures by making the Medium Term
Expenditure Framework (MTEF) operational and enhancing debt management policies and
capacity. Other possible areas of intervention were improvements of the tax system and reform
of the state-owned enterprise sector to increase its efficiency and reduce the fiscal risks.

2.11 Trade competitiveness was to be promoted by reducing protection through tariffs and
non-tariff barriers; supporting policy reforms aimed at reducing the anti-export bias and for
creating a level playing field; promoting regional trade; and by policies and programs to reduce
the cost of critical infrastructure such as transport and telecommunication and credit. The IFC
was expected to contribute to investments in infrastructure.

2.12 Improving the investment climate was a third component of the Bank Group’s program,
where the Bank Group supported policy changes to eliminate labor market rigidities and
establish a more business friendly legal and regulatory environment. The IFC was expected to
continue to provide advice on the investment climate, as well as invest selectively in the financial
sector and tourism. The MIGA was expected to strengthen investor confidence by providing
political risk guarantees.

2.13 In support of the fourth pillar of democratizing the economy, the Bank Group expected to
help with improving the efficiency of the social assistance programs for the needy; promoting the
inclusion of vulnerable groups; developing an education system that supplies the necessary skills
for a modernizing economy; and protecting the environment.

THE WORLD BANK’S PROGRAM

2.14 The World Bank’s support was provided through a combination of loans and AAA.
While the CPS provided the broad contours of the assistance program, specific operations were
to be firmed up in the context of annual business plans prepared jointly with the government to
synchronize with its budget preparation process. While this process did not work as envisaged,
there was sufficient flexibility in the program as reflected in the significant divergences between
the planned program and the actual program of assistance (see below). Originally, the CPS
envisaged six budget support and four sector investment lending operations. Instead, the World
Bank delivered eight DPLs and only one investment operation. The description of the operational
program of the Bank Group including the list of projects and AAA that were implemented during
the period is provided in appendix B.

THE IFC PROGRAM

2.15 The IFC focused its interventions on three key sectors: infrastructure, tourism and
financial services. Its activities were targeted at supporting the mobilization of FDI in these
sectors; introducing climate change mitigation and cleaner production standards and best
practices; promoting South-South transactions; and improving access to finance for SMEs.




                                                 22
2.16 The IFC supported funding and capacity building activities for SMEs. Since 2009, IFC
provided a global trade-line guarantee to two local commercial banks to act as confirming banks
to second tier banks in Africa and the Indian Ocean region. In 2010, IFC committed and
disbursed a $75 million senior loan to State Bank of Mauritius (SBM) to support the bank’s
regional focus and strengthening its balance sheet. To support its investment, IFC also provided a
year-long program in capacity building and training of SME loan officers and owner/managers,
which was recently completed. In February 2012, IFC committed 10 million Euros in a private
equity fund that invests in private sector businesses in the Indian Ocean region, with a view to
increase regional cooperation and cross-border investments.

2.17 Following the government‘s decision in August 2011 to transform the DBM into a full-
fledged micro-, small, and medium-sized enterprise (MSME) bank, the services of the IFC were
retained to carry out a due diligence assessment of the DBM, provide advisory services to
support the transformation and identify a strategic partner engaged in such type of specialized
banking activities. However, the IFC’s recommendation to privatize DBM was not acceptable to
the government and no further work was done by the IFC on this project.

2.18 The IFC was also retained as advisor to the government to identify a strategic partner for
the Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd so as to improve its functioning and mobilize foreign
investment. However, after the 2010 elections, there was reluctance from partners of the ruling
alliance to have profound changes in the sector given the political capital and vote bank at stake.
There was also opposition from trade unions that feared loss of jobs. As a result, the government
decided not to engage a private strategic partner and retained CHCL as the sole operator. IFC has
no further involvement in the sector.

Broad Assessment of Strategy and Program
2.19 This paragraph provides an overall assessment of the Bank engagement in Mauritius,
attempting in particular to respond to the following questions: Were the World Bank’s strategic
objectives in the country aligned with government’s development objectives and approach as
well as the overall Bank Group corporate objectives? Did the strategy include a good
understanding of the political economy and potential risks? Is the strategy focusing on the more
critical issues and customized to meet small states needs? Was the result framework adequate to
monitor results? Was World Bank strategy flexible in design and in practice to respond to
shocks? Is the Bank Group using adequate instruments to help the countries meet targeted
objectives, including strengthening institutional development and building capacity? Was the
Bank Group able to lever its impact through good partnership with other donors?

ALIGNING BANK GROUP OBJECTIVES WITH GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGY

2.20 The World Bank’s goals and strategy were broadly in line with the objectives and
strategy of the government. The World Bank did have reservations about the government’s
idea of promoting some sectors (such as IT, financial services, seafood) by giving special
incentives which the World Bank believed were distortionary and not likely to be effective.
However, the World Bank was pragmatic its approach, recognizing that some special incentives
for a limited duration may be unavoidable in the circumstances. However, its focus was on other
reforms creating a modern regulatory and incentive environment for business.


                                                23
2.21 The strategic alignment between the government’s and the World Bank’s strategy was
reflected in the World Bank’s choice of its four pillars which were identical to the priorities of
the government’s program. This broad alignment and wide coverage had the advantage of
comprehensiveness. However, in view of the limited resources available to implement the
program, the agenda was perhaps too ambitious.2 Moreover, because resources were spread too
thinly, some critical areas (such as the quality and accessibility of education and skills
development) may not have got the attention they deserved.3

2.22 Conceptually, the CPS strategy was aligned with the Bank Group’s corporate goals of
reducing poverty and increasing shared prosperity in a sustainable manner. Improving the
business climate and strengthening competitiveness would generate faster growth and jobs.
Fiscal consolidation would allow more resources to be allocated to social programs by cutting
waste, and improve their delivery. Strengthening the social protection programs would better
protect the poor. And better education and skills training would allow the poor to get better jobs
with better pay. However, there were sufficient grounds to suggest that these results would not
follow automatically. Some of the high growth sectors (ICT, financial services) were skill and
knowledge intensive and their growth disproportionately benefited the better off population who
had access to better education. Conversely, contracting sectors (agriculture, textiles) had a large
proportion of unskilled workers who came largely from poorer families. Thus, by itself, growth
was not likely to be inclusive. Even if the World Bank had aggressively addressed the problems
of quality and accessibility of education, it was only to be expected that gains from better quality
education and skills would emerge only in the medium term. In the meanwhile, the burden of
reducing the gap between rich and poor would fall on the social assistance programs and other
programs such as the flexi-security system that provided transitional assistance to eligible
workers. While there is some evidence that these programs may have contributed to reducing the
gap, inequality increased during the period.4

MEETING SPECIFIC SMALL STATES CHALLENGES

2.23 The Mauritian economy is one of the most open economies in the world and highly
dependent on international trade and capital flows. This makes it vulnerable to external economic
shocks such as increase in oil prices (Mauritius is entirely dependent on oil imports for its energy
needs) and sluggish growth in its main export markets, especially Europe. The economy is also
highly vulnerable to weather and natural disasters such as floods and cyclones. The small size of
the country also complicates the politics and governance in unique ways. The ‘everyone knows
everyone else’ characteristic makes it more difficult for the government to implement tough
decisions, and makes the political system (and governance in general) more prone to nepotism,
ethnic considerations and non-transparent functioning. Did the World Bank’s strategy and
program reflect these vulnerabilities, and how did it assist the country cope with the shocks?

2.24 The World Bank’s strategy incorporated several elements that sought to improve the
country’s resilience to external economic shocks. The Bank Group supported the government’s
efforts to diversify its exports, both in terms of products and services (away from textiles and
sugar toward ICT, financial services, fisheries) as well as markets (away from Europe toward
Asia and Africa). Considerable success was achieved in this effort (see chapter 3 for details).
Also, the World Bank supported the government’s fiscal consolidation agenda to create fiscal
space and build up international reserves to better cope with emergencies. Finally, to strengthen


                                                 24
social resilience, the World Bank supported reforms in the social protection programs and active
labor market policies to help those most vulnerable to economic downturns. Some of these
measures are summarized in appendix D.

2.25 The World Bank responded flexibly and quickly to the government’s request for
additional financial resources to cope with the adverse external economic environment in 2007–
09. The support was provided mainly in the form of DPLs, including one with a Deferred
Drawdown Option (which was immediately utilized to cover the financing gap). The World
Bank’s flexible and quick response was also instrumental in getting other development partners
to also extend additional financial support.

2.26 While the strategy and program did address the economy’s vulnerabilities, there was
nothing very unique in the World Bank’s response in Mauritius. Most of the elements of the
World Bank’s reform program, and the form of financing, could be found in any developing
country with which the World Bank was actively engaged.5

2.27 The World Bank’s engagement could also have benefited from a better understanding of
the political economy issues that influenced the design of the government’s economic program
and its implementation. This would have helped the World Bank avoid some of the flip-flops in
implementing its program and better tailor its expectations, especially when a new coalition
government was elected in 2010.6 To be sure, the World Bank’s program supported reforms to
introduce transparency in some limited spheres such as public financial management and
procurement practices. But a more comprehensive approach to open government decisions to
public scrutiny is needed (including for example in recruitment in SOEs) in small economies
such as Mauritius.

MONITORING PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION

2.28 The original results matrix identified a wide range of “possible strategy outcomes” that
were to be pursued jointly with the EU. However as the two institutions programs diverged in
response to the 2009 crisis, it became clear that a joint program was no longer feasible. The
results matrix was revised in the CPSPR to reflect this change. Nevertheless, the revised results
matrix still listed 21 strategic outcomes for the World Bank’s program with 22 intermediate
outcome indicators. As admitted in the CPS CLR (draft), only a few had quantitative outcome
indicators to monitor progress and fewer still included baselines and targets. In some cases, the
links between the expected outcomes and the World Bank program was weak. In some other
areas, the outcomes did not address the core issue. For example in education, the quality issue is
not even mentioned.

2.29 Moreover, several prior actions under the DPLs were sometimes in the form of
intermediate processing steps (such as preparing a draft report, or preparing some terms of
reference, or getting cabinet approval for a process etc.) that had a tenuous link with the ultimate
objective of the reforms. While this may be acceptable at the start of the process of reforms,
more concrete action on the ground should have followed in subsequent interventions. Very
often, these actions were certainly not sufficient to deliver the final outcome targeted in the
strategy.7




                                                 25
BUILDING FLEXIBILITY IN THE STRATEGY

2.30 One of the lessons from experience with the 2002 CAS was that the Bank Group should
be flexible in its strategy and program to adjust to the extreme vulnerability to external shocks.
This flexibility was built into the program design. The World Bank responded flexibly to the
government’s changing priorities in response to the international crisis. The World Bank’s
response was timely and helped the country in the face of the degradation of the macro situation.
Thus for example, the original DPL series was extended from 3 to 4 operations, and the amounts
increased under the third DPL to accommodate a deteriorating fiscal and external account
balance. For example, the DDO offered by the World Bank helped to provide better terms of
financing. This was a good response to a worse than anticipated external situation caused by
sluggish European growth following the 2008 crisis. The same accommodation was also in
evidence in AAA where the World Bank was quick to respond to urgent requests from
government for technical assistance (TA) and just in time policy advice.

2.31 By contrast, some of the other changes to the World Bank’s program have less
justification. Two sector investment loans were cancelled at an early stage of implementation,
ostensibly because the new government found Bank procedures and modalities too burdensome.
This may well have been true though it is not clear why the procedures became a problem simply
because there was a change of government at the top. While it is the prerogative of the
government to cancel any loan, the World Bank was perhaps too ‘flexible’ in approving two new
DPL series in 2012 and 2013 when funding from other sources was available to the government8
and all evidence pointed to a slowing down of reforms. Deviations from the program during
implementation were also often explained away too readily.9 While such flexibility was useful in
maintaining a robust lending program, it may have diverted attention from difficult but necessary
reforms. It also damaged the World Bank’s credibility.10

ADDRESSING CAPACITY LIMITATIONS

2.32 Lack of institutional capacity was not highlighted in the CPS, nor was it seen as a risk
factor for the implementation of the government’s reforms or the Bank Group’s program.11
While this is striking when compared to the situation in most developing countries, and in
particular in small states, it is perhaps less surprising given the good record of policy
implementation till that time.12

2.33 Capacity constraints are mentioned in the DPLs. For example, the second DPL (2008)
refers to capacity constraints in investment planning and implementation, and more broadly in
sector ministries, and these are explicitly treaded as risks to the program. Other DPLs, including
the ones approved in FY13, also give prominent space to implementation capacity constraints in
sector ministries, holding them partly responsible for the slow pace of reforms. The CPS
Progress Report (2011) highlighted the same risks in the context of the government’s plans to
implement a large fiscal stimulus package including public investments.

2.34 The World Bank provided TA through the DPL series as well as through its investment
lending for infrastructure development. For example, in the area of fiscal consolidation, the WB
Treasury provided assistance to the Bank of Mauritius (BOM) and the Ministry of Finance and
Economic Development (MOFED) to jointly develop an action plan for improving Public Debt


                                                26
Management and also provided training workshops. The registrar of companies noted that
training to insolvency practitioners helped raise in house capacity. TA was provided in the social
sectors. A Social Protection Review and Strategy was carried out in 2009 with Bank support and
the government continues to receive technical assistance in the sector to design and implement
reforms. TA was also provided for assessing various options for pension reforms. The
infrastructure project provided TA and institutional development in transport, water and
wastewater and energy subsectors to strengthen their capacity to plan and implement investment
programs. These initiatives met with varying degrees of success.

2.35 Overall, feedback from the client indicated that the country benefited from the Bank
Group’s analytic work and technical assistance, though it was not clear how much the
government was willing to pay for these services. Going forward, more capacity building
initiatives from the Bank Group would be welcome, including TA on nitty-gritty ‘how-to’ issues
as well as more peer reviewing by World Bank of work done in sector ministries. For capacity
building assistance to be really useful, it was suggested that foreign expertise be imbedded inside
government agencies for a sufficiently long duration of time, rather than flit in and out as has
been the case on some occasions.

ADDRESSING GENDER ISSUES

2.36 Gender discrimination is not a prominent or widespread issue in Mauritius as in other
small states included in this evaluation such as the Pacific states or Djibouti. Nevertheless,
gender discrimination appears to be present in the labor market. The down-sizing of the textile
sector following the elimination of preferential export quota was particularly severe on low
skilled women who constituted a large share of the employees in the sector. The government did
put in place programs for skill development and re-training especially for women though it is not
clear how successful these were in putting women back to work. Women continue to figure
disproportionately among Mauritius’ unemployed. The World Bank’s program did not address
this issue explicitly.

HARMONIZING DONOR SUPPORT

2.37 The formulation of the CPS and its implementation involved a fair degree of
harmonization with other development partners. The CPS was prepared jointly by the World
Bank and EU and included a shared diagnostic and results matrix.13 The World Bank and other
DPs such as AfDB and AFD participated jointly in preparing each others’ programmatic
operations. During implementation, the DPLs were used as a vehicle to harmonize policy
dialogue of development partners with the government.14 They also served as a mechanism to
ensure coordination among development partners in the country, thus lowering the burden on the
government. There were several instances of good cooperation among DPs in important areas of
reform, including the development of the Social Registry (between the UN Development
Programme (UNDP) and the World Bank) and in improving public financial management and
public debt management (with EU, IMF and Bank).

2.38 The opening of a Bank liaison office in 2007 was expected to improve the quality of
dialogue between the World Bank and the government of Mauritius and strengthen donor
coordination. But despite the high regard for World Bank resident staff, this does not seem to


                                                27
have happened to the degree expected in the perception of government interlocutors and other
DPs. The reasons given for this were a combination of several factors including: lesser number
and range of expertise involved in World Bank operations15 after 2010–11; loss of influence of a
key interlocutor and World Bank well-wishers within government who could also facilitate wider
Bank engagement with other stakeholders; and less vigorous dissemination of AAA. There was
also a perception that the World Bank was taking too long in moving from design to
implementation of programs. Also, coordination among DPs could be improved, with more
frequent meetings to assess what each of them was doing and what problems they faced.16 This
would allow the DPs to form a coherent unified view on how their interaction with the
government could be made more effective and useful to all. The government should think more
comprehensively and holistically of how DPs can best serve their national interests, and not
merely focus on coordinating their activities.

TRANSACTION COSTS OF DELIVERING WORLD BANK SUPPORT

2.39 Unlike in other small states, the transaction costs of delivering World Bank support to
Mauritius were not higher than the Bank average. Contrary to intuition, given the small size and
location of Mauritius, transaction costs per dollar lent or supervised did not diverge significantly
from the World Bank average. This can be explained in part by the higher proportion of
development policy operations in the Mauritius portfolio which do not require regular
supervision missions and therefore incur less supervision costs. In addition, the commitment
amounts of the loans to Mauritius were larger than for most other small states. Over the period
FY07–15, a proxy for average lending cost per dollar of new commitments in Mauritius was on
par with the Africa Region’s average and 1.4 times the World Bank-wide average.17 Similarly,
over the same period a proxy for average supervision cost per dollar of active commitments in
Mauritius was about the same as the Africa Region’s average and only 0.3 times the World
Bank-wide average.18

1
 Already in January 2005, MFA quotas on textiles ended. A 36 percent decrease in sugar prices under the EU sugar
protocol beginning in 2007 was expected to cost Mauritius around €100 million per year.
2
 The CPS Progress Report Results matrix listed 21 strategy outcomes of the World Bank’s program. These were to
be achieved by a program with commitments totaling $482 million (including IBRD loans, IFC, and trust funds)
over FY07–15 (about $54 million per year, less than .5 percent of GDP).
3
  This issue was flagged as critical way back in the 2002 CAS which noted that it would take 10–20 years to close
the education gap between East Asian countries and Mauritius. Yet, education reforms comprised just 2 of the 21
strategy outcomes defined in the CAS Progress Report. In the 8 DPLs that were implemented during this period,
only 4 prior actions related to reforms in the education sector. In the competitiveness area alone there were more
than 40 prior actions.
4
 As noted in the Mauritius SCD, “there has been a remarkable increase in inequality in Mauritius and the Gini
coefficient increased from 0.34 to 0.37, slowing down the pace of poverty eradication. As a result, relative poverty
has increased from 8.5 percent in 2007 to 9.8 percent in 2012.”
5
    Except for the one-time use of the Deferred Drawdown Option.
6
  Some of the areas in which World Bank had to re-think its strategy included: assessing the pace of tariff and non-
tariff reforms; the restructuring of the DBM; and the efforts to find a strategic investor for the Cargo Handling
Corporation. In all these areas, political considerations played an important role in influencing government decisions
which the World Bank appears to have ignored. The World Bank also did not seem to have factored in the
compulsions arising from the coalition-based political scenario post 2010.



                                                         28
7
 To take one example, a prior action under the second Private Sector Competitiveness Loan (FY13) was the
adoption of draft amendments to the ICT Act of 2001 by the ICTA Board that would create a framework for
spectrum auctions, spectrum sharing and secondary spectrum trading. This condition was formally met. However, to
become effective, the amendments have to be ratified by Parliament. Two years have passed since the draft
amendments were made, but they have yet to be enacted by Parliament. The same problem arose with World Bank’s
support for DBM restructuring (see below).
8
 In fact, as of 2013, only $200 million out of the $700 million budget support loan approved by the AfDB in 2009
had been disbursed. Source: PD for 2nd Private sector DPL (Feb 2013), pp. 15.
9
  For example: under the DPL series (FY07–10), trade tariff lines with zero tariff rates were to be increased 95
percent by June 2010. However, this program was put on hold for a year soon after it was initiated because of
‘unanticipated’ impact on manufacturing of speedy liberalization (Implementation Completion Report). The
indicative action for DPL2 was suitably modified. As a result, only 88 percent of tariff lines had zero tariff rates by
end 2011 (as against the target of 95 percent by June 2010) and yet the DPL series was fully disbursed on schedule.
A second example is the restructuring of the DBM. Under the first Private Sector Development and Competitiveness
DPL (FY12), a prior action was Cabinet approval for transforming DBM into a commercially viable micro-, small,
and medium-sized enterprise (MSME) bank with private sector participation. The corresponding indicative action
under the second loan in the series (FY13) was the adoption of a detailed transformation plan and the
implementation of selected actions. The actual prior action, which was assessed by the World Bank to have been
implemented, was “to initiate restructuring by the appointment of a transaction adviser, endorsement by a steering
committee of an inception report, and the issuance of letters of invitation to potential investors for the sale of DBMs
non-banking assets”. Yet, on the ground, as of today there has been no restructuring of the DBM along the desired
lines even as the World Bank has disbursed two DPLs. This is a good example where the World Bank’s acceptance
of token procedural actions does nothing to change the status quo.
10
  Some government interlocutors suggested that in recent years the World Bank was too willing to merely re-
package government proposals for reform for a DPL instead of developing appropriate reforms based on sound
analysis and an international perspective.
11
  The main country risks to the program were political, that is inability or unwillingness of the government to carry
through difficult reforms and maintain fiscal discipline, and external shocks (mainly oil price increase). Capacity
limits were not seen as impediments to implementation of the government’s reform program, nor for the World
Bank’s assistance program.
12
 The IEG was also quite struck by the consistently good quality of counterparts it met during the evaluation
mission.
13
  However, this exercise was only a partial success. Due to divergent responses to the 2008–9 economic crisis, the
joint results matrix was abandoned and a revised results matrix focused on the World Bank’s program alone was
presented in the CPS Progress Report.
14
  For example, the DPL series was jointly prepared and appraised by a team from the World Bank, the Agence
Française de Développement, the European Commission, and the African Development Bank. Some of these
partners adopted DPL triggers/prior actions for their own budget support operations.
15
 The initial set of DPLs had a wide range of Bank experts (e.g., ICT, education, private sector) whereas the last 4
DPLs comprised just one TTL and one/two staff. Mr. Ali Mansoor was a key official in the MoF who played a
major role in facilitating dialogue between the government and the World Bank in the early period.
16
 Currently, this kind of interaction happened in some specific areas such as public financial management (PFM).
But this needed to occur in other sectors as well, as well as on a broader level.
17
   We used Bank administrative budget data (which distinguishes new lending—that is, project preparation—and
supervision costs) as well as data on the flow of new Bank lending commitments and the stock of active Bank net
lending commitments (that is, the size of operations under supervision) over the period FY05–15. To proxy preparation
costs per dollar lent, we calculated the ratio of new lending costs in a given FY to new lending commitments in the
following year, and took the average for the entire period.
18
  To proxy supervision costs relative to project size, we calculated the ratio of supervision costs in a given FY to the
stock of active net lending commitments at the end of the year, and again took the average for the entire period.

                                                          29
3. Evaluation of Bank Group Assistance in Enhancing
Competitiveness and Private Sector Development
3.1     The World Bank’s strategy and program was developed around the four pillars of the
government’s strategy. However, for this evaluation the World Bank’s program was mapped into
two areas: first, what did the World Bank do to improve the country’s resilience and second,
what did the World Bank do to enhance competitiveness and private sector development for
generating sustainable economic growth and jobs creation (see appendix C). A brief description
of the World Bank’s contribution to strengthen resilience is given in appendix D, but this report
will not evaluate the World Bank’s contribution in that area. The rest of the chapter is devoted to
a description and evaluation of the World Bank’s support to enhance competitiveness and
promote private sector development. It also provides an overall assessment of the macro impact
(on exports, foreign and private investment) of the reforms undertaken during the period to
enhance competitiveness and promote private sector development. Throughout the evaluation
period, the government of Mauritius faced a difficult external environment, with adverse terms
of trade shocks, the global financial crisis, and a weak global economy which particularly
impacted Mauritius’ main export market—Europe. This adversity had a negative impact on
macro indicators, such as export growth and investment in new businesses.

3.2     Given the need for access to global markets, small economies generally need a higher
degree of openness and responsiveness to international markets than do larger states, where
businesses can achieve economies of scale through domestic markets. This requires a high
degree of resource mobility and competitiveness, which relies not only on a liberal trade regime,
but also an improved business environment, access to credit, and quality and affordable
infrastructure especially transport and communication.

3.3     Most of these areas were part of the reform program that the World Bank supported. The
World Bank supported reforms (i) facilitating efficient trade policies; (ii) promoting a business-
friendly environment through deregulation and more efficient land titling, labor market
flexibility and enhancing supply of skilled and better educated work-force; (iii) supporting
financial sector regulation; (iv) improving the delivery of infrastructure services; and (v)
supporting small enterprise through specific schemes.

Facilitating Efficient Trade Policies
3.4     Over the years, an accretion of interventions and regulations to protect domestic
producers had hurt trade competitiveness and impeded the flow of resources to new, potential
growth sectors. Trade protection (high tariff levels and non-tariff barriers) skewed returns in
favor of producing for the domestic market, reducing competition and overall efficiency to the
detriment of exporters. To balance the anti-export bias, an EPZ with favorable tax and other
incentives was created for exporters.1 However, the distinction between EPZ and non-EPZ status
distorted the playing field and effectively barred many SMEs from competing in export markets
because they lacked the resources and sophistication to take advantage of EPZ status.

3.5    Starting with DPL1 (FY07), the World Bank supported reforms to reduce trade protection
and unify the regulatory and incentive framework for EPZ and non-EPZ firms. Though progress


                                                30
has been slower than originally envisaged in the program, tariff protection was substantially
reduced. The number of tariff lines with zero-rated tariffs increased from 74 percent in 2006 to
88 percent in 2012 (as against a target of 95 percent that was to be achieved by 2010). The
highest tariff band was also reduced from 60 percent to 30 percent. The average tariff rate was
reduced from 6.6 percent in 2007 to 2.3 percent in 2014 and the dispersion in the tariff structure
was almost halved, from a standard deviation of 15.5 to 8.4.

3.6    The tax and regulatory regime for EPZ and non-EPZ firms was also substantially unified
though EPZ firms still continue to benefit from more favorable labor market regulations.2 The
application process for business licenses and permits were streamlined and customs and excise
procedures simplified by removing the need to administer a complex system of duty exemptions
on inputs for EPZ firms.

3.7     With the World Bank’s support, the government also moved to reduce non-tariff barriers
to trade.3 The World Bank’s Report on Trade and Labor (2010) catalogued a number of
inappropriate non-tariff trade-related regulations and implementation bottlenecks which
compromised competitiveness.4 Following from the recommendations of this study, a joint
public-private sector Standing Committee was established to define general principles of
regulatory reforms, review the design and implementation of all existing and proposed new
regulations, and oversee regulatory reform impact assessments. As a result of this work, which is
ongoing, un-necessary import permits for a number of commodities were abolished.5

3.8    To promote administrative efficiency in trade processes, a comprehensive and up-to-date
Trade Portal was established, increasing the transparency and accessibility of all regulations for
both importers and exporters. A ‘single window’ integrating the work of twelve agencies
involved in the processing and issuing of trade-related permits was developed and clearances
were streamlined.

3.9    With regards to customs, an internal appeals mechanism that complies with the
requirement of the Kyoto Convention was established to ensure the independence and fairness of
the appeal process.

ASSESSMENT

3.10 As a result of measures reducing tariff protection and NTBs, and unifying the incentive
regime for EPZ and non-EPZ firms, there is little doubt that the foreign trade regime is more
competitive. Though the pace of reforms was slower than anticipated and a number of NTBs still
remain to be addressed, progress has clearly been made in enhancing trade competitiveness.

3.11 The World Bank played a part by supporting these reforms consistently through its DPLs.
However, prior analytic work on the impact of tariff removal on key manufacturing industries
could have provided a useful guide to the sustainable pace of reforms and prevented the stop-go
nature of tariff reforms and continuing pressures for roll-back.6 The World Bank’s report
documenting the various NTBs that existed was instrumental in the subsequent dismantling of
some of them. However, support for continuing protection remains strong and NTBs in the form
of administrative procedures and/or discriminatory regulations (between imported and locally




                                                31
produced products) remain important even if they are formally eliminated. Overall, the World
Bank’s contribution in this area strengthened competition and enhanced competitiveness.

Promoting a Business Friendly Environment
3.12 The Investment Climate Assessments (FY06 and FY10) carried out by the World Bank
identified some important constraints faced by prospective businesses. Among the major
business climate constraints were the delays and cost of business registration and procedures
associated with securing trade licenses, operating permits, development and building permits;
delays in land registration and land-titling as well as hiring workers with needed skills. The Bank
Group supported reforms to improve the regulatory environment, accelerate land-titling for
business, facilitate labor market flexibility to encourage labor mobility, and reduce the skill
mismatch.

IMPROVING THE REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT FOR BUSINESS

3.13 Though Mauritius started the period with a relatively high ranking in terms of the ease of
doing business (32nd out of 175 countries in 2006), it did not do so well with respect to some
factors. These included: dealing with licenses (ranked 49); employing workers (ranked 64);
registering property (ranked 156); getting credit (ranked 83); enforcing contracts (ranked 109);
and closing a business (ranked 67). Starting with DPL1 (FY07), efforts were made under the
World Bank’s program to address some of these problems.

3.14 To facilitate entry, business registration procedures were streamlined. Effective October
2006, prior health, fire and police clearances were abolished and replaced by ex-post verification
of adherence to published guidelines. Building and land use permits were merged into a single
permit to be issued by the Town and Country Planning Board and trade licenses were converted
into a single municipal fee payable after beginning operations. The Registrar of Companies was
designated as a one-stop center for business registration7 and the Board of Investment converted
from an administrator of programs to a facilitator and promoter.

3.15 Entry of new firms was also constrained by the rules governing exit of bankrupt firms. To
improve the legal framework for insolvency, under the World Bank’s program, a new Insolvency
Act was adopted in 2009. It allows for procedures that permit quick and easy access to the
process of rehabilitation, providing sufficient protection for all those involved.8 To implement
insolvency procedures under the new legislation, guidelines for registering insolvency
practitioners were adopted. To promote domestic competition and prevent non-competitive
market practices, the World Bank supported the establishment of an independent Competition
Commission in 2009. However, there was no evidence to assess how effectively the Commission
was working.

3.16 The World Bank’s AAA contributed significantly to the reform agenda in this area. The
investment climate assessments and the Doing Business Reports were instrumental in
highlighting areas of weakness and strength in the regulatory environment, and despite some
dissatisfaction with the recent changes in Doing Business methodology that are not well
understood,9 these reports define the priorities for reform in the regulatory environment. The



                                                32
Registrar of Companies also noted an invaluable help from the World Bank to build capacity to
deal with insolvency issues using a modern approach.

ASSESSMENT

3.17 The streamlining of the regulatory environment that the World Bank supported through
the DPL series contributed to improvement in conditions for doing business. According to the
Doing Business Reports, the time needed to start a business declined from 46 days in 2006 to
about 6 days by 2014. The time it took to enforce contracts also declined from 630 days to 519
days in the same period. There was an improvement in the number of days it took to secure
construction permits. However, there was no change in the time it took to resolve insolvency
which stayed at 1.7 years.10 Overall, during this period, Mauritius improved on its performance
on the ease of doing business indicator, its ranking rising to 28th out of 189 countries in 2014
(compared to 32nd out of 175 countries in 2006).11 The World Bank played a useful role in
supporting these reforms.

3.18 Despite this progress, there remain areas of weakness in the regulatory environment.12
These may be one reason why the improvements in the regulatory environment have not resulted
in a surge in business registrations.13 According to World Development Indicators data, the
average number of new businesses registered per year between 2005 and 2007 was 7528. In the
three years ending 2012 (the latest year for which data exists), the corresponding number was
6535 (see figure 3.1.).

 Figure 3.1. Number of New Businesses Registered in Mauritius; 2005–14
                                  10000
           Number of businesses




                                  8000

                                  6000

                                  4000

                                  2000

                                      0
                                          2005   2006   2007   2008     2009   2010   2011   2012


                                                                 Year
 Source: World Development Indicators database as of September 2015.


IMPROVING LAND-TITLING AND REGISTRATION

3.19 The World Bank’s Doing Business Survey 2007 showed that it took 210 days to register
land title in Mauritius (compared to 34 days in Ghana, for example). Cumbersome and time-
consuming land-titling and registration procedures were cited in Investment Climate Assessment
and Doing Business Surveys as barriers to private sector investment and one of the main reasons
preventing SMEs from accessing credit from commercial banks. The World Bank supported
legislation amending the Transcription and Mortgage Act in order to prescribe a time limit



                                                               33
consistent with business standards to register property. The Registrar General now takes 2 days
to register immovable property.

3.20 To facilitate faster and transparent registration and securitization of land based assets, the
government initiated the Land Administration Valuation Information Management System
(LAVIMS) project to establish a modern, cost efficient land administration, valuation and
management system. The World Bank expected to support these reforms through its Economic
Transition TA project (METAP, 2009), but this project was cancelled at the request of the
government at an early stage.14 The government completed the reform program without further
assistance from the World Bank. LAVIMS is now operational and it has reduced the time taken
to complete a property transfer to only 14 days.

ASSESSMENT

3.21 The World Bank played a small but positive role in improving land-registration and
titling.

IMPROVING EFFICIENCY OF THE LABOR MARKET

3.22 Labor relations are governed by well-established laws and institutions. The government
plays a large role, setting minimum wages and working conditions, and sanctioning layoffs.15
According to the Doing Business Survey 2006, relative to other countries, Mauritius suffered
from significant rigidities in setting hours of work, and in firing workers. Detailed and inflexible
labor market regulations and institutions impeded efficient labor allocation and adjustment of
wages to reflect productivity. The Remuneration Orders governing private sector wages and
difficulties in firing labor discouraged risk-taking and innovation.

3.23 The objective of the initial labor market reforms initiated with DPL2 (FY08) was to
replace the existing wage setting mechanism with one that was less intrusive, promoted
collective bargaining, and linked wages more closely to productivity. A National Pay Council
was established in 2007 with the mandate to establish a national minimum wage and to link
yearly increases to not only inflation (as was the established practice) but also to national
productivity and competitiveness. In 2009, the World Bank supported the introduction of a flexi-
security system which provided for up to twelve months of transitional assistance to eligible
workers who must seek assistance either for job placement, re-training, or starting a small
business. By providing workers who lose their jobs with transitional support toward improving
the prospects of re-employment, the scheme was expected to improve labor market efficiency,
lowering resistance to structural change and stabilizing incomes for households at risk of falling
into poverty.

3.24 The DPL series supported policy changes aimed at easing entry of foreign skilled
workers by facilitating permit issuances. The reforms eased entry of foreign workers in the labor
market by creating a single occupational permit combining residency and work permits and
legalizing conversion of tourist to business visas.




                                                 34
ASSESSMENT

3.25 Labor market reforms were identified early on as one of the important areas that had to be
addressed. Yet, there is no evidence that the reforms supported by the World Bank have made an
appreciable difference to the efficiency of the labor market, or in closing the gap between wages
and labor productivity which was one of the objectives of the reforms.16 Despite the reforms,
workers are compensated yearly for the increased cost of living without due consideration to
other factors such as productivity gains. Also, around 80 percent of workers in the private sector
get their conditions of employment set by Remuneration Orders adopted by the National
Remuneration Board, which leaves limited scope for collective bargaining. As the recent (draft)
SCD for Mauritius has argued, “existing labor regulations undermine efforts to maintain wage
increases in line with productivity gains resulting in challenges to employment creation”. The
unemployment rate remains high and while it dipped in the early part of the period, it has been
creeping up since then. Notwithstanding some simplification in processes, hiring of foreign
workers remains an expensive and lengthy process. Though there are no legal barriers to
women’s participation in the labor force, gender differences in the labor market remain high
which hampers the inclusiveness of economic growth.17 The team found that that Bank activities
to support labor reforms were an area of weaknesses in the overall Bank program.

ENHANCING SUPPLY OF SKILLED WORKFORCE

3.26 For many years now, it was recognized by the government and the World Bank that the
shortage of skilled workers was a major handicap to the growth of the private sector and a drag
on the on-going efforts to diversify production toward a modern, knowledge-based
manufacturing and services sectors. The quality of education at all levels was not up to the mark
required, and a large portion of children of school- going ages (especially from poor families)
were excluded from the education system at an early stage. Learning opportunities for those who
failed the Certificate of Primary Education examination (CPEE) were limited to a pre- vocational
stream, which was not able to meet the learning needs of most attendees. The poor performance
of pre-vocational education was evidenced by high dropout rates as well as by the failure of a
large number of students in the pre-vocational stream to move on to technical and vocational
education and training (TVET).

3.27 While in the short run the ‘skills gap’ could be partly alleviated by employing skilled
workers from abroad, the medium term solution was a thorough-going reform of the education
system for improving the quality of education at all levels and ensuring that this education was
more widely accessible.18 Reforms were also required in the systems for vocational training to
make the training better aligned to the needs of the transforming economy.

3.28 To alleviate the shortage of skilled labor in the short term, in DPL1 the World Bank
supported the government’s action in easing entry of foreign professional and skilled workers by
issuing single residency and occupation permits within three working days for workers earning
above pre-set thresholds. Provisions for spouses to work as professionals and for conversion of
tourist to business visas were also liberalized.

3.29 For the medium term, the World Bank supported the government’s efforts to reform the
education system. Through the DPL series starting with DPL2, the World Bank supported the


                                                35
preparation of a National Education Strategy (NES) to increase output and quality of education at
primary, secondary and tertiary levels, including by increasing enrolment rates; reducing the
failure and marginal pass rates especially among children from poor families; offering a
vocational stream to those that fail the CPEE; implementing a revised curriculum emphasizing
languages, science, math, and ICT; and up-grading teacher training. Through the Public Sector
Performance DPL1 (FY12) and DPL2 (FY13), the World Bank also supported the development
and implementation of a comprehensive reform of the pre-vocational stream aimed at increasing
retention and enhancing the quality of education outcomes at that level.

3.30 In terms of AAA, the World Bank completed a PER focused on equity and efficiency in
public spending in education and health. This report and other background papers served to focus
the policy dialogue in the sector. In 2011, the report titled Skills and Technology Absorption in
Mauritius prepared by the World Bank pointed out constraints in both the education system and
on-the-job training to increasing the skills of the workforce to enable them to use new and
emerging technologies. The report’s recommendations focused on the important role that should
be played by the primary and secondary education system, particularly in the pre-vocational
system, the need to enhance the capacity of tertiary education to teach innovative and
technological skills, and the need to foster technical and vocational education and training and
active labor market programs.

ASSESSMENT

3.31 The National Education Strategy was adopted by the government in 2010 but it is not
clear what impact this has had on the quality of education or inclusiveness.19 There was an
increase in primary and secondary school completion rate from 64.9 and 78.4 percent in 2006 to
68.8 and 75.7 percent respectively in 2012. Also, gross enrollment in tertiary education increased
from 34 percent in 2006 to 46 percent in 2012. However, the completion rate at the primary level
has not improved for the last several years, which remains a key impediment to improving the
outcomes in the education sector. There is also little evidence suggesting that progress has been
made improving the quality of education and in closing the education and skills gap between
Mauritius and some of its comparator countries.20

3.32 With respect to vocational training, the system remains small, fragmented and flawed.
Overall, TVET supply remains marginal with enrolment rates far below those registered in other
knowledge-oriented economies. When excluding part-time students (mostly in apprenticeships),
enrolment in TVET represents less than 3 percent of the total secondary enrolment, well below
the average for East Asia or even Sub-Saharan Africa. There is a proliferation of small, private
providers, which makes it difficult to compare the quality and qualifications of the training
offered. TVET supply is not well aligned with market needs.

3.33 The World Bank’s failure to influence outcomes in this critical area is among the most
important weaknesses of the World Bank’s involvement in promoting competitiveness and the
private sector in Mauritius. This failure was not due to lack of trying. Though the World Bank
made persistent efforts to engage in the sector, and there was good rapport at the technical levels,
policy dialogue with the government on reforms was difficult.21 The reluctance of the
government to borrow for the education sector also hampered the World Bank’s ability to
influence outcomes.


                                                 36
Table 3.1. Summary Rating for “Promoting a business friendly environment”
                                                       Evaluation Assessment, FY05–15
 Promoting a business friendly environment             Positive but small
 Improving the regulatory environment                  Area of strength
 Improving Land Titling and Registration               Positive but small
 Supporting labor reforms                              Area of weakness
 Reducing Skill Mismatch                               Area of weakness

Strengthening the Financial Sector22
3.34 The financial sector is characterized by high levels of financial intermediation.
Nevertheless, access to credit ranks high on the list of factors emphasized by individual
entrepreneurs as critical to the survival and growth of their businesses. Limited access to credit
was especially problematic for SMEs.23 One reason for commercial banks’ reluctance to lend to
SMEs was that their assets are mostly in the form of movable property such as machinery,
inventory, or accounts receivable which they are unable to leverage to access capital.24 Credit is
more readily available to businesses that have immovable property (land and buildings).
However, even in the case of immovable property, lack of proper collateral laws and efficient
courts prevented banks from enforcing collateral in case of default.

3.35 The World Bank was not a major player in the sector during the CPS period. Its
interventions began only in FY12–13 in the context of the Private Sector Competiveness DPL1
(FY12) and DPL2 (FY13) which supported the government’s efforts to facilitate the use of
movable and intangible assets as collateral and the establishment of a modern movable collateral
registry. Necessary amendments to laws were drafted and were expected to be adopted by
Parliament by end 2013, but this has not happened thus far.

3.36 The Mauritius Credit Information Bureau (MCIB), established in December 2005 by the
Bank of Mauritius (BoM) as a public registry of borrower information, collected information
from, and shared information with banks to enable them to make more informed lending
decisions. To get a more complete picture of consumer indebtedness, the World Bank supported
the government in extending the coverage of the MCIB to include not just banking institutions
and insurance and leasing companies, but also non-financial institutions and utility companies.25

3.37 The restructuring of the Development Bank of Mauritius (DBM) was an important
component of the World Bank’s program in the financial sector. Directed and subsidized credit
programs offered by the DBM had achieved little to achieve the fundamental objective of
increasing the access of small enterprises to financial services. DBM performed poorly, and over
time fostered a “non-payment culture,” as indicated by the high volume of non-performing loans.
Based on a detailed diagnostic of DBM, the World Bank supported the government’s plans to
restructure DBM and transform it into a commercial bank with private sector participation and
with a focus on the MSME segment.26 Initiation of the restructuring was a prior action under the
second private sector competitiveness DPL (2013). However, no meaningful restructuring has
occurred thus far, and the government is considering alternative proposals to create a new bank
to serve SMEs. No final decision has yet been taken.27




                                                37
ASSESSMENT

3.38 The World Bank was a not a big player in the sector during this period. The World Bank
contributed to some positive changes such as the development of the movable collateral registry
(which is still to be made operational, pending Parliamentary ratification) and the expansion of
the coverage of the Credit Bureau. However, despite its long involvement in efforts to restructure
DBM, there has been very little progress in this regard. Overall, the World Bank made a small
positive contribution to the sector, but it was not effective in strengthening the sector’s role in the
economy in any significant way.

Improving Infrastructure Services
3.39 Lack of access to high quality infrastructure, especially telecommunication, road
transport, air access and cargo handling services in ports was an important constraint to
improving competitiveness. Significant investments including private investment were needed to
relax these constraints. But policy and regulatory reforms were also required.

3.40 The World Bank’s interventions in the infrastructure sector have been limited largely to
the ICT sector. Only one project for development of roads infrastructure was approved during
the period. The Bank Group was not a player in the two critical areas of air transport and the
development of ports. In the energy sector, the World Bank’s role was limited to a couple of TA
projects funded through Trust Funds, mainly in the field of renewable energy. The IFC provided
some funding for development of renewable energy and energy conservation. It was also
involved, unsuccessfully, in finding a strategic private investor for the Cargo Handling
Corporation Ltd.

INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT)

3.41 At the start of the review period, telecom costs in Mauritius were significantly above
competing locations, disadvantaging domestic firms.28 Moreover, broadband access was limited
across the island and internet penetration was low. The World Bank supported the government’s
effort to bring down prices through expansion of capacity in the sector and by strengthening the
role of the regulatory authority consistent with international best practices and new technological
advances.

3.42 To expand capacity, the World Bank supported the enhancement of Mauritius Telecom’s
capacity on the SAFE fiber-optic cable by nearly two-thirds in 2007. Since then, new
technologies have approximately doubled the capacity of the line and contributed to reduction in
telecom charges. To encourage private sector investment, the World Bank supported the
adoption of a National Broadband Policy by the government (published online in January 2012)
to facilitate large private sector investment in broad-band networks, and to signal a predictable
long term business environment in the sector.

3.43 Supported by the World Bank’s DPL series, a comprehensive regulatory and competency
review of ICT Authority was also undertaken with the objective of amending the ICT Act to
bring the overall licensing and regulation into line with international standards.29 Amendments to
the Act were also proposed to strengthen the authority of the ICT Authority to correct market


                                                  38
failures and act where there was evidence of ‘significant market power’. To reinforce the
independence of the ICT Authority, the World Bank supported amendments to the ICT Act to
create a framework for spectrum auctions, spectrum sharing and secondary spectrum trading.
However, these amendments are yet to be approved by Parliament.30

3.44 To keep pace with the growth of the ICT sector and the spread of e-commerce, the World
Bank supported revisions to the legal framework governing e-commerce, e-legislation and online
activity, especially with respect to data protection. The 2004 Data Protection Act was amended
to bring it in line with the EU data protection framework. The government also adopted an action
plan for promoting the widespread adoption of public key infrastructure (PKI) to execute
electronic transactions, as a means to increase government’s data and information security. To
increase the number of public services that can be executed via secured online transactions based
on PKI, the World Bank supported the government in selecting a partner for developing a
government services platform.

ASSESSMENT

3.45 Assisted by the World Bank, significant improvements to the policy and regulatory
environment were made in the ICT sector during this period. The World Bank provided valuable
assistance in drafting the National Broadband Policy aimed to facilitate private sector investment
in broad-band networks, and to signal a predictable long term business environment in the sector.
The regulatory framework in the sector was amended to bring it closer to international best
practice. However, on the major issue of spectrum management, they are still at square one
because the licensing ICT Act has not yet been amended.

3.46 As a result of reforms, the ICT has grown strongly and there are currently over 600 ICT
companies employing 4 percent of the total workforce. Exports of ICT services are growing
strongly and their share in services exports increased from 18 percent in 2007 to 38 percent in
2013. There has been a significant increase in the number of broadband subscriptions and prices
of fixed broadband and mobile broadband services have fallen considerably in recent years.31
However, when compared with a representative range of other low and middle income countries,
market determined broadband prices remain relatively high in Mauritius for both fixed-line and
mobile services. Using a measure of performance—the typical speed for broadband services (as
measured by NetIndex in January 2013)—Mauritius ranks a lowly 171st in the world (out of 180
countries), with an average download speed of around 1.57 Mbit/s. As noted in Mauritius SCD,
the ICT sector grew more strongly in some of the other more liberal markets such as Kenya over
2009–13 giving them a competitive advantage over Mauritius in terms of lower wholesale
bandwidth prices and therefore capacity to attract BPO traffic.

3.47 The establishment of the legal framework for safer and expanded e-commerce
contributed to an increase in the number of public services that can be executed via secured
online transactions.32 ICT sector interlocutors were generally appreciative of the World Bank’s
assistance in the sector, especially in providing lessons from international experience, and
viewed the World Bank as a reliable partner in the sector’s development.

3.48 Overall, the World Bank played a positive role in ICT sector development, though some
of the critical reforms it supported have yet to get off the ground.


                                               39
TRANSPORT

3.49 Compared to the ambitious agenda set forth in the CPS, the Bank Group played a limited
role in the transport sector. Potential investment projects for port and airport expansion
envisaged in the CPS did not materialize and the World Bank approved only one investment
project (Infrastructure Project, $50 million (FY10) during this period. This project financed the
up-grading and maintenance of an important segment of the national road network. It also
financed TA and institutional development line ministries and agencies in the Transport, Water
and Wastewater, and Energy. It was expected that on completion this project would help improve
implementation of public investments in these sectors and pave the way for a much larger Bank
investment in these sub-sectors. A pilot performance based Roads Asset Management and Safety
Infrastructure Project ($75 million) was cancelled after 18 months of preparation using
substantial grant assistant.

Road Sector

3.50 Under the Infrastructure project, the World Bank financed the upgrading of the Belle
Rive - Quartier Militaire road, the main link between the East and the West of Mauritius. The
objective was to alleviate congestion and to improve road safety on this axis. The project also
financed routine maintenance and performance based routine maintenance contracts on three
highway sections that were in bad shape. The project also included funding for institution
building in the road transport sector including the establishment (and subsequent strengthening)
of a Land Transport Authority and for preparation of an assortment of road transport related
studies and feasibility assessments for future investments.

ASSESSMENT

3.51 The strategy outcome listed in the results matrix of the CPS Progress Report was an
improved traffic flow along the main corridor in compliance with road safety measures. This was
clearly not achieved since the World Bank intervention focused on only one stretch of the road
network. However, on this stretch of the road which was up-graded, the results conformed to the
thrust of the strategy objective.33 According to data reported in the ISR, travel time on the
designated road was cut from 15 minutes before the project to 6 minutes. The number of
accidents reported per year on the road was also halved.34 The Independent Evaluation Group
(IEG) did not verify these claims.

3.52 With respect to TA provided by the World Bank in the sector, interlocutors were
generally pleased with the World Bank’s contribution through the project and otherwise.35 The
Land Transport Authority was established and is being strengthened. The World Bank provided
valuable advice on developing a Mass Rapid Transit System, bringing in their knowledge of
international best practice. An Urban Transport Action Plan was developed which is currently
being implemented. The Ministry also utilized the World Bank for peer-reviewing their work.
This was also found to be very useful.

3.53 The government interlocutor was also appreciative of the World Bank team’s early
engagement with the local population potentially affected by the road project. This was very
useful in getting them on board during the land acquisition process that followed. The Ministry



                                               40
hopes to follow this approach in domestically funded projects as well. Overall, the World Bank
made a small but positive contribution in the sector.

Air Transport

3.54 Given the open-ness of the Mauritian economy and its heavy dependence on tourism,
improving air transport services will have a significant positive economic impact. While some
progress has been made in up-grading air transport services, including investment in airport
expansion, further air liberalization can be expected to enhance competition, reduce air fares and
stimulate tourism.

3.55 The World Bank has not been a player in this important sector, either in terms of the
policy dialogue or investment. While the CPS and the CPS Progress Report included increasing
competition in air transport as one of the World Bank’ s strategy objectives to reduce air fares
and serve more destinations, and the CPS envisaged potential investment from the World Bank
in airport expansion, this area was not covered in any of the DPLs over the period. The IFC was
also not involved in the airport expansion plan nor was its expertise solicited for developing PPP
in the sector. Despite the importance assigned to the sector in the World Bank’s strategy, the
World Bank’s program did not contribute much to the sector’s development.

Port Operations

3.56 The high volume of foreign trade on which Mauritius depends makes port infrastructure
and operational efficiency in cargo handling an important factor in promoting competitiveness.
While the throughput of Port Louis has been increasing steadily in recent years in line with the
economic growth, this growth is well below the growth in other ports in the region (such as
Mombasa or Dar es Salaam) over the same period. Port performance (reflected in relatively
longer waiting time at berths) lags behind other leading private operators in the region.

3.57 The CPS included improvement in port performance as one of the Bank Group’s strategy
outcomes and the implementation of a port master plan as a milestone/progress indicator. To
improve the operational efficiency of the port, the IFC was asked by the government to identify a
suitable private strategic partner for Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd to spearhead the
turnaround of the company and also mobilize the much needed investment for port operations.
However, after the 2010 elections, there was reluctance from partners of the ruling alliance to
have profound changes in the sector given the political capital and vote bank at stake. There was
also opposition from trade unions that feared loss of jobs. As a result, CHCL was retained as the
operator, damaging the port’s competitiveness and sending a wrong signal to private investors.
This objective was dropped in the results matrix of the CPS Progress Report.

ENERGY AND WATER/WASTE-WATER

3.58 The CPSPR targeted an improvement in the environment by increasing the use of cleaner
technologies in the industrial sector and the implementation of adequate wastewater management
system to improve health and sanitation.

3.59 In the energy sector, the World Bank supported the use of Bagasse (a by-product of the
sugar industry) for electricity generation, serving multiple objectives of promoting clean energy


                                                41
by reducing dependence on fossil fuels and reducing the oil import bill. It also provided TA for
the preparation of a Grid Code, Feed-in-Tariffs and Model Energy Supply Purchase Agreements
for Renewable Energy Systems greater than 5 kilowatts through a SIDS DOCK Grant to promote
investment in renewable energy infrastructure, contribute to energy security, reduce greenhouse
gas emissions, and encourage household-private sector investment in renewable energy
technologies. Under the Infrastructure projects TA component, funds were allocated for
developing a renewable energy development strategy and implementation plan. TA was also
provided to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Renewable Energy and Public Utilities and
the Central Electricity Board.

3.60 Feedback from interlocutors suggested that the World Bank’s TA in the energy sector
was of variable quality. A study on the medium and long term strategy for electricity was
undertaken with the support of the World Bank. The first part of the study, which addressed short
term measures to avoid shortages, did not add value since the government was already
implementing the measures suggested. For the second part of the study, the government intended
to work with the International Energy Agency since the World Bank services were found too
expensive. Similarly a draft report outlying a strategy for renewable energy, funded by the World
Bank and AFD, was not of much use and the contract was terminated. In the area of electricity
pricing, with assistance from the World Bank a Law was adopted in 2008 establishing an
independent regulatory authority for setting electricity prices in line with costs. However, the
regulatory body is still not operational. Overall, the World Bank’s contribution to the sector was
negligible.

3.61 In the water and waste-water subsector, the World Bank’s engagement was confined to
the funding of TA and institution building under the Infrastructure project. Under that project,
the World Bank financed the development of a Water Sector Master Plan and a study on the
drainage system. It also funded capacity building in the Pollution Control Laboratory. The
project also financed detailed feasibility study for the expansion of the sewerage network in
selected areas and upgrade/enlargement of the existing wastewater treatment plants. Interlocutors
believed that the water Master Plan was good and was being used by the government in
developing the sector. The World Bank’s support for capacity building in the sub-sector was also
appreciated. Overall, the World Bank made a useful contribution in water and wastewater sector.

3.62 Based on these assessments, for infrastructure services as a whole, the Bank Group’s
performance was useful, but it could have done much better.

Table 3.2. Evaluation Assessment for “Improving Infrastructure Services”
                                                    Evaluation Assessment, FY05–
                                                    15
 Improving Infrastructure Services                   Positive but small
 Improving ICT                                      Positive but small
 Improving transport (road and air)                 Positive but small
 Improving energy                                   Negligible Area of strength
 Improving water/waste-water




                                               42
Fostering SME Development
3.63 Most of the measures discussed above were focused on improving the investment climate
and enhancing competitiveness for all businesses, irrespective of size or sector. However, SMEs
faced special challenges. Most small businesses lacked adequate knowledge and expertise to run
businesses. They were also especially hard hit by lack of access to credit from the banking
system.

3.64 Through the years, the government put in place special schemes to support SMEs, either
by creating special incentives to encourage banks to lend to them or by creating business
development centers to assist SMEs in planning and carrying out their activities.36 A special four
year tax holiday was put in place to encourage small enterprises to register formally. In addition,
financing was increased under the Empowerment Fund which provides equity capital to start-
ups. DBM opened a special window for SMEs to provide working capital and other short term
finance in the form of micro-loans. The World Bank supported some of these measures. For
example, a prior action under the first DPL (2007) was the implementation of specific measures
to facilitate the growth of formal SME sector through access to finance, TA and capacity
building and consultancy services.

3.65 However, most of the business development services were of mixed quality and not very
useful for meeting contemporary requirements of SMEs. Moreover, effectiveness of these
programs was hampered by coordination challenges among the multiple agencies that were
implementing the programs. To improve inter-agency coordination the World Bank supported
the establishment of an inter-agency strategic committee to serve as a platform to share
information of existing initiatives among the members as well as gauge the existing gaps that
need to be addressed to service entrepreneurs and SMEs. Also, an M&E framework to compare
the effectiveness of the various programs was developed in May 2014.37 To improve access to
financing for SMEs, the Bank Group supported efforts to restructure the DBM into a financially
viable MSME bank with private sector participation. The IFC supported selected banks in
capacity building and training of SME loan officers so that they could expand their lending to
SMEs.

3.66 To improve the quality of business development services, the Ministry of Business,
Enterprise, and Cooperatives (MoBEC) initiated a new Business Growth Scheme (MBGS) in
2011 that provided such services on a market driven platform. The Scheme, funded by the
government offered reimbursable financing, on a 90–10 cost-sharing basis, to buy specialized
expertise in the areas of: skills and training; technology upgrading and standards; and marketing.
Repayment was based on a royalty based system linked to incremental growth of the enterprises
benefiting from the scheme.

ASSESSMENT

3.67 The Bank Group’s support for SMEs have had a modest impact. SMEs continue to rate
lack of access to credit as an important impediment to their growth though there is some
evidence that commercial banks are willing to lend to SMEs with some form of support from the
government. The IFCs support for capacity building for SME lending in selected banks may
have been helpful in this regard.


                                                43
3.68 The World Bank may also take some credit for the design of the market driven platform
for providing financing to SMEs for business development services. An earlier version of this
scheme, which involved an outright 50 percent grant to beneficiary enterprises was supported by
funding from the World Bank under the Manufacturing and Services Development and
Competitiveness loan (2010). However, this project was cancelled at an early stage of
implementation at the request of the government. The MBGS scheme has performed well and
modified versions are being replicated in other countries. However, beneficiary enterprises
remain a very small proportion of the total number of SMEs and there are still question marks
about the long term financial viability of the scheme.

3.69 Other elements of the Bank Group’s support were less successful. The effort to bring
coherence to various SME schemes operated by multiple agencies has only meant that
information on all schemes can now be obtained from one address. It has not yet resulted in a
holistic vision of the various schemes or improved co-ordination and efficiency in their
implementation. The plans to restructure DBM are on hold.

3.70   Overall, the Bank Group’s contribution was small but positive.

Encouraging Tourism
3.71 Tourism remains one of the dominant pillars of the economy accounting for about 13
percent of GDP and a significant source of foreign exchange earnings. However, the future
growth of the sector is constrained by a number of factors including overcapacity, over-
indebtedness, and a declining competitiveness as indicated by the WEF’s Tourism and Travel
Competitiveness Index.

3.72 The Bank Group has not been a player in this sector. The CPS (2007–13) envisaged IFC
involvement in the sector, initially in the form of a loan for refurbishing and renovation of one of
the hotels of a prominent hotel chain in 2008–09. However, this initiative was dropped because
IFC’s financing was not competitive. There has been no further involvement of the Bank Group
in the sector.

Overall Assessment
3.73 What was the overall impact of the reforms to enhance competitiveness and promote
private sector development? Is the economy any more competitive than it was before the
reforms, and how is it reflected in the performance of macro indicators such as exports and
private investment, domestic and foreign?

EASE OF DOING BUSINESS

3.74 Reforms in the regulatory environment improved conditions for business, as is reflected
in the improved ranking according to the ‘ease of doing business’ indicators produced by the
World Bank. The country’s rank improved to 28th out of 189 countries in 2014 (compared to 32nd
out of 175 countries in 2006).




                                                 44
TRADE LOGISTICS

3.75 According to the World Bank’s Logistics Performance Index, Mauritius improved its
overall ranking from 132 (out of 150 countries) in 2007 (with an overall score of 2.13) to 115
(out of 160 countries) in 2014 (with an overall score of 2.51).38 The best improvement was in
the index for logistics quality and competence which improved from 147 (out of 150 countries)
in 2007 to 110 (out of 160 countries) in 2014. In terms of the quality of logistics infrastructure,
Mauritius was ranked 91 out of 160 countries in 2014, not significantly different from its rank of
84 out of 150 countries in 2007. Clearly, there is a huge scope for improvement in the quality of
logistics infrastructure and its management, and hence for improving competitiveness.39

ACCESS TO CREDIT AND FINANCIAL DEEPENING

3.76 There was a further deepening of the financial system during the period and private
sector’s access to credit improved. Broad money (M2) increased from an average of 98 percent
of GDP between 2005 and 2007 to 101 percent between 2012 and 2014. The share of domestic
credit in GDP also increased from an average of 102 percent to 117 percent over the same
period. Credit to the private sector rose from an average of 73 percent of GDP in 2005–07 to 103
percent between 2012 and 2014 (see figure 3.2).


 Figure 3.2. Mauritius Financial Deepening, 2005–14
               140.0

               120.0

               100.0
     Percent




                80.0

                60.0

                40.0

                20.0

                 0.0
                       2005     2006       2007      2008      2009       2010     2011      2012     2013   2014

                                                                      Year

                              Broad money (% of GDP)                     Domestic credit (% of GDP)
                              Credit to private sector (% of GDP)


 Source: IMF International Financial Statistics 2015


COMPETITIVENESS

3.77 According to the WEF’s Global Competitiveness Index, Mauritius improved its
competitiveness score slightly from 4.2 in 2006–07 to 4.5 in 2014–15. Its ranking improved from
55 out of 125 countries in 2006–07 to 39 out of 144 countries in 2014–15.40 However, in the
IMF’s assessment there was a loss of competitiveness in recent years because of (i) loss of export
volume and market share; (ii) higher costs of production factors; and (iii) appreciation of the
currency. Wages have risen faster than labor productivity, resulting in higher unit labor costs,
and an erosion of competitiveness.41


                                                                    45
EXPORT PERFORMANCE

3.78 Export performance weakened during 2007–14, but there has been successful
diversification both in terms of goods and services as well as markets.42 The share of exports of
goods and services fell from 57 percent of GDP in 2007 to 52 percent in 2014. This drop in
exports was primarily because of the drop in exports of goods (mainly textiles and sugar which
lost preferential access in Europe). The share of merchandise exports fell from 28.7 percent of
GDP in 2007 to 24.6 percent in 2014. There was a shift in exports toward services, and within
services toward ICT services. The share of ICT services in total export of services increased
significantly from about 18 percent in 2007 to 37 percent in 2014 (see figure 3.3.).

 Figure 3.3. Mauritius Exports, 2005–14
             70.0

             60.0

             50.0
   Percent




             40.0

             30.0

             20.0

             10.0

              0.0
                    2005   2006     2007      2008      2009      2010   2011     2012     2013    2014
                                                 Exports of goods and services (% of GDP)
                                                 Exports of services (% of GDP)
                                                 ICT service exports (% of service exports, BoP)



 Source: World Development Indicators database as of September 2015.
3.79 There was significant regional diversification of exports. The share of Europe in total
exports from Mauritius fell from 66 percent to 58 percent between 2007 and 2013 (see figure
3.3). This was compensated by increased exports to more dynamic regions such as Asia and
Africa, particularly South Africa.




                                                          46
 Figure 3.4. Mauritius Share of Imports and Exports, 2005–14
                         MU share of X to Europe and other markets                                                                              Europe share of imports from Mauritius
            100
              90
              80
              70




                                                                                                                                US$, billions
              60




                                                                                                                                                                                           Percent
  Percent




              50
              40
              30
              20
              10
                0
                                                                                                                                                                  Year
                       2005     2006     2007     2008    2009          2010      2011     2012     2013   2014
                                                                 Year
                                                                                                                                                          Mauritius (Import Value to EU)

                              AFRICA   ASIA     Europe   North America         Oceania   South America


 Source: Eurostat IMF.

INVESTMENT PERFORMANCE

3.80 Increased openness and improved business climate have contributed to increased inflow
of private foreign direct investment. The share of FDI in GDP increased from an average 2.2
percent per year during 2005–07 to over 3.7 percent per year during 2011–13. The important
sectors for FDI are real estate, finance and insurance. However, the improvement in the
investment climate has not yet translated into increased investment by domestic investors. Indeed
the share of domestic private investment in GDP declined from 27.3 percent in 2008 to 23.2
percent in 2013. This suggests that much more has to change in the overall investment climate
and global economic prospects to make private investment more profitable.

 Figure 3.5. FDI and Private Investment in Mauritius; 2005–2014
                      25.0


                      20.0


                      15.0
            Percent




                      10.0


                       5.0


                       0.0
                                  2005           2006            2007               2008           2009           2010   2011                     2012    2013       2014
                                                                                                  Year
                                 Foreign direct investment(% of GDP)                                Gross fixed capital formation, private sector (% of GDP)

 Source: World Development Indicators database as of September 2015.



                                                                                                           47
Conclusion: Overall Assessment of Bank’s Performance
3.81 The Bank Group’s performance in different dimensions for enhancing competitiveness is
noted in the table below. The macro-impact of the reforms also presents a mixed picture. The
positives included increased export diversification and higher FDI inflows, while stagnant
private domestic investment suggests more progress needs to be achieved.

Table 3.3. Evaluation Assessment for Pillar 2 “Improving Competitiveness”
    World Bank Group Objectives                               Evaluation Assessment, FY05–15
    Promoting efficient trade policies                        Area of Strength

    Promoting a business friendly environment                 Positive but small

    Strengthening the financial sector                        Negligible

    Improving Infrastructure Services                         Positive but small

    Fostering SME development                                 Positive but small


3.82 Based on these assessments, the overall Bank Group contribution in enhancing
competitiveness is positive but small.

1
  These included a 10 year tax holiday on retained earnings, a partial tax holiday for periods beyond that; free
repatriation of capital and profits; and preferential interest rates for firms in EPZ. Firms in the EPZ also benefitted
from favorable labor market regulations including favorable retrenchment conditions (no severance payments or
advance notification about retrenchment) and more flexible conditions for over-time work.
2
 For example all corporate tax was set at 15 percent. In addition the anti-labor bias in the tax system was eliminated
by removing a 25 percent investment tax credit.
3
  The situation is particularly burdensome for imports. As of January 2009, approximately 30 percent of import
declarations had two requirements involving different line ministries and agencies and, in approximately 5 percent
of cases, three or four import requirements. It took around 12 days to deal with import and export permits in
Mauritius, while Hong Kong (South Asia Region, China), Singapore, and Estonia require only half as many days.
Hidden import barriers, among other constraints, were keeping the economic globalization index in Mauritius below
that of its competitors.
4
  These included: (i) the lack of a systematic approach to assessing the costs and benefits of regulations; (ii) the
duplication of requirements and a lack of coordination across many ministries and agencies; (iii) an excessive
reliance on ex-ante inspections rather than random and targeted ex-post controls; and (iv) the lack of procedures for
businesses to appeal against regulatory rulings.
5
    Import permits for 26 products were abolished under the 2 nd Public Sector Performance DPL (2013).
6
 The phased tariff reduction program initiated under DPL1 was suspended in its second year because of its potential
adverse impact on some manufacturing industries. Even now there are calls for raising tariff levels to provide
additional protection for domestic industry.
7
 Both for companies (corporate entities) and business (individuals). The Registrar of Companies also has a
department dealing with insolvency issues.
8
 A major weakness of the legal framework for insolvency (identified in the World Bank’s Report on the
Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC) of Insolvency and Creditor Rights Systems for Mauritius (2004)) was a
bias toward liquidation even in circumstances where alternative resolutions could be possible or even less costly.



                                                           48
This bias was corrected in the new legislation. The two new alternatives to liquidation are out-of-court debt
restructurings (workouts) or temporary relinquishment of power by the firm ’s directors (voluntary administration).
Liquidation will then take place as a last resort only.
9
 One of the recent changes that was not well understood is ranking based on the concept of ‘distance to frontier’.
Interlocutors also noted that certain factors such as coverage of private credit registry were not very relevant for
small states, and yet their inclusion with a score of zero penalizes them in the overall country ratings.
 Mauritius ranked 43 out of 189 countries in the ‘resolving insolvency’ ind icator in 2014. It ranked 67 out of 175
10

countries in the equivalent ‘closing a business’ indicator in 2006.
11 While the rankings are not strictly comparable across Doing Business Surveys between 2006 and 2014 because of
methodological changes that are made from time to time (every two years), the direction of change is likely to be an
accurate reflection of reality. The latest methodological change was made in 2015 Report (which reports on data as
of June 2014) in which the ranking of countries was comp uted using the ‘distance to frontier’ score for the first time.
The distance to frontier score benchmarks economies with respect to regulatory practice, showing the absolute
distance to the best performance in each Doing Business indicator. An economy’s distance to frontier score is
indicated on a scale from 0 to 100, where 0 represents the worst performance and 100 the frontier. The DTF score
improved slightly from 74 in 2013 to 75 in 2014 (reported in DB2015).
12
   Despite the progress made in the regulatory environment in recent years, Mauritius performs relatively less well in
some areas. These include dealing with permits (DTF 67), registering property (DTF 66), getting credit (DTF 65),
enforcing contracts (DTF 66), resolving insolvency (DTF 63), and protecting minority investors (DTF 65). It did
relatively well in starting a business (DTF 92), paying taxes (DFT 92), trading across boundaries (DTF 88) and
getting electricity (DTF 84). Source: Mauritius Doing Business Report 2015.
13
  As suggested earlier, another reason could be that overall external conditions were not supporting increased
private investment and growth of new businesses.
14
  METAP included a small component to finance TA and training to the Registrar General’s Office to reengineer
and computerize the registration process for movable property and to set up an online registry for collaterals.
15
  Minimum wages and working conditions in the private sector may be subject to Remuneration Orders issued by
the Minister of Labor on recommendation from the National Remuneration Board. In 2006, these Remuneration
Orders covered 80–90 percent of private sector workers. A similar mechanism exists for the public sector.
16
  According to the IMF’s Article IV Report (2014), “over the past few years, wages have r isen faster than labor
productivity, resulting in higher unit labor costs.”pp45.
17
  According to the SCD, half of Mauritian women of working age are still outside the labor market and once they
do participate, women in 2012 are still 22 percent less likely to be employed, 6 percent more likely to be
unemployed, and 25 percent more likely to be out of the labor market than men. The primary factors for the low
female labor force are marriage and family size. (para. 131).
18Improving the quality of human resources was an important element of the 1997 CAS. These concerns were later
highlighted in the 2002 CAS, which recognized that Mauritius' current labor force was ill-equipped to match the
labor force of knowledge-based societies. It was believed at the time that it would take about 10–20 years to bridge
the knowledge gap between Mauritius and the high skill economies of East Asia. Not much has changed since then.
19
  An action plan based on the Strategy was supposed to be implemented as an indicative trigger for DPL3 (2009).
This did not happen. An indicative trigger for DPL4 (2010) was to get Cabinet approval for an action plan.
However, this did not happen either and DPL4 did not include the education sector.
20
   There is no data to make an assessment about the relative improvement in the quality of learning. Nevertheless,
according to the draft SCD, “Mauritius still lags behind other middle-income countries in terms of learning
achievements. Although most Mauritian children attend and complete primary education they lag behind their peers
in comparator countries in regard to basic literacy, math and science skills. Results from Mauritius participation in
2009 PISA point out to challenges in quality of learning outcomes in spite of efforts to improve quality of education.
Fifteen-year-old Mauritians have lower reading literacy rates than the average for their OECD peers. These low
learning achievements suggest that a large segment of the population lacks adequate literacy and math skills to meet
today’s labor market demands”.


                                                          49
21
  There are some indications of an improvement in the quality of dialogue in recent months. A major policy reform,
supported by the World Bank, extending basic education up to 9 years for all was introduced early this year.
22
  The Mauritian financial system comprises 20 banks and 729 non-bank financial Institutions. The banks include
seven local banks, eight foreign-owned subsidiaries, one joint venture bank and four banks that are branches of
foreign banks. All the banks are licensed by the Bank of Mauritius to carry-out banking business locally and
internationally. The non-bank financial institutions include institutions that operate under the Insurance Act, the
Securities Act and the Financial Services Act. According to the IMF’s assessment, the banking system is healthy at
the aggregate level, with sufficient capital to withstand a wide range of shocks. Source: IMF Article IV Report
(2014).
23
  While almost 50 percent of all the firms surveyed consider access to finance as one of the top three constraints to
doing business in Mauritius, 59 percent of total SMEs cite access to finance as a major constraint. Source: Quoted
from Project Document for PS DPL1 (2012).
24
  Lending to SMEs is constrained by other reasons as well. Most SMEs suffer from lack of expertise in preparing
and presenting bankable projects. SMEs find commercial bank lending procedures to be lengthy, and the overall
borrowing costs including interest, time to get the loan approved, and cost to prepare the documents is considered
too high. Equally importantly, there is a dearth of specialized menu of financial products/services that cater to their
needs.
25
  Participants of the MCIB currently comprise 17 banks including the Bank of Mauritius, nine leasing companies,
eight insurance companies, the Mauritius Housing Company Ltd, the Development Bank of Mauritius, the National
Housing Development Co Ltd, the Mauritius Civil Service Mutual Aid Association, the Employees Welfare Fund
and the utility companies Central Electricity Board, the Central Water Authority, the Waste Water Management
Authority, and other companies offering information, communication and telecommunication services.
26
   Cabinet approval of decision to transform DBM into a financially viable MSME Bank was a prior action for the
Private sector Competitiveness DPL 1. The prior action for DPL1 was fulfilled with the 2012 Budget Speech
confirming the government intention to seek a specialized private financial institution to transform the DBM into a
financially viable MSME Bank. IFC was given the mandate to attract a strategic partner that specializes in MSME
Banking. Prior to signing the mandate to act as a strategic advisor, IFC undertook a diagnostic analysis on DBM
which identified its chronic operational and governance weaknesses recommending against its transformation into
an MSME Bank and instead recommending its orderly closure and inviting a credible international SME Bank with
a verifiable record to set up such an institution in Mauritius. This was not accepted by the government and the IFC
pulled out of the project. Subsequently, the World Bank undertook another diagnostic of DBM which concluded that
restructuring of DMB into a MSME bank was a viable option Deloitte (India) was appointed the Transaction
Adviser to assist the restructuring of the DBM by the State Investment Corporation led steering committee. The IFC
disagreed with the World Bank’s assessment and did not believe any effective restructuring could be done without a
private strategic partner.
27
  This is a classic illustration of what is wrong with some of the prior actions. In this case, the prior action was not
initiation of restructuring but the appointment of transaction adviser and other procedural actions that ‘signaled’
initiation. Yet the impression given out is that restructuring was initiated when it was clearly not so.
28
  With regard to cost, while Mauritius does not appear expensive compared to sub-Saharan African countries, it is
expensive compared to other competing countries. In 2003, a representative bundle of internet services cost $15 in
Mauritius, $33.30 in South Africa and $45.70 in Kenya. But, costs in Africa are among the highest in the world and
the same bundle cost $11 in Singapore, $8.40 in Malaysia and $8.70 in India. Source: Project Document, DPL 2,
para. 92.
29
   The key proposed changes were the following: (i) Introduce competition regulation principles into the sector
regulatory framework; (ii) Revise the structure of licenses to increase flexibility for operators and bring the
framework into line with international norms; and (iii) Revise the system of tariff regulation to allow more
flexibility in competitive markets.
30
  They were expected to be approved in March 2013. These are some other examples where the prior actions were
implemented, yet nothing has changed on the ground.
31
  Mauritius’s supply of international bandwidth has increased through its links to three submarine cables. As a
result, the country‘s outgoing international internet bandwidth has increased six -fold over 2009–13. The price for

                                                           50
broad-band fixed service per month declined by 15 percent during 2011–2014. The price for broad-band mobile
service per month fell by 48 percent in the same period. Source: CPS CLR (draft).
32
  These include: online application and payments of services for incorporation of a company; annual registration
fees of a company; and e-payment for the lease of state land.
33
  Under the project, 10.5 kilometers of road were up-graded and standard annual maintenance carried out on an
additional 17 kilometers. Overall though, road maintenance remains underfunded resulting in increased network
deterioration.
34
     However, the project target for implementation of performance based routine maintenance contracts was not met.
36
  Assistance was offered for training and skills development; hand-holding services like business planning and
coaching; product development and marketing support, quality control and standards, support in technology
upgrading, and assisting in preparing a business plan, filing statutory returns and complying with various health, fire
and environmental regulations.
37
 The establishment of an inter-agency committee and issuance of a Request for Proposal to develop an overall
M&E Framework for Business Development Services schemes were prior actions for the second Private Sector
Competitiveness DPL (2013).
38
  The Logistics Performance Index overall score reflects perceptions of a country's logistics based on efficiency of
customs clearance process, quality of trade- and transport-related infrastructure, ease of arranging competitively
priced shipments, quality of logistics services, ability to track and trace consignments, and frequency with which
shipments reach the consignee within the scheduled time. The index ranges from 1 to 5, with a higher score
representing better performance.
39
     In 2014, Mauritius’ overall logistics performance score was just 48.5 percent of the top performer’s score.
40
   Switzerland, the top rated country in 2014–15 had a score of 5.7 (out of a maximum score of 7). The index is a
composite of 12 aspects that influence competitiveness in an economy including quality of institutions, macro-
economic management, infrastructure, health and primary education of population, higher education and training,
goods market efficiency, labor market efficiency, financial market development, technological readiness, market
size, business sophistication, and innovation.
41
     IMF Article IV Report (2014).
42
   Overall, exports in 2013 from Mauritius, including re-exports have only nearly recovered to 2006 levels and stood
at USD 2.3 billion as compared to USD 2.4 billion in 2008. Source: SCD para 40.




                                                            51
4. Conclusions and Lessons
Conclusions
4.1      After nearly two decades of strong economic growth, in 2005 the economy was in
difficulties. The loss of trade preferences in textiles in 2005, the anticipation of prospective
reform to the European Union’s sugar protocol for 2006–10, and higher international oil prices
had contributed to a slow-down in growth, rising unemployment and widening fiscal and current
account deficits. A new government was elected in 2005 which implemented a series of bold
economic reforms to redress the macro-economic imbalances and enhance competitiveness to
facilitate efficient restructuring of the economy.1 Good policies also allowed the government to
deal effectively with the global financial crisis of 2008. Following the elections in 2010, a new
(and fragile) coalition government was elected which emphasized increased public spending on
welfare programs and the pace of reforms slowed. Following a period of political instability,
fresh elections were held in end December. However, a sense of policy drift continues under the
new government elected in end 2014 with an overwhelming majority.

4.2    Over 2005–10, the CPS aligned the World Bank’s program with the reforming efforts of
the government of the time. The World Bank Group’s engagement in Mauritius involved mostly
the DPL programmatic series (DPL 1–4) with limited investment lending and IFC involvement.
This was appropriate given the need for wide-ranging reforms and the clearly expressed
preference of the government to avoid long disbursement procedures. The four pillars of the
World Bank’s strategy were identical to the government’s program. Consistent with the World
Bank Group’s small states agenda, the World Bank’s strategy and program in Mauritius
addressed the two critical issues of vulnerability (macro-economic, social) and competitiveness.
Overall, the World Bank’s strategy was flexible in design and practice and there were substantial
changes to the World Bank’s program in the course of implementation, notably to respond to the
prolonged recession in Europe and the country’s need for additional financing. The World
Bank’s program was well harmonized with the work of other development partners. One of the
major benefits of the joint mission and results matrix for the DPLs cited by authorities was that it
provided a forum for co-ordinating the activities of various sector ministries in pursuit of the
reform agenda, as well as brought all DPs together to focus on the key reforms and their role.

4.3     However, the World Bank was slow to recognize the changing political dynamics after
2010. Even as the policy dialogue became more difficult with the new government, and co-
ordination with the MoF and engagement with other stakeholders less clear, the World Bank
assumed it was business as usual. This was reflected in the CPS Progress Report of 2011, which
did not recognize any significant change in policy orientation except for an increased emphasis
on social programs. In the face of increasing evidence of lack of appetite for serious reforms, the
World Bank went ahead and approved a new series of DPLs to support a more efficient public
sector and competitiveness of the private sector. Prior actions were loosely defined and were
judged to have been completed even when no real reforms were implemented. Not surprisingly,
unlike the previous period, results on the ground have not been satisfactory.2

4.4     Over the whole review period we found the Bank Group response helped improve the
trade policy regime and investment climate (e.g., business and land registration) and contributed



                                                 52
to SME development and the ICT regulatory framework. Its interventions were also useful in
developing institutional capacity in the roads, energy and water-supply sub-sectors. However the
lack of appetite for reforms since 2011 may jeopardize the sustainability of some of these
achievements. Moreover, because of the slow pace of reforms Mauritius is now losing ground in
some sectors (e.g., ICT, regional transhipment in Port Louis port, tourism) compared to some
neighborhood countries. As noted in the SCD, current policies such as those disallowing fifth
freedom and foreign ownership of air carriers, bringing in private sector to improve the
operational efficiency in cargo handling, or further promoting the ICT sector through
infrastructure sharing and unbundling the local loop network limit competition and dampen
employment creation, thereby hampering the Mauritian economy in a context of growing
regional competition.

4.5    As a result of the slow-down in reforms in recent years, the macro impact of the reforms
on competitiveness and promotion of private investment was mixed, with some positive impacts
(on export diversification and FDI) and some negative (stagnant private domestic investment).

4.6     Based on these assessments, the Bank Group made a positive contribution to enhancing
competitiveness, but its performance fell short of what was expected and needed in some critical
areas (see table 3.3).

Lessons
4.7     Taking all of the research carried out for the evaluation into account, we have developed
a series of lessons regarding operational and strategic dimensions of Bank Group engagement in
Mauritius. A number of key lessons relate, specifically, to the Bank Group’s ongoing
engagement in Mauritius as well as to its engagement in middle income small states countries.

4.8     Improving risk management through a better understanding of the political economy:
Getting a broader understanding of the political economy of the reforms is critical. At times, a
lack of political judgment was evident. For example, the World Bank did not anticipate the
slowdown in reforms after a new coalition government was formed in 2010, and went on as if
nothing had changed except for a greater focus on fiscal stimulus. It may be useful to prepare
some kind of informed Note describing the political make-up of a new government after
elections3 (what kind of coalition parties involved, their numerical strength etc.), with an
assessment of the new government’s attitude to key reforms. The World Bank should also
maintain an on-going dialogue with the political parties as well as civil society which will help
better understand political constraints and factor them into its program. This understanding
should be reflected in an up-dated CPS to ensure the World Bank’s revised program is consistent
with changes in the new government’s reform priorities. The CPS Progress Report of 2011 was a
missed opportunity in this regard.

4.9    Improving selectivity: In Mauritius, the World Bank’s strategy sought to address a wide
range of issues and lacked focus. Instead of this wide coverage, perhaps the Bank Group should
have focused on some of the most critical bottlenecks that take a long while to fix (such as poor
transport infrastructure, poor quality of education and skills) and are tough to implement, and
supported these consistently over the course of its long engagement.



                                                53
4.10 Balancing flexibility and credibility. The Bank Group should be prepared to adjust its
strategy and program in the face of adverse exogenous shocks, or errors in judgment. However, it
should draw some red lines, based on what is important, and what is realistically possible
politically and institutionally. To this end, the monitoring framework for DPLs and the CPS
should be simplified with a few key targets with baseline measures and realistic 3–5 year
outcomes that go beyond processing indicators. This was not always the case in Mauritius. Quite
often, prior actions were very early steps in a long process at best, and mostly they were process-
oriented. The result was predictable: in some cases, prior actions were successfully implemented
(in form and not substance), money was disbursed, and yet there was no progress in achieving
the strategy objectives (for example, DBM restructuring, spectrum auctions, education reforms).

4.11 Better customizing assistance to small states needs: The Mauritius experience suggests
that it is possible to address specific concerns of small states with conventional programs. But
there was a general sense among interlocutors that if the World Bank is to remain a key partner
in Mauritius it needs to “redesign the process of working with the Mauritius Government”. For
example, new financial instruments would be needed to meet the needs of UMIC small states
like Mauritius. Though Bank Group assistance was often considered of better quality, proposed
instruments such as Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS) were found overly expensive. This
was also the case with IFC interventions that were often too costly. There was a sense that the
Bank Group would need to find new ways to engage to be a more visible and helpful partner.
Our interlocutors expected the Bank Group to provide notably:

      more cross-fertilization to take advantage from other countries experience and more
       innovative support from the Bank Group. For example, DPLs conditions were at times
       considered as “repackaging” what was already being done rather than adding real value.

      more proactive engagement from the Bank Group to further promote regional
       cooperation and trade and exchange of ideas of good practice. Mauritius stands to benefit
       immensely from lowering of trade barriers in its neighborhood. And the neighborhood
       can also benefit from examples of best practice in many areas of economic management
       in Mauritius. Initiatives such as the Accelerated Program for Economic Integration
       though challenging to implement, are welcome. The World Bank could usefully partner
       with regional institutions such as The Regional Multi-disciplinary Center of Excellence
       set up by Mauritius, the Indian Ocean Commission and COMESA to promote regional
       exchange of ideas.

      Better ways to build in-house capacity especially in line ministries. Assistance in building
       institutional capacity, especially in sector ministries, is probably the most important
       contribution the Bank Group can make in small states. Several areas of weakness are
       obvious (including capacity for: strategic planning in sector ministries; investment
       planning and implementation; developing appropriate regulatory frameworks for
       innovation and new technologies; improved systems for delivery of social services etc.).
       TA involving hands-on support in the nitty-gritty aspects of reform implementation were
       as important as designing frameworks and policies, and expertise imbedded in line
       ministries over a sufficiently long period of time were seen to have been very useful. TA
       in the form of peer reviewing by Bank of important ministerial initiatives was also found



                                                54
       useful. How best to fund and implement such TA with a small budget remains a
       challenge.

4.12 Taking the above findings into account, we have developed five lessons regarding
operational and strategic dimensions of Bank group engagement in Mauritius.

4.13 Lesson 1: The Bank Group needs to make a greater effort to understand political
economy issues, including identifying reform champions or opponents of politically
contentious reforms, in order to better incorporate political risks into reforms, especially in
coalition governments. The decision to extend the CPS in 2010, was a missed opportunity to
reflect the slowdown in reforms after a new coalition was formed. This would have made more
sense to prepare a new CPS rather than trying to adjust the program through ad hoc bilateral
dialogue and actions that are insufficient to meet targeted objectives. The World Bank also failed
to properly grasp the political risk of a program depending on the leadership of very few policy
makers. A political analysis piece at the time of the election could have generated insight into
government ownership of the reform agenda.

4.14 A detailed political economy analysis could have served as a base for monitoring of
political developments and risks to reform. This analysis would help (i) identify for key reforms
policy makers willing to fight for it, recognize the risks to the reform agenda of failed ownership,
and based on these findings prioritize and sequence the supported policy agenda accordingly; (ii)
gauge the degree of ownership and progress on targeted outcomes at the progress report stage to
thereby inform more accurately and honestly revisions to the on-going program.

4.15 If there is a change of government over the CPS period, the Bank Group would prepare a
new full or interim strategy to reflect the priorities of a new government if the lack of political
support make the former strategy obsolete. The Bank Group could still continue advocacy work
through policy dialogue on ‘dropped outcomes’ related to key reforms for which government
support has waned (see Lesson 4).

4.16 Lesson 2: The Bank Group needs to ensure that the objectives and scope of its
strategy are commensurate with the size of its program, and needs to be highly selective in
the areas it decides to support. The analysis conducted in this case study points toward two
major areas where the Bank Group could focus its work together with other DPs to increase
competitiveness: (i) improving the legal and regulatory framework to promote public-private
partnerships (PPPs) and improve transport and ICT infrastructure; (ii) overhauling the education
system to widen its base and improve quality to help meet the shortages of skilled labor
constraining the growth of the high skill, high technology economy of the future. The Bank
Group should continue to take a pro-active stance in promoting trade, investment and exchange
of ideas at the regional level. These suggestions would need to be further confirmed by the
findings of the CLR and CPF (under preparation) which aim at informing this selectivity choice.

4.17 Lesson 3: The Bank Group needs to remain flexible in the design of its program and
be prepared to modify it in size and substance if the external environment changes or
priorities of the government change. However, slippages in implementation of policy
conditionality (as in prior actions) are to be accommodated only in exceptional circumstances.
Prior actions in DPLs need to be precisely worded. They should be crafted to ensure that there is


                                                55
a clear logical chain between the prior action and the ultimate objective of reform and also that
this chain is aligned with the programmatic cycle of the DPL.4

4.18 Lesson 4: The Bank Group could take advantage of the new SCD to reposition itself
as a more visible and credible partner of the Mauritian government and foster demand for
good policies. The World Bank needs to make more effort in informing public debates, sharing
other countries’ experience, organizing forums to discuss policy trade-offs on national
development policies including on supporting SOE reform, improving environmental resilience
and supporting capacity building of key stakeholders—government, parliament and civil society
organizations. Brainstorming sessions on key critical challenges could be a very effective
mechanism for policy reform.5

                  Lesson 5: Demand for innovative advisory services typically exceeds what can be
                   financed through Reimbursable Advisory Services. The introduction of a
                   programmatic joint analytic economic program could provide room for a more
                   sustained and adapted sector policy dialogue, help maintain strategic focus and
                   identify interconnected activities. In Mauritius, peer reviewing by Bank staff and
                   experts of important work undertaken by line ministries was found useful and
                   could be formalized. Embedding expertise in line ministries for a reasonable
                   length of time was seen to be useful for building in-house capacity.

1
  These included the elimination of the EPZ regime, a progressive liberalization of the foreign trade and investment
regime and simplification of labor laws.
2
 Examples include: stalled restructuring of DBM; stalled reforms in cargo handling facility; lack of progress in
spectrum auctions; limited movement on air transport liberalization; no movement on improving quality in
education etc.
3
 The new government was a coalition government which was fragile (and it became a minority government when
one of the partners withdrew in 2011).
4
    See paragraph 4.10.
5This appeared to be used successfully in Kazakhstan, but this may reside on the importance the PM gives to these
sessions. The World Bank has optimized these sessions by bringing in a panel of high-level experts, providing clear
policy messages based on international experience and customized to Kazakhstan environment. These sessions,
chaired by PM and the vice presidency or chief economist of the Europe and Central Asia Region, have become a
critical platform to share opinion and discuss specific policy issues in Kazakhstan. (see IEG- Knowledge Based
Country Program Report).




                                                         56
Appendix A. Mauritius Economic and Social Indicators,
2005–13
Series Name                               2005     2006     2007     2008     2009     2010     2011     2012     2013
Growth and inflation
GDP growth (annual %)                      1.2      3.9      5.9      5.5      3.0      4.1      3.9      3.2      3.2
GDP per capita growth (annual %)           0.6      3.5      5.4      5.1      2.7      3.9      3.7      2.9      3.0
GNI per capita, Atlas method (current
                                          5,420    5,660    6,190    7,050    7,420    7,970    8,320    9,010    9,570
US$)
GNI per capita, PPP (current
                                          11,340   12,150   13,400   14,150   14,470   15,470   16,220   17,010   17,730
international $)
Inflation, consumer prices (annual %)      4.9      8.9      8.8      9.7      2.5      2.9      6.5      3.9      3.5
Composition of GDP
Agriculture, value added (% of GDP)        6.0      5.0      4.4       4.0     3.8      3.6      3.6      3.5      3.2
Industry, value added (% of GDP)           27.6     25.9     26.2     27.3     27.1     26.2     25.4     24.7     24.3
Services, etc., value added (% of
                                           66.4     69.1     69.4     68.7     69.1     70.3     71.0     71.8     72.5
GDP)
External Accounts
Exports of goods and services (% of
                                           59.9     60.4     57.9     52.9     49.0     52.5     53.4     54.6     54.3
GDP)
Imports of goods and services (% of
                                           65.9     70.9     67.2     66.1     58.3     63.8     66.4     66.7     66.5
GDP)
Current account balance (% of GDP)         -5.2     -9.0     -5.6    -10.1     -7.4    -10.3    -13.9     -7.2     -9.9
Present value of external debt (% of
                                            ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..      79
GNI)
Total debt service (% of GNI)              3.6      3.8      2.0      1.8      1.8      1.6      30.6     27.4     28.4
Other macroeconomic indicators
Gross domestic savings (% of GDP)          16.5     16.2     17.6     14.1     11.9     12.4     13.0     12.6     11.8
Gross fixed capital formation (% of
                                           21.4     24.2     25.1     24.6     26.4     24.9     24.0     23.0     21.2
GDP)
Gross fixed capital formation, private
                                           15.1     16.7     19.7     20.5     19.8     18.8     18.5     17.5     16.2
sector (% of GDP)
Gross savings (% of GDP)                   17.4     17.6     21.5     17.2     14.0     15.5     14.4     14.2     12.7
Fiscal accounts
Cash surplus/deficit (% of GDP)             ..       ..       ..       ..      0.6      -2.4     -1.1     -0.6      ..
General government final
                                           14.8     14.1     12.9     12.7     14.1     13.9     13.5     13.4     14.4
consumption expenditure (% of GDP)
Gross national expenditure (% of
                                          106.0    110.5    109.3    113.2    109.4    111.3    112.9    112.1    112.2
GDP)
Revenue, excluding grants (% of
                                            ..       ..       ..       ..      23.5     22.8     22.4     23.0      ..
GDP)
Social indicators
Health expenditure, public (% of
                                           2.2      2.0      1.9      1.8      2.2      2.5      2.5      2.3      2.4
GDP)
Immunization, DPT (% of children
                                           97.0     97.0     97.0     99.0     99.0     99.0     98.0     98.0     98.0
ages 12–23 months)
Improved sanitation facilities (% of
                                           89.8     89.9     90.1     90.2     90.4     90.5     90.6     90.8      ..
population with access)
Life expectancy at birth, total (years)    72.4     72.4     72.6     72.6     72.9     73.0     73.3     73.9     74.5
Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live
                                           13.8     14.0     14.0     13.9     13.6     13.3     13.0     12.8     12.5
births)



                                                            57
   Series Name                                        2005          2006           2007           2008           2009           2010          2011           2012        2013
   Out-of-pocket health expenditure (%
                                                      84.6           86.6           88.0          90.7           91.1           91.3           91.3           91.4       91.4
   of private expenditure on health)
   Population growth (annual %)                       0.6            0.5            0.5            0.4           0.3            0.2            0.2            0.3        0.2
   Population, total (millions)                       1.2            1.2            1.2            1.2           1.2            1.3            1.3            1.3        1.3
   Population, female (% of total)                    50.5           50.5           50.5          50.5           50.5           50.6           50.6           50.6       50.6
   School enrollment, preprimary (%
                                                     103.0          102.5          100.4          100.2         104.4          110.4          113.3          113.7       112.9
   gross)
   School enrollment, primary (% gross)              105.7          106.6          106.7          107.4         106.9          107.2          107.6          108.2       107.8
   School enrollment, secondary (%
                                                      90.7           90.1           91.4          91.4           92.5           93.2           94.4           95.9        ..
   gross)
   School enrollment, tertiary (% gross)              21.3           23.5           24.5          27.2           32.2           34.2           36.0           39.9       41.2
   Fixed telephone subscriptions (per
                                                      29.5           29.4           29.6          29.7           30.6           31.5           30.3           28.2       29.2
   100 people)
   Unemployment, total (% of total labor
                                                       9.6           9.1            8.5            7.2            7.3            7.7            7.9           8.7         7.6
   force) (national estimate)

Source: World Development Indicators data as of July, 2015.
Note: DPT = diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus; GDP = gross domestic product; GNI = Gross National Income; ILO = International Laborur; PPP = purchasing power parity.




                                                                                   58
Appendix B. Bank Group Operational Program in
Mauritius FY07–15
Summary of Bank Activities
LENDING

1.     During the CPS period, the World Bank responded flexibly to changing external
circumstances and the government’s preference for budget support operations. Originally, the
CPS envisaged six budget support and four sector investment lending operations. Instead, the
World Bank delivered eight DPLs and only one investment operation.

2.      A series of three programmatic budget support operations for $30 million each was
originally planned to support the government’s policy reforms. However, to respond to fiscal
challenges and cushion the impact of the financial crisis of 2008, the World Bank increased the
third operation to $100 million and introduced a DDO in the operation. As soon as DPL3 was
disbursed, the government requested a fourth DPL for supporting the budget for the last six
months of 2009. The World Bank provided a further $50 million in funding through a DPL4.

3.     In addition, two sets of programmatic DPL series (Public Sector Performance and Private
Sector Competitiveness) with a total amount of $35 million in each series were delivered in
FY12 and FY13. The Public Sector Performance DPL series focused primarily on the
performance of the public sector while the Private Sector Competitiveness DPL series
concentrated on strengthening the policy and institutional environment of the private sector
competitiveness. These operations provided both technical and financial assistance to the
government in carrying out its reform program.

4.     Two sector investment technical assistance operations, which were not originally
envisaged in the CPS, were also approved in FY09 and FY10 to support the government in
enhancing competitiveness. However, these projects were canceled at an early stage of
implementation at the request of the government, and replaced by the two sets of DPLs series
mentioned above.1

5.      Only one out of four planned infrastructure projects totaling $140 million was approved
(Infrastructure Project, FY10, for $50 million).2 This project sought to improve the roads
infrastructure and also to strengthen the government’s institutional capacity for planning and
executing public investment in transport, water, waste-water and energy sectors.

AAA

6.      Financial assistance was complemented by technical assistance and analytic work, some
of which has been described in the report. Technical assistance was provided through the DPLs
as well as stand-alone activities.3 Some of the key analytic work informed the reform program in
areas such as tariff reforms and identification of NTBs, Doing Business reforms, infrastructure,
health, education sector reforms, social protection, poverty assessment, public enterprises, ICT
regulations, e-Government initiatives, public sector efficiency and institutional strengthening.



                                               59
Detailed Portfolio Analysis
7.     Bank Group financing commitments delivered over the evaluation period amounted
to about $ 482 million. From FY07–15 the World Bank Group committed a total of $368
million in IBRD loans, $26 million in trust fund grants, and about $88 million in net
commitments by the IFC. IBRD disbursements during this period amounted to about $339
million.

8.      World Bank lending support to Mauritius increased sharply to help the country
deal with a series of shocks. Between FY05 and FY07, there was no lending support provided
to Mauritius. In order to support the government’s response to a series of short term trade shocks,
including the loss of textile and sugar trade preferences and soaring oil prices, a series of three
programmatic budget support operations totaling $90 million, were originally planned. The
first two Development Policy Operations of $30 million each were approved in FY07 and FY08.
For the third operation approved in FY09, the amount was increased to $100 million and a DDO
introduced in order to cushion the impact of the unexpected financial crisis of 2008. An
unplanned fourth operation, of $50 million, was approved in FY10, to continue supporting the
reform agenda.

 Figure B.1. IBRD Commitments and Disbursements to Mauritius, FY07–15




 Source: World Bank Business Intelligence database.


9.      The financing commitments were largely for development operations and were
concentrated primarily in economic policy. IBRD development policy lending over the
evaluation period amounted to $280 million and constituted 76 percent of total IBRD lending to
Mauritius. World Bank support through investment lending amounted to $88 million for three
IRBD investment loans to support manufacturing, services and infrastructure development. The
projects included a $50 million loan to improve the national infrastructure (FY10) and two
Technical Assistance (TA) operations in FY09 and FY10, to support the government in its
private sector competitiveness agenda. At the government’s request, the two TA projects were
canceled and replaced by two sets of DPLs.4 The government of Mauritius felt that given the
greater need for policy and institutional support, as opposed to public investment and capacity
building, DPLs were a more appropriate instrument for their needs. Furthermore, the government
of Mauritius had initially underestimated the fiduciary compliance requirements under SILs and
despite the technical assistance support provided to the staff, the procedures were deemed too



                                                      60
cumbersome. The sector composition of operations was concentrated in the area of economic
policy, with commitments classified under the economic policy sector board accounting for more
than half of total commitments. Other key areas of engagement included; financial and private
sector development, transport, social protection and investment climate.

 Figure B.2. Sector Allocations of World Bank Commitments to Mauritius (US$,
 millions)
                                       Series1, Social         Series1, Investment
                                     Protection, 20, 5%        Climate Practice, 15,
                                                                       4%
                                                                                       Economic Policy
                         Series1, Transport,
                              50, 14%
                                                                                       Financial and Private Sector
                                                                                       Development

                                                                                       Transport
                                                                 Series1,
                       Series1, Financial and
                                                                Economic
                           Private Sector
                                                               Policy, 230,            Social Protection
                       Development, 53, 14%
                                                                   63%

                                                                                       Investment Climate Practice



 Source: World Bank Business Intelligence database.



10.     A range of knowledge products and technical assistance informed key areas of Bank
Group support and also contributed to building capacity. Between FY07 and FY15, the
World Bank delivered a total of 26 analytic and advisory activities (AAA) products to Mauritius
–split equally between economic and sector work (ESW) and nonlending technical assistance
(NLTA). A total of about $3.6 million in Bank (administrative) budget and trust fund finance
was allocated to AAA products, 69 percent of which was allocated to ESW tasks. Key analytic
work informed the reform program in areas such as Doing Business reforms, infrastructure,
health, education, social protection, poverty, public enterprises, e-government initiatives, public
sector efficiency and institutional strengthening. A substantial amount of knowledge work was
performed as part of implementation support for DPLs.




                                                          61
 Figure B.3. Number of AAA products by Sector Board, FY07–15




 Source: World Bank Business Intelligence database.



Investments by the International Finance Corporation
11.     The net investment commitment of the International Finance Corporation during this
period amounted to $88 million. IFC focused its interventions on two key sectors- infrastructure,
and financial services. IFC investments in Mauritius included a $75 million loan to the State
Bank of Mauritius to provide foreign currency needed by the bank to meet its medium term
funding plans and local and regional obligations.5 Advisory services included support to the
government of Mauritius in introducing private sector participation in the financing, operation,
and management of cargo-handling operations in the port sector, specifically in two transactions
at Port Louis Harbor. IFC involvement was aimed at working with the government to identify a
strategic partner in Cargo Handling Corporation Limited (CHCL) who would spearhead the
much needed turnaround of the company and also mobilize the much needed investment for port
operations. However, various challenges including a lack of clarity about managerial autonomy
and decision making and changes in interlocutors, caused the Port transaction to stall.

12.     There were no MIGA guarantees provided to Mauritius during the evaluation period.

Portfolio Performance and Risk
13.     IEG assessments of completed World Bank operations in Mauritius show much better
development outcome ratings (100 percent, moderately satisfactory or better) than the average
for the Sub-Saharan Africa (64 percent) and for the World Bank as a whole (71 percent). With
the exception of the Environmental sewerage and sanitation project, which was rated as
satisfactory, all the other IEG rated projects received highly satisfactory ratings. The sewerage
and sanitation project was found to have had a weak M&E design. In particular, the project
outcome and output indicators lacked baseline and target values and some of the outcome
indicators were considered inadequate, as they could not be tracked during project
implementation.



                                                      62
14.     IEG’s review of closed projects found a moderate risk to development outcome in
four (80 percent) of the five instances where risk was assessed (see table B.3). The total value
of loans to these projects was about $218 million or 96 percent of the value of all projects
assessed for risk to development outcome. The risks assessed related mainly to the ability of the
government to keep up the momentum of the reforms, maintaining macroeconomic stability and
addressing capacity constraints.

15.      The riskiness of the World Bank’s Mauritius portfolio under implementation
remained below average for most of the evaluation period. During the two periods, FY07–10
and FY12–15, no Bank operations in Mauritius (and none of the commitments) were considered
to be at risk. This was in contrast to an average of 26 percent of projects and 27 percent of
commitments at risk in AFR, and a world average of 22 percent of projects and 19 percent of
commitments at risk over the same two periods. In FY11, one out of the three projects (33
percent) under implementation in Mauritius and 23 percent of commitments, was considered to
be at risk. This was higher than both the Africa Region (24 percent of projects and 21 percent of
commitments), and World Bank averages (21 percent of projects and 14 percent of
commitments).




                                               63
Table B.1. Mauritius—List of World Bank Approved Projects, FY07–15
                                                                             IBRD     Trust Fund
                                                            Total Project
                                                                          Commitment Commitment     Rev
                               Agreement          Project   Commitment                                         Sector
 Proj ID   Project Name                    FY                               Amount     Amount     Closing                   Latest DO   Latest IP   IEG Outcome Rating
                                 Type             Status       (US$,                                           Board
                                                                             (US$,       (US$,      Date
                                                              millions)
                                                                           millions)   millions)
 P091828 Infrastructure          IBRD      2010   Closed        50.0          50.0               12/31/2014   Transport        S           S
         Project
 P101570 Development Policy      IBRD      2007   Closed       30.0         30.0                 12/31/2007  Economic                                Highly satisfactory
         DPL (FY07)                                                                                            Policy
 P103158 Multisectoral            IDF      2007   Closed        0.5         0.0          0.5     07/20/2010   Health,          S           S
         Response to                                                                                        Nutrition and
         HIV/AIDS                                                                                            Population
 P103467 CTSaV Bagasse-          CARB      2008   Active       25.7         0.0          25.7         #     Energy and        N/A         N/A
         Fuelled                                                                                              Mining
         Cogeneration
 P105669 Economic Transition     IBRD      2009   Closed       18.0         18.0                 06/25/2013      FPD                                   Not applicable
         (TA) Project
 P106650 MU-Dev.Pol.Loan         IBRD      2008   Closed       30.0         30.0                 12/31/2008   Economic                               Highly satisfactory
         (intermediate)                                                                                        Policy
 P112369 MU-Third Trade and      IBRD      2009   Closed       100.0       100.0                 12/31/2011   Economic                               Highly satisfactory
         Competitiveness                                                                                       Policy
         DPL
 P112943 MU-Manufacturing &      IBRD      2010   Closed       20.0         20.0                 12/13/2012      FPD                                     Not rated
         Servs Dev &
         Comp(SME)
 P116608 MU:Fourth Trade         IBRD      2010   Closed       50.0         50.0                 12/31/2011   Economic                               Highly satisfactory
         and                                                                                                   Policy
         Competitiveness
         DPL
 P125694 MU-First Public         IBRD      2012   Closed       20.0         20.0                 12/31/2012     Social         S           S
         Sector Performance                                                                                   Protection
         DPL
 P126903 Private Sector          IBRD      2012   Closed       15.0         15.0                 12/31/2012      FPD           S          MS
         Competitiveness
         DPL
 P128140 MU -Second Public       IBRD      2013   Closed       20.0         20.0                 06/30/2014   Economic         MS          S
         Sector Performance                                                                                    Policy
         DPL




                                                                            64
                                                                                                         IBRD     Trust Fund
                                                                                        Total Project
                                                                                                      Commitment Commitment     Rev
                                       Agreement                       Project          Commitment                                                           Sector
  Proj ID     Project Name                                 FY                                           Amount     Amount     Closing                                           Latest DO         Latest IP       IEG Outcome Rating
                                         Type                          Status              (US$,                                                             Board
                                                                                                         (US$,       (US$,      Date
                                                                                          millions)
                                                                                                       millions)   millions)
 P131818 MU-Prep of Grid                  RETF            2013             Active            0.2          0.0         0.2    08/21/2014                     Energy and            N/A                 N/A
         Code, Feed in                                                                                                                                        Mining
         Tariffs
 P132510 MU Second Private                 IBRD           2013          Closed             15.0            15.0                           06/30/2014        Investment             S                  S
         Sector Compet. DPL                                                                                                                                   Climate
                                                                                                                                                              Practice
   Total                                                                                   394.4           368.0           26.4
Source: World Bank database as of July, 2015 (includes supplements).
Note: DO = development objective; HS = highly satisfactory; IDA = International Development Association; IEG = Independent Evaluation Group; MS = moderately satisfactory; RETF = Recipient-executed trust fund; S =
satisfactory; FPD = Financial and Private Sector Development



Table B.2. Number and Total Commitment Amount of IBRD Commitments, FY07–15 (US$, millions)
                                                         2007               2008               2009            2010            2011              2012                2013                  2014                 2015            Total
                                                    No.     Amt.     No.       Amt.       No.     Amt.    No.      Amt.   No.     Amt.      No.    Amt.        No.       Amt.       No.      Amt.         No.     Amt.     No.     Amt.
 Sector Board
 Economic Policy                                     1          30     1        30         1       100    1        50      -          -      -          -       1        20            -          -         -          -   5        230
 Financial and Private Sector Development            -          -      -            -      1       18     1        20      -          -      1      15           -          -          -          -         -          -   3        53
 Investment Climate Practice                         -          -      -            -      -          -    -          -    -          -      -          -       1        15            -          -         -          -   1        15
 Social Protection                                   -          -      -            -      -          -    -          -    -          -      1      20           -          -          -          -         -          -   1        20
 Transport                                           -          -      -            -      -          -   1        50      -          -      -          -        -          -          -          -         -          -   1        50
 Grand Total                                         1          30     1        30         2       118    3        120     -          -      2      35          2        35            -          -         -          -   11       368
Source: World Bank database as of June 27, 2014 (includes supplements).
Note: IBRD = International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.




                                                                                                           65
Table B.3. IEG Project Ratings for Mauritius, Exit FY07–15
                                                                                                   IEG Risk to
                                                      Net                              IEG        development        IEG Bank
                                                   Commitment        Approval        Outcome        objective        Quality atIEG Bank
 Exit FY       Proj ID       Project Name          Amount ($M)          FY            rating         Rating            entry  Supervision
  2007        P001921    MU-Env Sewerage              10.0             1998             S          Negligible to    ModeratelySatisfactory
                         & Sanitation (FY98)                                                           low         unsatisfactory
   2007      P101570 MU-Development                    30.0         2007       HS                   Moderate           Highly    Highly
                         Policy DPL (FY07)                                                                                    satisfactory
                                                                                                                    satisfactory
   2008      P106650 MU-Dev.Pol.Loan                   30.0         2008       HS          Moderate                    Highly    Highly
                         (intermediate)                                                                                       satisfactory
                                                                                                                    satisfactory
   2009      P112369 MU-Third Trade                    107.8        2009       HS          Moderate                    Highly    Highly
                         and                                                                                                  satisfactory
                                                                                                                    satisfactory
                         Competitiveness
                         DPL
   2011      P116608 MU:Fourth Trade                   50.0         2010       HS          Moderate          Highly              Highly
                         and                                                                               satisfactory       satisfactory
                         Competitiveness
                         DPL
   2013      P105669 MU-Economic                        1.6         2009      N/A             Not          Moderately        Not applicable
                         Transition (TA)                                                   applicable      satisfactory
                         Project
   2013      P112943 MU-Manufacturing                   0.3         2010       NR             Non-         Satisfactory      Not applicable
                         & Servs Dev &                                                     evaluable
                         Comp(SME)
Source: World Bank database as of July 15, 2015.
Risk to development objective is rated for projects from FY07 onward.
Note: FY = fiscal year; IEG = Independent Evaluation Group; MS = moderately satisfactory; MU = moderately unsatisfactory; S = satisfactory;
U = unsatisfactory.

Table B.4. Bank Budget by Cost Structure Category, FY07–15 (US$, thousands and percent)
                                                                                        Analytic
                                                                                          and            Country
                                                            Project                     Advisory         Program
 Sector Board                                    Total    Supervision     Lending       Support          Support
 Capital Markets Practice                         109                                     109
 Competitive Industries Practice                  200                         200
 Economic Policy                                 2,124       327             1,145        652
 Education                                        96                                       96
 Energy and Mining                                177         38             139
 Environment                                      66                                       66
 Financial and Private Sector Development        1,742       422             917          403
 Financial Management                             98                                      98
 Innovation, Tech. & Entrepreneurship Practice    116                                     116
 Investment Climate Practice                      467         16             213          238
 Not assigned                                    3,766       102             193          1,377           2,094
 Public Sector Governance                         760                                      760
 Social Protection                                583         1              189          393
 Transport                                       1,078       498             580
 Water                                            69         69
 Total                                           11,450      1,472           3,576        4,309           2,094
 Cost structure (percent)
 Capital Markets Practice                         100         0                 0         100               0
 Competitive Industries Practice                  100         0              100           0                0




                                                                        66
                                                                                                        Analytic
                                                                                                          and          Country
                                                                      Project                           Advisory       Program
 Sector Board                                      Total            Supervision     Lending             Support        Support
 Economic Policy                                       100              15                  54            31                 0
 Education                                             100               0                  0             100                0
 Energy and Mining                                     100              21                  79             0                 0
 Environment                                           100               0                  0             100                0
 Financial and Private Sector Development              100              24                  53            23                 0
 Financial Management                                  100              0                   0             100                0
 Innovation, Tech. & Entrepreneurship Practice         100              0                   0             100                0
 Investment Climate Practice                           100              3                   46            51                 0
 Not assigned                                          100              3                   5             37                56
 Public Sector Governance                              100              0                   0             100                0
 Social Protection                                     100              0                   32            67                 0
 Transport                                             100              46                  54             0                 0
 Water                                                 100             100                  0             0                 0
 Total                                                 100             13                   31            38                18
Source: World Bank database as of July 15, 2015.


Table B.5. Total Net Disbursements of Official Development Assistance and Official Aid,
2005–2013 (US$, millions)
                                                                                                                                               Percentage of
                                                                                                                                 Cumulative   total disbursed
                              2005     2006      2007        2008       2009       2010          2011       2012      2013        2005–13        2005–013
 All Donors Total             34.6     19.2      68.9        109.7      155.0      125.3         187.2      177.9     148.3        1,026.0          100.0
 Multilateral, Total          10.4     12.6      27.5        95.5        93.3      69.1          75.3          93.2   85.4         562.2           54.8

 EU Institutions               6.5     14.6      27.9        95.0        93.2      67.9          70.3          87.3   77.2         539.8           52.6
 DAC Countries Total          21.5      8.5      43.6        16.1        63.6      58.2          113.6         86.3   64.5         475.9           46.4
 France                        3.4      2.7      39.8        15.8        43.2      54.0          100.5         83.7   62.2         405.4           39.5
 United Kingdom               -0.8     -0.1      0.1          0.6        20.8       5.5          13.5          0.0     0.5          40.2            3.9
 Japan                        16.6      4.0      2.8          0.4        -2.1      -2.9          -2.4          1.1    -0.6          16.8            1.6
 GEF                           0.6      0.4       ..          2.0        0.5        2.1           2.7          2.6     4.2          15.0            1.5

 Global Fund (GFATM)            ..       ..       ..          ..         0.8        2.1           1.3          1.7     1.7          7.6             0.7
 UNDP                          0.2      0.4      1.2          1.5        1.4        1.1           0.6          0.5     0.4          7.3             0.7
 UNTA                          1.7      0.8      1.6          0.6           ..         ..         ..            ..     ..           4.7             0.5
 Australia                     0.0      0.1       ..          0.1        0.2        0.1           1.0          0.6     1.7          3.9             0.4
 Canada                        1.6      0.4      0.6          0.3        0.3        0.0           ..           0.1     0.1          3.2             0.3
 United States                 0.7      0.4      0.3          0.2        0.1        0.5           0.2          0.4     0.4          3.0             0.3

 IAEA                           ..      0.2      0.2          0.6        0.5        0.4           0.4          0.3     0.4          2.7             0.3
 Luxembourg                    0.7      0.2      0.0          ..         0.2        0.4           0.1          0.1     0.1          1.8             0.2

Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Data extracted in June 2015 from OECD.Stat.
Note: DAC = Development Assistance Committee; EU = European Union; GEF = Global Environment Facility; GFATM = Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria; IAEA = International Atomic Energy Agency




                                                                                  67
1
  The cancelled projects were: Manufacturing and Services Development and Competitiveness Project (MSDCP,
FY10) and the Mauritius Economic Transition Technical Assistance Project (METAP, FY09). Both were
cancelled/closed in April 2011. The reason for cancellation was the government found the fiduciary compliance
requirements in these projects to be too cumbersome. The new DPLs were the Public Sector Performance DPLs
1(2012) and 2 (2013) and the Private Sector Competitiveness DPLs 1 (2012) and 2 (2013).
2
 Dropped projects included an Urban Infrastructure project (FY09) and two follow-up Infrastructure projects in
2012 and 2013. A pilot performance based Roads Asset Management and Safety Infrastructure Project ($75 million)
was cancelled after 18 months of preparation using substantial grant assistant.
3
 For example, in the area of fiscal consolidation, the WB Treasury provided assistance to the Bank of Mauritius
(BOM) and the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MOFED) to jointly develop an action plan for
improving Public Debt Management and also provided training workshops.
4   Public Sector Performance DPL series and Private Sector Competitiveness DPL series.
5
  IFC also provided advisory services in the form of the Business Edge Program designed to identify and upgrade
the skill set of the client bank’s Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) loan officers, credit officers, and SME Clients
identified by the World Bank.




                                                               68
Appendix C. World Bank Group Program Organized Along
the Evaluation Pillars
Pillar 1—Strengthening Resilience
1.1 STRENGTHENING FISCAL AND DEBT SUSTAINABILITY AND PUBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE

Under Pillar 1.1, the Bank Group sought to help make progress on the objectives/outcomes
detailed below.

 Objectives/Outcomes Sought                                    Associated Indicator(s) and Outturn
 Improved fiscal management                                    •Operationalizing the MTEF.
 Improved budget allocation                                    •Allocation of budget according to pre-set ceilings.
                                                               •Compilation and publication of tax expenditures in the budget.
                                                               •Minister of Finance relinquishing discretionary power to remit duties
                                                               and taxes and grant exemptions.
 Enforcement of new procurement rules as measured by audits    •Adoption and Implementation of new Procurement Act
 Budget transfers from central government to parastatals is    •Consolidation of 4 parastatal bodies in the water sector to create a
 reduced                                                       single Water Authority.
 Improved system and procedures that reward performance        •A strategy for human resources is prepared


Instruments used by the Bank Group to help make progress on the above
objectives/outcomes.
 Lending Operations                              Analytic Work                       Nonlending Technical Assistance
 First Trade and Competitiveness DPL (P101570;   MU-CEM (P090055; FY06)              MU-Aid for Trade (FY06) (P100496; FY06)
 FY07; $30M)
 Second Trade and Competitiveness DPL            MU-Civil Service Reform             GCMCG: Mauritius TA to OPSG on SOE
 (P106650; FY08; 30M)                            (P125280; FY12)                     (P126608; FY11)
 MU-Third Trade and Competitiveness DPL          MU-Public Expenditure Review        MU-Comm Assessment (FY06) (P100543;
 (P112369; FY09; 100M)                           (P128135; FY13)                     FY06)
 MU:Fourth Trade and Competitiveness DPL                                             MU-Cabinet Meeting on Reform Prog
 (P116608; FY10; 50M)                                                                (FY07) (P100845; FY07)
 MU -Second Public Sector Performance DPL                                            MU-Sectoral Strategic Planning (FY08)
 (P128140; FY13; 20M)                                                                (P107215; FY08)
 MU-Economic Transition (TA) Project (P105669;
 FY09; 18M)
 MU-IDF MTEF CB (FY03) (P081770; FY03;
 0.494M)
 MU-First Public Sector Performance DPL
 (P125694; FY12; 20M)

1.2 STRENGTHENING ENVIRONMENTAL AND DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT AND CLIMATE
CHANGE

Under Pillar 1.2, the Bank Group sought to make progress on the objectives/outcomes detailed
below.


                                                          69
 Objectives/outcomes sought                             Associated Indicator(s) and Outturn
 Improvement in the environment                         Increased use of cleaner technologies in the industrial sector

Instruments used by the Bank Group to make progress on the above
objectives/outcomes.
          Lending Operation                           Analytic work             Nonlending Technical Assistance
 Restoration of Round Island
 (P070392; FY01; $0.8M)

1.3 ENHANCING HUMAN CAPITAL AND SOCIAL RESILIENCE

Under Pillar 1.3, the Bank Group sought to make progress on the objectives/outcomes detailed
below.

 Objectives/Outcomes Sought                                   Associated Indicator(s) and Outturn
 Increased articulation between the education strategy (in    Development of a renewed strategy of the post-secondary
 particular at the post-secondary level) and the overall      education sector strongly linked with the overall economic
 economic growth strategy                                     strategy.
 Protection programs reach the needy as measured by
 household surveys.
 Adequate waste water management system in place
 ensuring improved heath and sanitation
 Stabilization of the prevalence of HIV/AIDS at 0.3
 percent.

Instruments used by the Bank Group to make progress on the above
objectives/outcomes.

 Lending Operation                             Analytic Work                     Nonlending Technical Assistance
 First Trade and Competitiveness DPL           MU-Social Protection System       MU-Human Opportunity Index
 (P101570; FY07; $30M)                         (P113152; FY10)                   (P127593; FY12)
 Second Trade and Competitiveness DPL          MU-Skills Dev & Technology        MU-Reg.Multi-disciplinary Ctr TF
 (P106650; FY08; 30M)                          (P117987; FY11)                   (FY07) (P101755; FY07)
 MU-Third Trade and Competitiveness                                              MU-Safeguard Country Systems
 DPL (P112369; FY09; 100M)                                                       (P115687; FY10)
 MU: Fourth Trade and Competitiveness                                            MU - Social Protection (P122545;
 DPL (P116608; FY10; 50M)                                                        FY11)
 MU -Second Public Sector Performance
 DPL (P128140; FY13; 20M)
 Multisectoral Response to HIV/AIDS
 (P103158; FY11; $0.5M)




                                                         70
 MU-Env Sewerage & Sanitation (FY98)
 (P001921; FY98; 12.4M)


Pillar 2—Enhancing Competitiveness
2.1 STRENGTHENING THE DOMESTIC FINANCIAL SECTOR

There were no CPS objectives articulated under Pillar 2.1.

Instruments used by the Bank Group under Pillar 2.1.

 Lending Operation                         Analytic Work                         Nonlending Technical Assistance
 Fin Sec Supervisory Authority             Mauritius - Insolvency ROSC           FIRST #251: Financial reporting council
 (P073594; FY02; $1.8M)                    (P087422; FY05)                       (P105441; FY07)
                                           FSAP Update Mauritius                 MU-Reg. Multidiscip. Cent. of Excellence
                                           (P104439; FY07)                       (P110022; FY09)

2.2 STRENGTHENING THE LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK, SECTOR LINKAGES, AND
VALUE CHAINS FOR PRIVATE BUSINESS

Under Pillar 2.2, the Bank Group sought to make progress on the objectives/outcomes detailed
below.

 Objectives/Outcomes Sought                                           Associated Indicator(s) and Outturn
 Streamlined tariff measures                                          •Tariff reduction program under implementation
 Reduction in air fares and more destinations served
 Increased exports                                                    •Identification and removal of non-tariff barriers
 Transparent administrative regulations                               •List administrative requirements online via trade portal at
                                                                      customs.
 Reduction in cost of doing business as measured by                   •Creation of a one stop shop business registration
 surveys (land, labor regulations)                                    mechanism.
                                                                      •Improve recovery rate of creditors.
 Increase flexibility of hiring and firing                            •Amendments in the Labor Laws
 A working land market with reduced government                        •Development and adoption of a land administration and
 intervention                                                         management system (LAVIMS)
 Significant expansion of postsecondary education (technical          •Potential efficiency gains are identified at all levels
 and general)
 Elimination of bias (financing, regulatory, skills, etc) against      •Increased number of new SMEs registered
 SMEs

Instruments used by the Bank Group to make progress on the above
objectives/outcomes.

                                                                                                    Nonlending Technical
 Lending Operation                                                  Analytic Work                   Assistance



                                                            71
 First Trade and Competitiveness DPL (P101570; FY07;        GCMCG: Mauritius II          MU-Next Generation Business
 $30M)                                                      Country Assessment           Reforms TA (P127425; FY12)
                                                            (P125340; FY11)
 Second Trade and Competitiveness DPL (P106650;             MU-Competitiveness Update    Mauritius - TA on Insolvency
 FY08; 30M)                                                 (P112768; FY10)              Bill (P114439; FY09)
 MU-Third Trade and Competitiveness DPL (P112369;           MU-Skills Dev & Technology   MU: Forum: Doing Business in
 FY09; 100M)                                                (P117987; FY11)              Mauritius (P119677; FY10)
 MU: Fourth Trade and Competitiveness DPL (P116608;         Mauritius - ICA (P090821;
 FY10; 50M)                                                 FY06)
 MU -Second Public Sector Performance DPL (P128140;         ROSC-IAIS Mauritius
 FY13; 20M)                                                 (P126618; FY12)
 MU-Economic Transition (TA) Project (P105669; FY09;        Mauritius ROSC A&A
 18M)                                                       (P123674; FY11)
 MU-Manufacturing & Servs Dev & Comp(SME)                   MU-ICA (FY10) (P113332;
 (P112943; FY10; 20M)                                       FY10)
 Private Sector Competitiveness DPL (P126903; FY12;
 15M)
 Second Private Sector Compet. DPL (P132510; FY13;
 $15M)
 IFC Investment: SBM Ltd (29518; FY11; $75M)
 IFC Investment: I&P Capital III (30958; FY12; $13M)
 Helios RI II (31552; FY12; 0.011M)
 Helios Towers RI (31399; FY12; $0.2M)

2.3 IMPROVING INFRASTRUCTURE SERVICE DELIVERY

There were no CPS objectives articulated under Pillar 2.1.

Instruments used by the Bank Group to make progress under Pillar 2.3.

 Lending Operation                          Analytic Work                           Nonlending Technical Assistance
 Infrastructure Project (P091828; FY10;     Defining an Asset Management
 $50M)                                      Strategy (P133271; FY15)
 Prep of Grid Code, Feed in Tariffs         Road Safety Management Capacity
 (P131818; FY13; $0.2M)                     Review (P133300; FY14)
 CTSaV Bagasse Fueled Cogeneration          IFC Advisory services: Mauritius
 (P103467; FY08; $25.7M)                    Ports (26352;FY08; $2.3M)




                                                       72
Appendix D. Short Summary of Bank Contribution under
Pillar 1—Improving Resilience

                 Mauritius: Bank’s Contribution to Strengthening Resilience

Macroeconomic: Objective was to create adequate fiscal space to meet emergencies by
improving public financial management and management of public debt, reducing wasteful
public expenditures and improving tax revenues.

       abolishment of ministerial discretion over tax and duty exemptions.

       operationalization of the Mauritian Taxation Authority (MRA) to strengthen tax
        administration.

       starting with the 2007/08 budget, adoption of MTEF and program based budgeting
        (PBB) to maintain a strategic framework for fiscal management and improve budget
        planning and execution.

       enactment of new Public Procurement Act 2006 to bring greater transparency in
        public procurement.

       enactment of Public Debt Management Act 2008, to improve debt management
        practices and limit the Borrowers public sector debt to a maximum of 50 percent of
        GDP by the end of 2013 (this was subsequently shifted to 2018).

       establishment of Parastatal Reform Steering Committee, and initiation of restructuring
        of selected parastatals with the ultimate objective of reducing their claim on public
        resources.

Social: objective was to improve the safety net for the poor by better targeting of social
benefits and improved efficiency in implementation of the programs.

       restructuring of social protection programs under the National Empowerment
        Foundation (NEF) guided by a 2010 joint World Bank/UNDP report on the reform of
        the institutional arrangements at the NEF and its social protection strategies.

       establishment of a Social Registry (an integrated management information system that
        provides comprehensive information on existing and potential clients of social
        assistance programs) and progressive consolidation of programs for social protection
        under the Social Registry to improve coordination and reduce leakages in different
        social protection programs.

Natural Disaster: Improve legal and regulatory framework for disaster management.
However, the World Bank did not provide much support in this area.
