2016 Simplified Methodology for
Economic Appraisal of Road-
Transportation Projects in the
Kurdistan Region




                        15th May 2016
                                                     Table of Contents
1. PROLOGUE AND OVERVIEW........................................................................................................ 3
2. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................ 4
   2.1. Scope of Project Appraisal ..................................................................................................... 4
3. ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK......................................................................................................... 7
   3.1. Incrementality of Projects...................................................................................................... 7
   3.2. Economic Benefits .................................................................................................................. 7
   3.3. Economic Costs ..................................................................................................................... 13
4. PROJECT PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS .................................................................................. 14
   4.1. The Project Lifecycle ............................................................................................................ 14
   4.2. The Project Background ....................................................................................................... 15
   4.3. Final Comments .................................................................................................................... 29
5. PROJECT EVALUATION ............................................................................................................... 31
   5.1. Evaluation Period ................................................................................................................. 31
   5.2. The Net Present Value Criteria ............................................................................................ 31
   5.3. The Internal Rate of Return Criteria ................................................................................... 33
   5.4. Cost of Postponing Project Criteria ..................................................................................... 33
   5.5. Final Comments .................................................................................................................... 34
6. FINAL COMMENTS ...................................................................................................................... 35
7. REFERENCES................................................................................................................................ 36




                                                                       2
1. PROLOGUE AND OVERVIEW
In the context of public policy, governments face the problem of allocating scarce resources
(natural, human and capital) among infinite uses, to satisfy certain needs and with the goal
of obtaining the maximum social and economic benefit. On the other hand, standardization
and systematization of public investment processes have demonstrated important advantages
in terms of increasing the profitability and productivity of public investment. In general,
developing economies should allocate their scarce resources to the most productive
investments. The public investment projects financed through increases in tax revenue or
foreign debt should generate increased economic benefits to justify its implementation.
From this perspective, the purpose of this simplified transportation methodology is to assist
Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) agencies involved in the selection of new roads for
construction and in maintenance projects for the existing network.
These guidelines are intended for different types of user in KRG. They serve as a technical
reference for public sector authorities who are responsible for making public-sector
investment decisions. This group shall include public officials (project evaluators) within the
Ministry of Planning, Ministry of Finance, line ministries (LMs), departments and agencies
(DAs), public enterprises (PEs) and all others institutions involved in the formulation,
evaluation and implementation of public investment projects.
The structure and issues addressed in this methodology took into account international best
practices and the review of textbooks and methodological guides from different countries
and international organizations.
The document is divided into five chapters. Chapter 2 describes the scope of projects
involved in the improvement of the transportation network in Kurdistan. The analysis will
cover two processes: i) road-project preparation; ii) allocating funds to select projects for
road maintenance and new road construction.
Chapter 3 lays out the analytical framework for this simplified methodology. This chapter
familiarizes the project sponsor and project analyst with the basic concepts of financial and
economic analysis of roads.
Chapter 4 is devoted to project preparation and analysis. An integrated financial, economic
and uncertainty analysis must be carried out for new routes on the network in order to
compare the alternative roads, and rank them according to their economic net benefits. This
is what we call the module approach.
Chapter 5 lays out the basic concepts for allocating the limited budgetary funds between the
construction of new roads and the maintenance of the existing network. This chapter helps to
establish an economically sound balance between rival spending alternatives.
Finally, Chapter 6 presents final comments. It is important to note that the proposed
methodology is fully aligned with the methodology used for the Highway Design and
Maintenance Standard Model, the software designed to be used to perform lifecycle
economic evaluation of road construction projects across the world.




                                               3
2. INTRODUCTION
Evaluation tools are essential for making decisions related to project selection (to ensure the
highest return). Comparing the total costs (investment and operation) of a project with its
benefits allows a judgment to be made on the true contribution of that project to the wealth
of the country.
Many developing countries show a shortage of modern procedures and techniques to provide
the requisite efficiency in the process of selecting public investment projects (PIPs) for
implementation. Provision of the basic infrastructure facilities such as roads, water,
electricity, education and telecommunication – among others – are the key to the
development of a country, and are fundamental for the creation of a strong private sector.
In this context, the proper evaluation of previous initiatives is essential in avoiding past
mistakes and to enable us to learn from experience. Project evaluation allows the:
 i)     Identification of those criteria for investment policies that maximize social welfare;
 ii)    Cessation of "bad” projects and promote those whose are "good";
 iii)   Definition of the public or private sector implementation of the project;
 iv)    Establishment of agreements for desirable cost recovery;
 v)     Assessment of their impact on the environment, regional development and poverty,
        among other things.
2.1. Scope of Project Appraisal
The existence of a formal tool for project appraisal provides a framework to guide the efforts
of government systems (which tend to run projects, which is good!), preventing the society
as a whole from being harmed (which is bad!). Project appraisal allows us to answer the
following questions: “What is the aim of the project? What happens if the project is
implemented or not? Is the project the best alternative? Does the project have separable
components? Who benefits and who pays the costs of the project? Which stakeholders may
affect the investment decision or the performance of the project? Is the project financially
sustainable (feasible)? What is the environmental impact of the project? What are the sources
and magnitudes of the risks? Does the project contribute to economic growth? Is the project
a source of political risk? And finally, to answer the big question: Is the project the most
desirable relative to others competing for the same budget?” (Belli, P. et al, 2001).
The investment appraisal phase of PIPs is to ensure the economic feasibility and
sustainability of projects over time. The utilitarian approach and applied welfare economics
provide a conceptual framework to estimate the goodness of public policies in terms of social
welfare and thus to answer the above questions. To estimate the contribution of the projects,
it is then necessary to identify, measure and assess their costs and benefits. Identification of
costs and benefits is to determine, qualitatively, the positive and negative impacts generated
by the project.
Appraisal of PIPs using either the cost–benefit analysis (CBA) or cost-effectiveness analysis
(CEA) approach will allow the direction of scarce economic resources toward the most
productive investments and will provide for the sustainable long-run economic growth of the
Kurdistan Region.




                                               4
2.2. Scope of Proposal Methodology

The objective of this document is to provide a uniform pattern to prepare, assess and evaluate
intercity (also called interurban) transportation projects. Intercity Transportation Sector
includes all those national, regional and communal roads linking cities, towns and rural areas.
In addition, it includes access to productive areas, tourism, neighbors, etc.
This methodology is aimed at allowing the economic profitability of road projects of the
following type to be determined:
Projects that increase road capacity
Projects that increase the vehicle capacity of a highway, for example:
   •   Construction of third lanes.
   •   Construction of secondary roads for trucks.
Projects that improve road quality
Projects that improve the quality of existing service through changes in road geometry. For
example:
   •   Reduction of the curvature of the path.
   •   Decreased slopes in the road.
   •   Construction of an alternative way.
   •   Construction of a tunnel that avoids a slope.
Projects that improve the quality of existing service through changes in the road surface
(better quality). For example:
   •   Paving of a gravel road.
   •   Improvement of a dirt road.
Included are projects that partially or completely renovate the road surface, including the
basic works required. For example:
   •   Resetting the concrete surface.
   •   Recoating with asphalt mix.
   •   Resetting the surface on a gravel road.
Construction of new roads
Projects that incorporate areas with accessibility problems. For example:
   •   Construction of access roads.
   •   Construction of border crossings.
Normally, conservation of existing roads does not require economic evaluation, because
these activities are planned and considered in the original project appraisal. However, this
methodology can support the analysis of conservation policies.
Activities to conserve roads should include all those actions that are intended to prevent the
rapid deterioration of the road surface, deferring its replacement. These actions are applied
to the same surface as related works, for example:
   •   Replacement of concrete slabs.


                                              5
•   Patching on asphalt.
•   Re-profiling of a folder gravel or dirt.
•   Re-taping of holes.
•   Sealing of joints.
•   Conservation and improvement of drainage works.
•   Conservation of bridges.




                                       6
3. ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK
One of the objectives of project evaluation is to ensure that a project makes efficient use of
a country’s scarce resources. Economic analysis provides a methodological framework for
estimating economic benefits and costs. The benefit is measured by the net present value
(NPV) of the incremental net economic benefits. Only if NPV is positive can a project claim
to reallocate resources efficiently.
3.1. Incrementality of Projects
One of the key problems of project appraisal is ensuring that the project’s benefits and costs
are being measured on an incremental basis. When conducting a project appraisal, it is
important to conceptualize two states of nature: the one that includes the project (with-
project situation) and the one that does not include the project (without-project situation).
The costs and benefits of the “without” situation should be subtracted from the costs and
benefits of the “with” project situation to derive the incremental resource-flow statement.
An important element in the appraisal is to ensure that the “without” situation is properly
defined. The “without” project situation does not mean that nothing is done to the current
situation (if a road construction is not undertaken). Even without a major rehabilitation of
that particular road-link, there will be some regular maintenance performed on the road. In
other words, the “without” project situation should still be technically optimized in order to
be compared to the “with” project situation. A simple before-and-after comparison would not
be able to avoid this pitfall1.
3.2. Economic Benefits
The approach undertaken in this manual is called the Integrated Project Analysis (IPA),
developed by Prof. Glenn Jenkins and Prof. Arnold Harberger, which is the most advanced
methodology for modeling investment projects. This approach estimates the impact of the
project from various perspectives in one integrated model; effects on private investor,
government tax revenues, fiscal expenditures, consumers, and the environment are quantified
and estimated in one integrated simulation model. IPA uses financial, economic and risk
analyses of a potential investment project within a single consistent model.
From the economic point of view, transportation is a "good" and as such is governed by
market laws: there is a demand, which reflects the willingness to pay for travel, and there is
a supply, which represents the cost incurred for making such trips. This situation is shown in
Figure N°3.1. The traffic volume is measured by annual average daily traffic (AADT, the
number of trips) and is performed per unit of time; it is measured between a source-
destination pair.
The costs incurred by users are called generalized travel cost, GTC, which mainly depends
on the valuation of time spent on the trip and on the operating costs of vehicles (fuel, tires,
etc.).
Both curves are expressed in private terms, i.e. at market prices. The 0ABTV0 area, under
the demand curve D, represents the willingness to pay (the total benefit received by road
users).
1   Jenkins, GP., Kuo, C.Y. & Harberger, A.C. (2013). Cost–Benefit Analysis for Investment Decisions.
    Chapter 1.


                                                 7
                        Figure N°3.1: Transportation Supply and Demand


                         A




                                                                       Traffic Volume (AADT)


Source: international best practices.

The cost perceived by the user that is incorporated into a route is the GTC, so it is also known
as financial marginal travel cost, FMgTC. Since the GTC is the perceived cost by each road
user, it will also be equal to the Economic Average Travel Cost, EATC.
The GTC is the addition of Vehicle Operation Costs and the Economic Value Time, which
is considered a cost in transportation projects.
        Reduction in Vehicle Operating Costs

Vehicle Operating Costs (VOC) represent the costs incurred by road users in terms of inputs
consumption: gasoline and oil, wear-and-tear on tires, repair and maintenance expenses. All
these inputs are combined into the definition of VOC and as a consequence of road
improvement they will decline:
    •    Road geometry.
    •    Type and surface status.
    •    Types of vehicle; volume, composition and distribution of vehicles.
    •    Economic price of inputs.
For each type of vehicle formulator the following cost items must be calculated:
    •    Fuel consumption.
    •    Lubricants/oil consumption.
    •    Tire consumption.
    •    Parts consumption.
    •    Maintenancecost per hours of consumption.
    •    Vehicle depreciation.
These costs will depend on the types of user: normal traffic, diverted traffic and newly-
generated traffic.
“Normal traffic” corresponds to road users who will travel on the road even without road
improvement. Incremental VOC savings are estimated by comparing the total VOC


                                               8
 “without” project with the proposed road improvement VOC. This annual financial VOC
 savings must then be converted into economic values to reflect the value of the resources
 saved for the economic analysis as a whole.
 The total amount of such savings depends on the traffic volume and the vehicle composition
 on the route. It will depend also on the degree of surface improvement. In the case of a dirt
 or gravel road upgrading to a tarred surface, the value of VOC savings is likely to be
 substantial, as graphically presented in Figure N°3.2. Note that figure represents not only
 VOC reduction but also a combination of VOC and time costs incurred by road users.
  “Diverted traffic” corresponds to users that change their route, keeping their origin and final
 destination. For diverted traffic, the benefits are measured by the difference between the total
 VOC on the alternative route against the total VOC on the upgraded road. To estimate their
 benefit, it is necessary to know what the alternative routes are in terms of distance and surface
 condition. In the absence of improved roads, “diverted” users are not willing to incur the
 current GTC, but they are willing to incur the new GTC measured as the sum of the value of
 time, VOC and toll rate (if any). Figure N°3.2 illustrates this.
          Figure N°3.2: Reduction of Total User Costs for Existing and New Traffic

Generalized
Travel Costs
  (dinars)                                                      GTV Without Project Situation


                         E                           F              GTV With Project Situation
                         E                           B          G
                 A
                                                    B                 D
                                                                      D


                     0                              TV0   TV1             Traffic Volume (AADT)


 Source: international best practices.

 Line D in Figure N°3.2 represents the demand function by vehicles. The vertical axis denotes
 the price (cost) that each successive unit of traffic would be willing to pay, per vehicle-km,
 for traveling over the road. This price should be interpreted as the maximum total cost per
 vehicle-km that one unit of traffic would be willing to bear in order for it to travel on the
 road. With the unimproved road, the cost per vehicle-mile is E, and the traffic level is TV0,
 including all those traffic units willing to bear costs of C0 or more. Under the improvement,
 costs will fall to A and traffic volume will now expand to TV1. The net benefit to “normal”
 traffic is described by rectangle AEFTV0, which is simply the difference between total VOC
 plus the time costs “with” and “without” the project.
 The gross benefits received by incremental traffic are measured by TV0FGTV1, but the costs
 they perceive are TV0BGTV1. Therefore, the triangle BFG measures their net benefit for a
 particular period of time. It is evident from the diagram that they do not receive as much net



                                                9
benefit as the existing traffic as some reductions in costs are necessary to induce them to
travel on the improved road 2.
 “Newly-generated traffic” corresponds to those new users that start a new trip between an
origin and destination point. The reduction in the cost of using the improved road resulting
from lower vehicle operating costs and faster travel (time savings) will induce more road
journeys. The additional (newly-generated) road users are not willing to incur the current
(without-project) generalized cost, but they are willing to incur the new GTC measured as
the sum of the value of time, VOC and a toll rate (if any). The benefit to the generated users
is also measured based on a half of the per-unit GTC reduction, since this type of traffic
would not be materialized without this reduction. Referring to Figure N°3.2, if the additional
traffic is entirely of the “newly-generated” type, with a volume TV1TV0, then its per-unit
value of benefits is equal to ½(E–A).
The actual increase in traffic as a result of lower transportation costs depends on the elasticity
of demand for transportation services, which in turn depends on the elasticity of demand for
the individual commodities involved3. The traffic model that provides traffic forecasts should
incorporate these factors in order to generate a series of “diverted” and “newly-generated”
traffic.
       Travel Time Savings

The magnitude of time savings depends on traffic volumes, average effective speeds,
economic value of time for users of vehicles and economic opportunity cost of commercial
vehicles. Valuation of time savings requires measuring the average speeds traveled on the
road before and after road improvement. At some point, the speed on the road will become
negatively related to the traffic volume due to congestion. Time savings should be projected
for the future period.
“Normal” Traffic. For passengers and tourists that are classed under “normal traffic”, the
improved road allows their vehicles to travel at a higher speed than the speed they can travel
at on the existing road; as a result, they will save time. The economic value of time is typically
linked to the wage rates of unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled labor in the country/region.
Once the average occupancy is established for each vehicle type, the analyst can estimate the
value of time savings, depending on the vehicles’ rate of use (the number of passengers by
type of vehicle).
“Diverted” and “Generated” Passenger Traffic. Typically, the value of time savings per
additional vehicle-km traveled for “diverted” and “newly-generated” passenger traffic is
taken as only one half of the value of time savings for “normal” traffic.
“Diverted” and “Generated” Freight Traffic. There are a few approaches to estimating the
value of time savings for cargo transportation. Ideally, the analyst should know what
commodities are being transported on the road, as well as their volumes and destinations.
This would facilitate an estimation of a delay cost as measured through the willingness to
pay for a faster delivery.

2   Harberger, A.C. (1976), “Cost-Benefit Analysis of Transportation Projects”, Project Evaluation:
    Collected Papers, Chapter 10. University of Chicago Press.
3   Adler, H.A., “Economic Appraisal of Transport Projects: A Manual with Case Studies”, Indiana
    University Press, London, UK (1971), pp. 28–29.


                                                10
Valuation of time savings by different types of vehicle requires a substantial volume of
survey information, often specific to the particular road segment in question.
        Savings of Maintenance Expenditures

The construction costs of a tarred surface are typically justified by its lower annual
maintenance costs as compared to a gravel-type surface. Savings of maintenance
expenditures are estimated as the difference between the projected expenditures over the
periods covered by the analysis of the existing road (“without” situation) minus the projected
expenditures on an improved road (“with” situation). The resulting annual financial savings
must then be converted into economic values to measure the real economic value of resources
being conserved.
Most road improvement projects or new roads will affect the pattern of traffic on other roads
that are complementary or substitutes to the road being improved. The traffic volume will
increase on complimentary roads because people will use these roads in order either to access
or to exit the improved road. It would be normal for road maintenance requirements to rise
to a certain extent on these roads as their traffic increases. This rise in the annual road
maintenance costs should be included in the costs associated with the road improvement
project. The opposite situation arises in the case of substitute roads. The net change in the
maintenance cost on substitute roads should be included as a benefit or cost in the appraisal
of the road improvement project.
Figure N°3.3 shows the GTC curve for a section of the road network; it is assumed that this
curve does not change the effect of the project, as the road remains standard. The project
produces a shift in the demand curve from D to D' because of the diverted (or transferred)
users to the improved road. If there is a distortion in this section (for example, congestion),
reduced traffic will lead to an indirect benefit of the project.
                 Figure N°3.3: Positive Indirect Benefits on a Substitute Road

    Generalized
    Travel Costs
      (dinars)                                                GTV Without Project Situation =
    Generalized                                                GTV With Project Situation=
                                                                      FMgC = EAC
                             K                         M
                                                  L

                                                                    D
                             H                J
                                                                    D´

                         0                    TV1T    TV0T               Traffic Volume (AADT)
                                               Vc     Vo

Source: international best practices.

On the other hand, sections of a complementary road will increase their traffic, as shown in
Figure N°3.4. In this case, the existence of a distortion, such as congestion, will cause a



                                              11
negative indirect benefit of the project (equivalent to a cost, but considered one of its benefits,
because the benefit of the project is the sum of these parts).
             Figure N°3.4: Negative Indirect Benefit on a Complementary Road

    Generalized
    Travel Costs
      (dinars)                                                  GTV Without Project Situation =
                                                                  GTV With Project Situation

                            S              T            W

                    R                                                 D´
                                               U
                                                                       D

                        0                      TV0     TV1                 Traffic Volume (AADT)


Source: international best practices.

        Summary of Direct and Indirect Benefits

The economic benefit of the project is the sum of its direct and indirect benefits, i.e. the
following shaded areas:
    •    Area AEFB in Figure N°3.2 corresponds to the release of resources or increase in
         consumer surplus associated with normal traffic on the improved road.
    •    Area FBG in Figure N°3.2 corresponds to the increase in consumer surplus associated
         with diverted (transferred) and newly-generated traffic in the improved section of the
         road.
    •    Area HKLJ in Figure N°3.3 corresponds to the increase in consumer surplus
         associated with normal traffic on substitute or alternate paths due to reduced
         congestion.
    •    Area LMJ in Figure N°3.3 corresponds to the increase in consumer surplus associated
         with the traffic that deviates and is transferred to the road that the project improves;
         this increase is determined by the excess-reducing congestion to the point where the
         user decides to change route.
    •    Areas RSTU and TWU in Figure N°3.4 should be considered negative as they
         correspond to costs.
        Accident Reduction

An improved road is an important factor in reducing the number and degree of accidents, but
there are a number of other influential aspects determining accident rate: width and geometric
alignment of the road, congestion, volume of slow traffic, effectiveness of law enforcement,
vehicles’ mechanical condition, and driver behavior. As a result, road improvement per se
may not automatically imply a substantial reduction in the rate and severity of accidents. A
detailed assessment is needed for each particular road in question before final conclusions
are derived.

                                                12
Two main steps must be taken to assess the magnitude of accident reduction. Firstly, the rate
of traffic accident “with” and “without” the proposed improvement must be established. The
rate is typically expressed as number of accidents per million vehicle-kilometers. Secondly,
the value of accident reduction must be estimated. Typically, three types of damages are
considered: property damage, cargo damage, and injuries and fatality. The value of property
and cargo damage is easily appraised, but the assessment of injury and fatalities will require
putting a value on human life or on forgone earnings over remaining years of life.
        Externalities

It is appropriate, in the analysis of any project from the point of view of society as a whole,
to take into account external or indirect benefits and costs, for example, whether, owing to
the existence of a road project, more or less unskilled labors were to be employed in the area.
Indirect benefits are measured by the excess of the amount these workers were paid over the
minimum amount they would be willing to work for. The value of these indirect benefits is
attributed as an additional benefit to the project4.
3.3. Economic Costs
In order to receive the benefits of the project, it is necessary to incur some costs. Obviously,
the most important costs are related to road improvement: construction, maintenance,
conservation and future replenishments. However, the project can produce effects in stretches
where no construction work is carried out (for example, alternative roads that will require
less investment in maintenance or roads that will postpone future replacements to the
surface). This is one of the subject addressed when considering the benefits by savings of
maintenance expenditures.
In practice, what is commonly done is to determine the total resources that would be needed
each year to maintain the technical standard of the sections belonging to the project
(including alternative and complementary ways). The cost of the project is given by the
additional amount of resources required in the with project situation compared with that in
the without project situation.
In addition, project costs should include interference causing traffic construction (diversions,
arrests, complaints, etc.). To assume that during project execution the road continues its
normal operation (and therefore no additional operating costs and travel time are produced)
may not reflect reality. It should be noted that in most cases, the additional costs incurred by
users during project execution will be insignificant (it is common for users to have to wait in
line). Costs shall be clearly defined, and the type of interference and additional travel costs
that users will incur compared to the situation without interference clearly indicated.




4
    Harberger, A.C. (1976) “Cost-Benefit Analysis of Transportation Projects”, Project Evaluation: Collected
    Papers. University of Chicago Press. Chapter 10.


                                                    13
4. PROJECT PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS
For optimal allocation of public resources, the process of economic evaluation of projects
should ensure the correct selection of projects. This process should start with the
identification and analysis of the problem situation: a bad coverage of a service, a bad service
delivery, lack of assets, lost opportunities for improvement, among other factors. The
definition and evaluation of a range of alternatives that may provide solutions to the problem
must follow, ending with the selection of the alternative that maximizes social welfare.
In the context of public sector investment, a project may be viewed as an instrument for
achieving the planning objectives and development goals of a country or a region, available
to planners and policy-makers. Often, a project may be considered a series of activities and
tasks with a specific objective, to be completed within certain specifications and a given
timeframe. Usually, it will also have funding limitations, consume resources and may be
evaluated as an independent unit. It may be possible to break down a project into various
components, but they cannot be operated independently and each one cannot fulfill a purpose
without the other.
4.1. The Project Lifecycle
The project lifecycle is the process by which an idea is transformed into a concrete solution
through the analysis of alternatives and the choice of the most profitable alternative from the
economic point of view. Every project has certain phases in its development and
implementation. These phases are very useful in planning a project, as they provide a
framework for budgeting, resource allocation, the schedule of project milestones in
implementation and the establishment of a monitoring system. The purpose is to provide a
basis for organizing the project to establish resource requirements, and to set up the
management system that will ultimately guide project activities.
Although the exact division of a project’s life into its different phases is somewhat sector
specific, the project lifecycle phases may be broadly placed in different steps. Figure N°4.1
shows the project lifecycle.
As the project moves through its lifecycle, the focus of managerial activities shifts from
planning to operating and controlling activities. It should be emphasized that these phases
only represent a natural order in which projects are planned and carried out. Also, none of
these phases becomes really final until the project approaches its termination stage.




                                               14
                          Figure N°4.1 – The Project Development Cycle

                                                               Monitoring &
         Planning              Ex Ante Evaluation                                  Ex Post Evaluation
                                                                Follow Up




         Planning and         • Idea and profile                                   • Operation and
         Identification                                         Investment Phase     execution
             Phase            • Pre feasibility
                              • Feasibility
   • Public Investment                                      • Detailed design
     Needs
                                                            • Implementation            Operation and
                                   Pre Investment
   • National                                                                              Ex Post
                                        Phase
     Development Plan                                                                  Evaluation Phase


                                                   Approval


Source: international best practices.

To obtain more details on the project cycle, please review the following document:
“Simplified Methodology for Economic Appraisal of Public Investment Projects in the
Kurdistan Region of Iraq”.
4.2. The Project Background
The pre-investment phase is a gradual process of developing project ideas, following the
project lifecycle until an appraisal conclusion is reached. This corresponds to the process of
preparing the necessary studies and analysis for the identification, preparation and evaluation
of the project that can solve the problem or meet the needs that triggered it, so reducing the
degree of uncertainty on investment decisions.
        Idea and Project Profile Definition

The project profile requires a rigorous identification process, which implies undertaking the
identification of gaps in the economy and the definition of investment priorities for the public
sector. A typical description of a problem requires a definition of:
    (1) The area of influence of the project;
    (2) The target population; and
    (3) The present and projected demand, supply, and deficit of the service to be provided
        by the project.
The purpose in a project profile analysis is for the sector, promoting a given investment
initiative, to answer the various questions in terms of base-case optimization, alternative
projects, redefinitions, etc.
The sponsoring agency must first clearly identify the problem that gives rise to the idea of a
given project. After that, the problem must be framed as a negative state affecting a
population, and not as the “lack of a solution”. In any situation that is analyzed, several



                                                       15
problems can be distinguished; however, it is necessary to focus on the root problem,
establishing the causes that originate it and the effects it produces.

               Areas of Interest: Study and Influence Area

The Study Area is defined after the geographical analysis and gives a context to the problem
being studied. It also delivers the limits for analysis. The Influence Area corresponds to the
point at which the problem directly affects the population and at which alternative solutions
should be considered. Typically, the influence area is a subset of the study area, but there are
also situations in which the study area and area of influence are equivalent.
The project file should include:
   •   The project name.
   •   Region and governorate of the affected road network. It is convenient to present a
       map or location scheme, clearly highlighting the section of the road network that the
       promoting agency wants to address.
   •   Define the problem to be solved.
Referring to the source of information, data could be addressed from:
   •   The Roads Department at the Ministry of Public Works.
   •   The Investment Department at the Ministry of Planning.
   •   The Project Department at the Ministry of Transport.
   •   Others.

               Affected and Target Population

Inside the Influence Area analysis, the recognition and description of the affected and target
population is critical to understanding the current situation and to finding solutions to
problems.
For the purposes of identification, it is recommended that efforts be concentrated on the
identification of the affected population. To do this, information about their social and
economic, demographic and cultural characteristics must be collected. Also, it is necessary
to forecast the growth of the affected population in the project evaluation horizon.
Project preparation should include a diagnosis of the current situation, which is necessary to
address the following issues:
   •   Current supply infrastructure. Each section should include the following:
           o Length in kilometers.
           o Geometrical characteristics of the layout.
           o Characteristics of the cross section of the road (number of tracks, width of the
             road, etc.).
           o Features on surface.
           o Description of bridges, berm (road shoulder), drainage system, etc.


                                              16
               Identification and Description of Alternative Solutions

To identify possible solutions, the first thing is to visualize the expected situation once the
central problem is solved; this provides strategies for action and, therefore, the set of
alternatives to be analyzed.
It is recommended that the analysis of alternatives be carried out in the pre-feasibility studies,
using the modules approach (developed in the next section). As the sponsoring agency is
involved in the details of the study, the chance of choosing the best alternative for solving
the problem is higher.
The project file should describe all the alternatives that provide solutions to the traffic
problem while being technically feasible to perform. Information on alternative solutions
should include the following:
   •   Roads with different design speeds.
   •   Different surfaces, such as gravel, asphalt double treatment, asphalt concrete and
       concrete.
   •   Different sizes of project, in order to determine the optimal size, if applicable.
   •   Different times at which to begin the project, in order to determine the optimal time
       investment for each.
Pre-feasibility studies may rule out some alternative solutions as a result of considering
findings at the profile level. At times, alternative solutions may be ruled out for technical,
institutional or other reasons, in addition to economic reasons.
One of the alternative solutions to be considered in project appraisal for all types of problem
is what is known as the "optimization of the base-case situation”. The sponsoring agency
must take it into account in the comparison of alternatives.

               Optimizing the Base-Case Situation and the Concept of Incremental Analysis

One of the important concepts when defining a project is to ensure that project benefits and
costs are being measured on an incremental basis. An investment opportunity entails
incremental net benefit flows that occur over and above what would have been there in the
absence of that investment. In application to public investments, this means that one should
carefully identify the benefits and costs that are only associated with the project in question.
The optimization of the without-project situation should always be considered as an
alternative solution, especially in the case of brown-field projects (or incremental projects).
Optimization investments apply to all low-cost measures that can improve the current
situation, partially or completely eliminating the problem. In this case, it allows for
improvements without the need for a fully-fledged project, which involves many financial
resources.
If, after the evaluation of the optimized base-case situation, the conclusion is that there is no
solution to the given problem, it will be necessary to evaluate other alternative solutions,
considering the optimized “Without Project” situation as a base-case situation. It is from this
starting point that the project promoter should measure the incremental benefits and costs of
each alternative, and then, choose the most profitable alternative from the economic point of

                                               17
view. It should be remembered that the evaluation of projects is always a comparison
between different alternatives (including, of course, doing nothing!).
The without-project situation corresponds to the optimized current situation, which is
determined by executing works under feasible and cost-effective investment or management
measures to improve the operating conditions of the road. Often, it is not necessary to
economically assess these investments; they emerge as obviously profitable. For example, if
the promoting agency wants to evaluate the possibility of repaving a road that is full of holes,
the without-project situation would be the same surface, keeping the clogged holes.
As another example, in the case of roads with waterlogging problems (because of poor
drainage), the base-case situation should not be considered among the without-project
solutions to this problem, because it is not feasible to maintain the road under those
conditions.
It should be noted that if there is not a cost-effective alternative solution, the project sponsor
must run the above optimization.
       Traffic (Demand) Module

This module examines the volume of traffic by the type of vehicle. The function of this
module is not only to assess current traffic but to undertake the more difficult task of
forecasting the future traffic on the route. Additional assessment should be made to measure
the effects on the alternative and complement routes and modes of transportation.
To determinate the economic viability of a road project it is necessary to perform the
following:
   •   To determine the tranches (sections) of vehicle network that will be affected by the
       project.
   •   To determine traffic flows to be used on those sections in the without-project situation
       and for the entire period of analysis.
   •   To determine the GTC for each vehicle in the without-project situation and for the
       entire period of analysis.
   •   To determine the investments required in the without-project situation for the entire
       period of analysis, including both infrastructure investments and conservation.
   •   To reassign traffic flows taking into account the new features of the network in the
       with-project situation. It should be noted that the total number of trips will be the
       same in the with- and without-project situation, because it is assumed that there is no
       generated traffic.
   •   To determine the GTC and investment for the with-project situation.
   •   To determine the benefit for each year of the analysis period, which is calculated as
       the difference between the GTC on the without- and with-project situations.
   •   To determine the total investment (including all sections) for each year of the analysis
       period for with- and without-project situations.
   •   To determine the costs for each year as the difference between investments in with-
       and without-project situations.
When there is generated traffic it will be necessary to analyze the markets that generate them,
because the benefits are perceived primarily in those. For example, a path of penetration will
require analyzing markets such as forestry, livestock, tourism, etc.


                                               18
Current Demand. The demand for a road is determined by the flow of vehicles passing
through it. The vehicular flow path is represented by AADT5, i.e. the number of vehicles
every day, in both directions, on average during the year.
The existing level of traffic is obtained either from mechanical or manual traffic count by the
types of vehicle. Ideally, it would be preferable to differentiate vehicles into several types,
such as cars, light, medium and heavy buses, and light, medium, heavy and articulated trucks.
Prefeasibility studies also require vehicle counts on the ground, in order to determine the
relationship between measurements for each stretch of road and measurements at the transit
point census representative. This requires that the latter measurement be performed
simultaneously. Traffic information should include the following:
      •    A map showing the area covered by the project, the location of the chosen census
           points and location of the vehicle-count ground.
      •    A table showing, for census points, the most accurate traffic information available.
      •    A table showing the traffic obtained in the field.
      •    A relationship between the transit of each section and its associated census point.
Traffic Forecast “With” and “Without” New Road/Upgrading. A projection of future
traffic volumes typically incorporates the following factors: growth in population; growth of
economic activity and income; number and magnitude of new mining, tourism and
agriculture projects in area; public sector initiatives such as expansion of hospitals/health
centers, schools, police stations; the physical condition of road sections, the degree of
congestion, and so on. Models based on linear and past traffic growth functions (often linked
to some parameters of general economic activity in the region) may do a reasonable
forecasting job.
The number of trips to be held in the future on the road network is difficult to predict. One
alternative is to assume that the historical trend of traffic growth will be maintained in the
future; another alternative is to analyze each production sector to discover the trend in
associated traffic growth. For example, in a study of forest roads, historical traffic was
projected by an exponential function. In cases where the exponential function is not
representative, it is recommended that three levels of traffic are independently estimated,
associated with the zero year of the analysis, the last year of the analysis period, and any
intermediate. For the other years, the promoting agency can make linear interpolations.
However, it must always be verified that historical information is homogeneous.
The following recommendations are for those projects where the need to analyze "activity
systems" becomes evident, i.e. for each sector independently:
      •    Use census data source/destination.
      •    Conduct a specific analysis of those activities that are relevant, to estimate their
           impact on current or future traffic flow.
      •    Estimate the development of each sector through simple and clear criteria; it is not
           necessary to complicate the analysis. For example, the growth of traffic access ports
           is linked to the capacity of port operation and existing expansion options.



5   Annual Average Daily Traffic.


                                                19
A computerized model of regional traffic flow is needed to make reliable forecasts of future
traffic volumes. These forecasts have to account for all relevant factors affecting the growth
and direction of passenger and cargo traffic. The output of this model will be time series of
expected traffic volume by types of vehicle. Typically, such computerized models are able
to generate several scenarios from the “worst” to the “best” case. These series will be the
basis of the “without” financial and economic analysis. Similarly, annual traffic flows in the
“with” road project scenario could be simulated by types of vehicle.
To determine operating costs and travel time savings is recommended to use the Highway
Maintenance and Design Model6 (HDM). The HDM is a software application that has been
developed by the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the Department for
International Development of the United Kingdom, the National Road Administration of
Sweden and the Transport and Road Research Laboratory. This application is a simulation
model of the lifecycle of behavior on roads, considering the relation between the atmosphere
and transit within a national or regional economy. This model allows the composition and
structure of the GTC to be determined. The model provides detailed results based on the data
supplied by users.
Reassignment in flows. In projects that do not generate traffic, the number of trips made
must be equal in with- and without-project situation, for any year of the analysis period.
However, the AADT of each section of road will differ as the distribution of trips by purpose
of the project changes (for example, the existence of traffic diverted and transferred).
The new balance must be estimated for each alternative solution independently; and it
depends on the quality of travel services offered by each of the alternative routes. Most
commonly, it is assumed that the new equilibrium is achieved by matching the GTC between
different alternative routes.
          Engineering Module

Once traffic forecasts are formulated in terms of the expected traffic load, design of the road
sections should be prepared. The blueprints of road width, drainage, surface strength, passes,
and bridges along all sections are prepared. The outputs of the engineering module are the
design plans for all road elements, and the estimated costs of their construction. Expected
future maintenance, periodic, and rehabilitation costs are estimated using previous
information from the provincial network and expected traffic levels.
As an example, in a tarred road is usual to follow these rules: Routine maintenance should
be performed every year; intermediate maintenance should be performed every 5 years;
periodic maintenance should be performed every 10 years. In the case of a gravel road,
blading should be performed every year; the wearing course should be performed every 2
years; a heavy regravel should be performed every 5 years.
          Environmental Module

Several projects have a negative impact on the environment that may affect a group of people
in the society adversely. This is an externality generated by the project and is not reflected in
the private costs of the project. Failure to consider these actions in the ex-ante evaluation of


6   http://www.worldbank.org/transport/roads/rd_tools/hdm3.htm.


                                                     20
the project may lead to the selection of an alternative that is not necessarily the most
profitable in economic terms.
In this context, any road development should basically avoid spoiling the environment. The
modern construction methods attempt to minimize such negative interactions; however, even
the presence of the road and its traffic movement is likely to pose a danger to the remaining
flora and fauna. If road improvement is thought to cause a substantial degree of harm, a
proper environmental assessment should be made on the nature and extent of this damage. In
cases of substantial pollution, the design phase may re-consider the direction of the
problematic segment and, perhaps, re-route it elsewhere.
If redirection is neither possible nor technically feasible, then it is important to estimate the
amount of environmental damage caused by this road improvement project. The
environmental assessment team may be able to produce an estimate of the damage in
monetary terms.
       Financial Module

Financial analysis assesses the impact of a project on the financial costs and funding of the
organization that makes the decision to carry it out. This type of analysis requires the
construction of cash flows based on different points of view. For example, if the project does
not yield private investors a sufficient return to be attractive to them, a related function of
financial analysis is to measure the minimum amount of public assistance that would be
needed to induce private investors to undertake the investment.
Project implementation involves the use of resources to build, install, upgrade and/or equip
infrastructure, facilities or other investments. The financial analysis of a project helps to
determine the financial sustainability of the project and its overall success. But an important
question arises immediately. Why a financial appraisal for a public sector project? It may
appear that the financial appraisal of a project is only of interest to a private investor who
wishes to determine the net financial gain (or loss) resulting from an investment project.
From a country’s point of view, a project will increase the country’s net wealth if it has net
positive economic returns. Conversely, a project that yields negative economic returns should
not be undertaken as it would lower the net wealth of society as a whole.
This module provides the first integration of the financial and technical variables estimated
in the demand, technical and manpower modules. A cash-flow profile of the project is
constructed that identifies all the receipts and expenditures that are expected to occur during
the lifetime of the project.

               Financial Expenditures

For toll-free roads, the cash flow profile will only include initial investment costs, regular
and periodic maintenance expenditures, and rehabilitation costs. Since road users are not
charged for their passage, no financial receipts are expected. All these outlays will be borne
by the sponsoring agency and will be incurred during the lifespan of the project, typically 20
years. This cash-flow profile will belong to the “with” project situation.
Another set of expenditure outlays must be estimated for the “without” road improvement
situation. It will include entire regular and periodic maintenance expenditures and the
rehabilitation costs of the existing road if no improvement is done to it beyond maintenance.

                                               21
This situation does not automatically mean that there is “no spending”; nor does it imply a
“minimum maintenance” strategy. What this profile really means is that this road will be
maintained in a proper physical condition, according to the overall network maintenance
strategy plan.

              Data Requirements

The condition of a road link is typically assessed through a number of criteria: cracks,
pothole, patching, rutting. At least two summary measures of physical condition need to be
stated: International Roughness Index (IRI), and Visual Condition Index (VCI).
The role of this database is to provide decision-makers and engineers with up-to-date
information about the condition of the provincial road network. The database might also
contain information about the deterioration of certain roads and suggest possible treatment
options. In short, the database is a tool that helps to identify roads for upgrading and
rehabilitation.
The following financial data is needed to conduct a financial analysis in order to determine
the financial viability of a new road link/upgrade:
     a.    Construction, regular maintenance, and rehabilitation costs for the “without”
           situation.
     b.    Construction, regular maintenance, and rehabilitation costs for the “with”
           situation.
     c.    Types of Vehicle:
               o Car
               o Pickup
               o Bus
               o Light Truck
               o Medium Truck
               o Heavy Truck
     d.    Existing and future “normal” traffic volume by type of vehicle for the “without”
           situation.
     e.    Forecasts of “diverted” and “generated” traffic by type of vehicle for the “with”
           situation.
     f.    Forecasts of user charges by type of vehicle (in the case of a toll-road).
     g.    Financial discount rate (in real terms).
     h.    Period of analysis.
     i.    Initial calendar year.
Data requirements in (a) and (b) can be reasonably estimated. The existing traffic load can
be easily estimated. The forecast of future traffic flows “without” and “with” project, items
(d) and (e), must be generated by the analyst with the aid of traffic-flow software.


                                              22
Likewise, the forecasts of user charges by type of vehicle, item (g), could be developed. The
appropriate discount rate, item (h), will be the Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC)
if the owner of the enterprise is a private owner. In the case of a public road, the appropriate
discount rate will be the target financial rate of return (net of inflation) set by the government.
Period of analysis (i) is the time over which benefits and costs are compared. An analysis
period of 20 years is recommended. Initial calendar year (j) is the first year of the analysis
period. Also note that the last year of the analysis should be reserved to reflect the residual
value of the road and other project assets.

               Real Versus Nominal Prices

One of the core concepts of the financial modeling is tied up with the differentiation between
the “nominal” and “real” prices. “Nominal” prices are easily observed in the marketplace
while the underlying “real” prices are not. The difference between the two accounts for the
movement in the general price level over time.
The nominal price of an item is its real price plus the cumulative effect of inflation. In fact,
any year could be defined as the base as long as the whole analysis consistently uses that
particular year as a reference point7. If the “real” value of a good or service is constant over
time, i.e. forces of demand and supply do not alter its relative price, then in order to project
a “nominal” price of a good or service into future periods the analyst needs to know the
inflation rate(s).
To simplify the financial analysis, the analyst might use only “real” costs of construction and
maintenance. If the real cost of a commodity or service changes, for any reason other than
inflation, the projected future nominal cost will also adjust.

               Incremental Financial Cash Flow

Once the amount and timing of financial expenditures for both “without” and “with” project
situations are established, the analyst can finally derive an incremental financial cash flow.
The costs of routine, intermediate, and periodic maintenance are computed for X-km length
of road, and are also timed according to engineering standards.
Thus, the incremental financial cash flow of this road improvement project is derived by
subtracting each and every value of the “with” project situation from the corresponding
values of the “without” project situation. Any positive result implies that cost savings will be
achieved, while a negative figure means that additional costs will be imposed on the
economy.
       Economic Module

Economic analysis is similar to financial analysis in the sense that it also measures changes
in the wealth generated by a project. However, economic analysis is concerned with society
as a whole and not only with the welfare of the owners of the project. Here, the starting point



7   Jenkins, G.P., Kuo, C.Y. & Harberger, A.C. (2013). “Cost–Benefit Analysis for Investment
    Decisions”.


                                                23
for economic analysis is the incremental expected net cash flows to total capital from the
financial analysis.
At this stage, all the benefits generated by the project to society are recognized. The
sponsoring agency should consider not only those benefits that are generated in the same
market services or products (direct benefits) but the benefits generated in a related market
(secondary and indirect benefits and positive externalities). Similarly, all the costs should be
recognized, considering the direct costs plus the costs imposed on the rest of society
(secondary and indirect costs and negative externalities).
Market distortions refer to externalities like taxes, subsidies, trade tariffs, price controls,
monopoly markets, environmental impacts (such as pollution or congestion), and open access
or common property situations. Also, it is necessary to take into account externalities in the
price of capital (discount rate), in the price of foreign exchange (because of trade distortions
and controls in foreign exchange markets), and in the labor market (where the financial wage
rate may be different from the economic price of labor).
In this module the project is being examined from the entire economy's point of view to
determine whether or not its implementation will improve the economic welfare of the region
or governorate. An economic appraisal is of exactly the same nature as financial analysis is,
except that now the benefits and costs are measured from the point of view of the whole
country or the region. Instead of relying on market prices to measure the economic cost of
expenditures, the economic analysis estimates the economic prices of goods and services,
foreign exchange, cost of capital and labor. The true economic values of costs and benefits
are not accurately reflected in market prices in the presence of various market distortions
such as import tariffs, value-added taxes, subsidies, minimum wages, and price controls.
To undertake economic appraisal, the first step is to convert all financial expenditures into
their corresponding economic costs. This implies that all taxes, subsidies, market
imperfections, impact of foreign exchange premium, and labor market distortions must be
removed from financial expenditures to arrive at economic costs. Secondly, the benefit items
must be estimated in terms of their magnitude and timing over the duration of the project.
These include maintenance costs savings, vehicle operating costs savings, and time savings.
In practical terms, the incremental economic resource-flow statement consists of two parts:
economic benefits and economic costs. Ideally, on the benefit side, five types of benefit
should be counted: i) a change8 in resource costs on maintenance by the roads agency; ii)
reduction in vehicle operating costs for road users due to improved road surface; iii) time
savings for road users, including cargo, due to an increase in the average speed of vehicles;
iv) possible reduction in the costs of accidents; and v) other externalities.

                Conversion of Financial Expenditures into Economic Costs

Economic prices account for the real resources consumed or produced by a project and hence
exclude tariffs, taxes or subsidies, as these are the financial transfers between consumers,
producers and the government all within the same economy. An economic conversion factor
(CF) is the ratio of the economic price of a commodity to its financial price.

8
    A road project does not necessarily imply a reduction of maintenance expenditures. Upgrade of the road
    surface and/or road expansion might lead to an increase in the required road maintenance expense.


                                                   24
Market distortions drive a wedge between financial and economic prices of goods and
services9. The concept of the conversion factor, defined as the ratio of the economic price to
the financial price, is a handy way to express the relationship between the economic and
financial values of the same commodity or service. Hence, the economic price of any
commodity can be determined by multiplying the CF for that commodity by its financial
price:
                                           Economic Cost
                                     CF =
                                            Financial Cost

                               Economic Cost = Financial Cost * CF
Practically, the procedure of transforming financial expenditures into their economic
equivalents is very straightforward once all conversion factors have been estimated. The
financial expenditure savings are derived from the incremental financial cash-flow profile,
and are simply an annual summation of maintenance costs, grouped by type of maintenance
activity.
If there are no distortions in the supply and demand market of a commodity, the CF will
simply be 1 because the economic and financial prices are the same. If the market for foreign
exchange is distorted, the market exchange rate (Em) or the official exchange rate (OER) will
not accurately reflect the economic value of a unit of foreign exchange in relation to the
domestic currency. Thus, it is essential to make an adjustment for the divergence between
the market or official price of foreign exchange and its economic price, also referred to as
the Economic Exchange Rate (Ee) or sometimes as the Shadow Exchange Rate (SER).

                Data and Economic Parameters

As was mentioned above, there are three types of benefit that could reasonably be estimated
from road improvement:
    •   Reduction in vehicle operating costs for road users, due to improved road surface.
    •   Time savings for road users, due to the increase in the average speed of vehicles.
    •   Reduction in resource costs on maintenance by different agencies.
In addition to financial data requirements, the following set of additional data and economic
parameters are needed to conduct the economic analysis:
    •   Economic conversion factors for all construction, maintenance, and rehabilitation
        costs (in order to estimate corresponding economic costs).
    •   VOC of existing and future traffic volume by type of vehicle for the “without”
        situation.
    •   VOC of the diverted and newly/generated traffic by type of vehicle for the “with”
        situation.
    •   Detailed composition of traffic by vehicle type, and average speeds “with” and
        “without” road improvement.
9
 Jenkins, G.P., Kuo, C.Y. & Herberger, A.C. (2013). “Cost–Benefit Analysis for Investment Decisions”.
Chapter 7: Principles Underlying the Economic Analysis of Projects.


                                                 25
     •   Average occupancy of vehicles and cargo content.
     •   Average value of time for passengers and cargo.
     •   Economic discount rate (in real terms).
Economic conversion factors are required to estimate the economic costs of road
construction, maintenance, and rehabilitation expenditures. It is suggested that a database of
economic conversion factors for all commodities under harmonized tax system (HST) be
developed, organized into a single database10. To arrive at the economic costs of road-related
expenditures, the analyst should examine the outlays on domestically produced inputs,
imported inputs, cost of services (i.e. design, supervision, etc.), and cost of labor by skill11.
The economic cost of foreign exchange (Foreign Exchange Premium, or FEP) is extensively
used in the calculation of economic conversion factors. FEP represents the difference
between the market value and the economic value of foreign exchange12.
Labor markets of many developing countries are characterized by high rates of
unemployment of unskilled labor and close-to-full employment of skilled labor, and are
generally highly regulated, unionized and distorted. In such a situation, the wage rate paid by
a project for a particular skill or occupation will usually be significantly different from its
economic opportunity cost.
The vehicle operating costs by type of vehicle are estimated from traffic forecasts for
“without” and “with” project with the help of appropriate road management software. The
resulting product is a set of annual time-series on VOC by type of vehicle. The next step is
to take the difference between the VOC “without” and “with” project by type of vehicle;
discount the resulting differentials to the beginning year of analysis in order to estimate a
total present value (PV) of VOC cost-savings, i.e. economic benefit.
The parameters are typically derived from an actual road survey, which can help establish
the composition of road users on a particular section, average speeds, and their average
occupancy. The average speed is the function of the type of road surface, as well as
congestion on the road.
The value of time for passengers and tourists is usually linked to wages of skilled, semi-
skilled and unskilled labor in the region. The value of time-savings for cargo is a function of
delay costs, and may require an additional investigation for the particular commodities in
question.




10
    It is suggested that user-friendly online-based software be used for the database. The software should have open
    access and be available to analysts, including private companies and international bilateral agencies and
    development institutions. An example of an open-access database can be found at http://rwanda-
    cscf.minecofin.gov.rw. The conceptual framework and actual estimation procedures are presented in “Cost–
    Benefit Analysis for Investment Decisions”, Chapter 10 and Chapter 11.
11
    For the methodology underlying the estimation of the economic conversion factors for labor, refer to Jenkins,
    G.P.¸ Kuo, C.Y. & Harberger, A.C. (2013). “Cost-Benefit Analysis for Investment Decisions”, Chapter 12.
12
   Jenkins, G.P.¸ Kuo, C.Y. & Harberger, A.C. (2013). “Cost–Benefit Analysis for Investment Decisions”, Chapter
    9: Shadow Price of Foreign Exchange and Non-Tradable Outlays.


                                                      26
The Economic Opportunity Cost of Capital (EOCK) is the appropriate discount rate to use
when estimating the economic NPV of a road project13.
Investment decisions are fundamentally different from consumption decisions because the
former have a time dimension. For example, land and capital equipment are purchased at one
point in time, and they are expected to generate net cash flows, or net economic benefits,
over a number of subsequent years. To determine whether the investment is worthwhile, it is
necessary to compare benefits and costs, which occur in different time periods.
From the point of view of the economy, the funds are generally drawn from three sources.
First, funds that would have been invested in other investment activities and have now been
displaced by the project (the cost of these funds would be the return that would have been
earned on the alternative investments that are now foregone). Second, funds come from
different categories of saver in the economy who postpone their consumption in the
expectation of getting a return on their savings (the cost of this part of the funds is the cost
of postponing consumption, and this is reflected in the interest rate that the savers earn).
Finally, some funds may be coming from abroad, that is from foreign savers (the cost of these
funds would be the marginal cost of foreign borrowing). The EOCK will simply be a
weighted average of the costs of funds from the three sources outlined above: rate of return
on postponed investments, the rate of interest on domestic savings, and the marginal cost of
additional foreign capital inflows.
This hurdle rate applies not only to investments financed solely with public funds but for the
economic evaluation of joint public–private ventures and pure private investments. For
developing countries, the 12 percent EOCK is generally adopted if a more accurate estimate
is not available.
         Uncertainty (Risk) Analysis Module

Generally, when evaluating investment projects, it is assumed that the variables used have a
deterministic character. However, there are a number of variables in all infrastructure
investment projects that do not behave this way. There are variables whose value cannot be
accurately predicted, but there is some uncertainty in their estimation.
A traditional cash-flow analysis assumes single (deterministic) values for all of the variables.
The outcome of that analysis is a point-estimate of a project’s indicators, as NPV or its IRR,
and a decision on whether to accept a project is made on that basis. More realistically,
however, we know that values for most project variables are subject to change and are
difficult to predict. While the past values of a particular variable are known with certainty,
predicting future values is a different matter. It is more likely to forecast the correct range of
future values for a variable rather than its exact value. Given that there are probabilities
attached to the possible values of a variable in a given range, there is a good chance that the
value that occurs will be other than the one we have chosen.
Uncertainty and its consequences are very significant issues in road appraisal because the
project costs and returns are spread over time. Estimates of time and vehicle operating cost


13
     The theoretical arguments have been developed by Harberger, A.C., “On Measuring the Social Opportunity
     Cost of Public Funds”, in Project Evaluation – Collected Papers (Chicago: the University of Chicago,
     1972).


                                                    27
savings are tentative due to uncertainty in traffic forecasts. In turn, this makes the outcome
of projects uncertain.
Typically, the analysts use three types of analysis to deal with uncertainty: sensitivity tests,
scenario analysis, and Monte-Carlo risk analysis. For a road improvement project, the
minimum requirements in terms of risk assessment are sensitivity tests and scenario analysis
for the parameters of cost items, assumptions of traffic forecasts, and valuation of benefits.

               Sensitivity Analysis

Appraisal of transportation-road construction projects involve some degree of uncertainty.
Appraisal analysts simply do not know with certainty what will happen in the future.
Sensitivity analysis is a way of testing how sensitive a project’s outcomes (whether cash
flows, economic NPV, gains and losses to different groups in the economy) are to changes
in the value of one parameter at a time. Sensitivity analysis is typically conducted to identify
the impact of input variables on the economic outcomes of a project. Sensitivity analysis is
often referred to as “what if” analysis, because it allows the analyst to answer questions, such
as “What would happen to the NPV if a variable were to change by a certain amount or
percentage?”. To conduct this analysis, it helps if the spreadsheets are organized in a
systematic way starting with the table of parameters that can be easily adjusted.
      Construction Costs Overruns. This test measures the response of the economic
       NPV to an unexpected escalation of road construction costs, keeping all other project
       parameters constant. Road users are not affected by unexpected cost escalations of
       road construction since the cost is covering by the government. In the range from -
       5% to +25%, the total economic NPV is moderately sensitive to changes in initial
       construction costs.
      Traffic Growth Rate. This test measures the project’s performance under various
       traffic volume levels, as a factor of expected future traffic growth rate. The value of
       benefits accruing to owners of light and heavy vehicles varies with the rate of traffic
       growth. It is implicitly assumed that a higher traffic level does not result in an
       increased frequency and cost of road maintenance, and that is why the PV of the net
       benefits accruing to the government remains constant.
      Maintenance Costs Savings Factor. This factor adjusts all the maintenance resource
       savings over a range from -50% to 0% in order to assess the sensitivity of the NPV
       to the overall value of maintenance savings.
      VOC Savings Factor. A range of -50% to 0% for this factor has been tested. The
       response of NPV is directly related to the overall level of VOC savings.
      Time Savings Factor. This test examines the elasticity of the NPV to changes in the
       total value of time savings in a range of -50% to 0%.

               Scenario Analysis

A one-at-a-time testing of variables is not realistic to account for the interrelationships
between variables. Scenario analysis recognizes these interrelationships by allowing to
simultaneously after a number of variables.


                                               28
Scenario analysis allows for interrelationships between variables, it usually does not take into
account the probabilities associated with each scenario. Probabilities could be assigned, but
they are likely to be highly subjective and could be biased either in favor or against a project.
Scenarios are based on a set of parameters, values of which are pre-defined by the analyst.
There could be a number of scenarios, built on the “base” scenario but ranging from the
“worst” to the “best”. Even under the worst set of circumstances, the project has a marginal
negative (close to the break-even) NPV, which suggests that the proposed road improvement
is indeed a robust project. Obviously, the “worst” and “best” scenarios are two extremes that
are very unlikely to happen in practice.
The main limitation of this method is that it does not allow the probability of occurrence of
each of the proposed scenarios to be represented, so that while delivering as much
information as the sensitivity analysis (considering the correlation between different
variables), it cannot be enough, since the number of variables and values for each that can be
tested is limited.
What sensitivity tests and scenario analysis lack the capacity to embrace is the probabilistic
expression of a project’s returns. The two extreme sets of conditions formulated in the
“worst” and “best” scenarios are unlikely to occur, and most of the time some combination
of parameters within the vicinity of the “base” scenario will materialize. The chance that the
values of project outcomes will materialize exactly as estimated is practically zero. In order
to look at the project returns from a probabilistic point of view, the analyst should undertake
a Monte Carlo simulation.
4.3. Final Comments
The project lifecycle and its phases play a key role in the success of a project. In these phases,
information is gathered and the necessary studies for the identification, formulation and
appraisal of the project are done. The studies reduce the degree of uncertainty about the
investment decisions, thus allocating fiscal resources efficiently.
Given the importance of these phases, a series of recommendations and obligations to ensure
that the project is formulated correctly is listed below:
1. The definition of the problem is essential in determining possible alternative solutions.
   Framing the problem as the lack of a good or service leads invariably to a unique solution
   and prevents the analysis of more than one alternative to the root problem.
2. It is necessary to understand that a problem in itself is not a project. A project comprises
   courses of action that arise from a given problem and provides a rational response to the
   problem.
3. When doing the diagnostic of the current situation, it is helpful to set a baseline for
   comparisons and benchmarking. This is essential for the ex-post evaluation of the
   project, which aims to verify whether the project has been a real solution to the problem.
4. The optimization of the base case (or without the project) should always be considered
   as one of the alternative solutions to the problem.
5. Always more than one alternative should be analyzed as a solution to the problem.




                                               29
6. For the calculation of benefits and costs of each alternative, the situation “without
   project” or “optimized base case” should be considered the baseline for comparisons,
   thus avoiding over- or underestimation of benefits or costs.
7. It is recommended that the analysis of project alternatives be performed in the pre-
   feasibility study, as this involves looking at each alternative in greater detail and
   therefore increases the probability of choosing the best alternative to solve the problem.
   A modular analysis for each alternative is recommended.
Finally, it should be noted that financial and economic analyses represent a guide for decision
makers and do not represent a decision in themselves. The evaluation approaches proposed
above are just an input to the policy process that projects undergo.




                                              30
5. PROJECT EVALUATION
The financial and economic attractiveness of a project is determined by the net present value
of its incremental net cash or resource flows. The NPV criterion is widely accepted by
accountants, financial analysts, and economists as the only one that yields correct project
choices in almost all circumstances. However, some investors have frequently relied upon
other criteria such as a project’s internal rate of return and the benefit–cost ratio.
The incremental net economic resource flow is the difference between total benefits and total
costs, on a year-by-year basis. It is a summary profile of the road project. The values of the
resulting annual net economic flow are then discounted to the initial year of analysis at the
EOCK to compute an economic Net Present Value (NPV) of the project. If the economic
NPV of the project is greater than zero, the project is potentially worthwhile to implement.
This implies that the project would generate more net economic benefits than if the resources
had been used elsewhere in the economy. On the other hand, if the NPV is less than zero, the
project should be rejected on the grounds that the resources invested could be utilized better
by the capital market.
When selecting among several alternatives, the economic NPV criteria makes it possible to
choose the best combination of roads. Alternative road projects with the highest NPVs should
be selected first to maximize the net economic benefits over time.
5.1. Evaluation Period
To evaluate a project, a period of analysis is required. This evaluation horizon will depend
on the particular characteristics of the project. However, there are some recommendations to
facilitate determining what it should be.
      If there are several alternative solutions, a single analysis period must be set, for
       comparison purposes. A shorter period of analysis may be required to determine the
       profitability associated with the initial investment if the most convenient alternative
       is chosen.
      It is recommended that a period equal to the life of the most important or
       representative aspects of the project work be chosen as an analysis period. For
       example, if the project is to evaluate the paving of a gravel road, the pavement life
       will be used, even if the drainage works or earthworks are longer-lasting.
      In the case that the most important work has a very long shelf life, such as bridges or
       tunnels, it is desirable to reduce the period of analysis, for example, to 20 years.
On completing the analysis period, some works are left with a surplus of life. This is to be
incorporated into the residual economic value of the project and is considered to be a benefit
received during the last year of analysis.
5.2. The Net Present Value Criteria
The NPV is the algebraic sum of the present values of the incremental expected positive and
negative net cash flows over a project’s anticipated lifetime. If this sum is equal to zero,




                                              31
investors can expect to recover their incremental investment and to earn a rate of return on
their capital equal to the private discount rate used to compute present values14.
A NPV greater than zero means that investors can expect not only to recover their capital
investment and to earn a rate of return equal to the discount rate but to receive an addition to
their real net worth equal to the positive amount of the NPV. Only projects with positive
NPVs are going to be beneficial and hence attractive to private investors. They are unlikely
to pursue a project with a negative NPV unless there are strategic reasons.
The formula for computing the NPV of expected incremental net cash flows over n time
periods with annual discounting is:

                                                       CF
                                             t0 (1 + rt)t
                                                n
                                     NPV =

Where:
The incremental net cash flows (CFt) could be negative, zero, or positive.
r is the discount rate equal to the cost of capital.
Sigma sign (  ) is the symbol of summation.
The NPV formula can be written out in its component present values of the annual net cash
flows, as follows:

                                        C F1 C F 2               C Fn
                           NPV = C0 +        +           + ...
                                        1 + r (1 + r ) 2        (1 r ) n
The net present value criterion can be stated in the form of a set of decision rules.
Decision Rule 1: Do not accept any project unless it generates a positive NPV when
              discounted by a discount rate equal to the opportunity cost of the funds.
Decision Rule 2: To maximize net worth, choose among the various projects, or scenarios of
               projects, the one with the highest NPV. If investment is subject to a budget
               constraint, choose the package of projects that maximizes the NPV of the
               fixed budget.
Decision Rule 3: When there is no budget constraint and when a choice must be made
              between two or more mutually exclusive projects, e.g. projects being
              considered for the same building site, investors who seek to maximize net
              worth should select the project with the highest NPV.
These rules follow from the definition of the NPV, namely the algebraic sum of the present
values of the incremental expected positive and negative net cash flows over a project’s
anticipated lifetime.



14
  The recovery of the invested capital is anticipated when NPV  0 because the incremental
capital expenditures are included in the initial negative net cash flows.

                                                 32
5.3. The Internal Rate of Return Criteria
By definition, the internal rate of return (IRR) is the discount rate (  ) that sets the NPV = 0
in the following equation:
                                       n
                                               CF j
                                       (1 +  )
                                       j=1
                                                         j
                                                             - I0 = 0

Where:
CFj = the incremental net cash flow in year j to total, or equity, capital,
I = the initial investment,
  = the IRR. We have to solve for  .
This definition is consistent with the meaning of a zero NPV as explained in the previous
section, namely that investors recover their invested capital and earn a rate of return equal to
the discount rate, which is the IRR. The internal rate of return criterion can be stated in the
form of a set of decision rules.
Decision Rule 1: Do not accept any project unless its IRR is greater than the opportunity cost
               of the funds (accept project if  > r, the opportunity cost of capital;
               otherwise, reject). The opportunity cost of capital is measured by the cost of
               funds or the expected rate of return offered by other assets equivalent in risk
               to the project being evaluated.
Decision Rule 2: When a choice must be made between two or more mutually exclusive
               projects, investors should select the project with the higher, or highest, IRR.
5.4. Cost of Postponing Project Criteria
The cost of delaying the project (Cost of Postponing the Project, CPP) can be expressed as a
fraction of the initial investment required by the project.
                                                    NPV
                                             CPP=
                                                      I0
For those road projects that only have savings in operating costs and travel time, it is easy to
calculate the cost of delaying the project (CPP). In this case, if the execution of the road is
delayed one year, it incurs in a cost equal to the profit of the first year of project operation
(BZ). The benefit to postpone by one year the initial investment is the initial CAPEX multiple
by EOCK. The expression is:
                                           1  BZ            I *r 
                                CPP=         *          Z
                                                            0 z
                                           I0  (1  r )    (1  r ) 
Where:
CPP is the cost of delaying the project, expressed as a fraction of the initial investment.
BZ is the benefit for the first year of project operation.
Z is the number of years from when the initial investment was made.


                                                    33
I0 is the initial investment.
r is the economic discount rate.
Since the first year of investment corresponds to the year zero, the year "z" is the year when
the project is put into operation (and therefore is the year when the first benefit is obtained).
The expression of CPP is based on some assumptions, such as that the initial investment will
not change if the project is delayed; second, that the benefits are not significantly dependent
on the time of investment; third, that the external additional travel costs (inconvenience,
delays, detours, etc.) resulting from the execution of the project are negligible.
The optimum time to run the investment is the one that maximizes the NPV. If the cost of
delaying the project (CPP) is negative, it means that the NPV increases with this
postponement, and therefore this is not the optimal year to start project execution.
For road projects is reasonable to assume that the benefits (Bi) will increase over time and
therefore that the cost of delaying the project, CPP, will also grow over time. The optimal
year to run the investment will be one in which the CPP is greater than or equal to zero.
5.5. Final Comments
For roads owned and operated by the government, no financial revenues from road users
accrue to the government, and it should be clear that the financial NPV is, in most cases,
simply the present value of the costs of building and maintaining the road during a period of
time. As a result, the financial NPV for such a road will be negative, representing the
requirement for funds to finance the project.
If it is a private-sector project such as a public–private partnership (PPP) and the financial
NPV of the project is greater than zero, the project is potentially worthwhile for the private
investor to implement. But if the financial NPV turns out to be negative, private investor(s)
might find it better to shift their investment elsewhere, to other projects, where they will earn
the minimum required return.




                                               34
6. FINAL COMMENTS
This document is a simplified tool to technically guide the process of project formulation and
project evaluation for transportation-road projects. Therefore, and because it is a technical
document, the methodology does not describe roles and administrative responsibilities in the
public investment process. This description must be part of the rules and procedures of the
PIM system.
Project evaluation is a tool for decision-making that allows the determination of the
suitability of society to invest in various initiatives when resources are scarce. Usually, this
"convenience" is understood from the economic point of view as a measurement of the costs
and benefits of competing projects, leading to the prioritizing of those projects whose
expected economic benefits are the highest.
Comparing the total costs (investment and operation) of a project with its benefits allows
public authorities to decide if that project has the potential to make a real contribution to the
wealth of the country. Thus, project evaluation allows them to: i) Identify the criteria for
investment policies that maximize social welfare; ii) stop the "bad projects" and promote
those that are "good"; iii) define whether the public or private sector should implement the
project; iv) estimate the fiscal impact of the project; v) establish agreements for desirable
cost recovery; and vi) assess their impact on the environment, regional development and
poverty, among other things.
It is often argued that all road improvements stimulate economic development. The truth is
that some do stimulate it while others do not. It is the task of the project analyst to establish
whether this particular road project will spur on economic development in the area.
In order to consider this road upgrading as groundbreaking in terms of economic potential,
three conditions must be met simultaneously:
      The economic development would not have taken place in any circumstance without
       this road improvement.
      The resources used in the new development would have been under-utilized or
       remained unused.
      The economic activity stimulated does not replace any other activity that would have
       taken place otherwise.
Often, the proposed road improvement is not the only requirement to unlock the economic
potential of a particular area. Other basic factors of production must be ensured in order to
make the best use of available resources. In a very specific case, when all conditions are
effectively satisfied and the road upgrade is the only barrier to pass, the valuation of road
benefits should be linked to the net value of additional output. Of course, vehicle-operation
cost savings for the traffic from the project must be excluded to avoid double counting of the
benefits of developing the road.




                                               35
7. REFERENCES
 Asian Development Bank (2002). “Handbook for Integrating Risk Analysis in the
  Economic Analysis of Projects”.
 Baum, Warren, C. (1982). “The Project Cycle”. The World Bank. Washington.
 Belli, P., Anderson, J., Barnum, H., Dixon, J., Tan, J. (2001). “Economic Analysis of
  Investment Operations: Analytical Tools and Practical Applications”. The World Bank,
  Washington D.C.
 Boardman, A., Greenberg, D., Vining, A., Weimer, D. (2001). “Cost–Benefit Analysis.
  Concepts and Practice”. Prentice Hall, Third Edition.
 De Rus, G. (2012). “Introduction to Cost–Benefit Analysis; Looking for Reasonable
  Shortcuts”. Edward Elgar Publishing.
 De Rus, G., Betancor, O., Campos, J. (2006). “Evaluación Económica de Proyectos de
  Transporte”. Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo.
 European Commission, Directorate General Regional Policy (2008). “Guide to Cost
  Benefit Analysis of Investment Projects”.
 Flyvbjerg, B., Holm, M., Buhl, S. (2003). “How Common and How Large are Cost
  Overruns in Transport Infrastructure Projects?” Transport Reviews, 23(1): 71–88.
 Fontaine, E. (2008). “Social Project Evaluation”. Pearson, México.
 Harberger, A. (1971). “Three Basic Postulates for Applied Welfare Economics: An
  Interpretive Essay”. Journal of Economic Literature, 9(3): 785–797. American
  Economic Association.
 Harberger, A. (1996). “The Economic Evaluation of Projects, Papers from a Curriculum
  Development Workshop”. Edit by David G. Davies. Economic Development Institute of
  The World Bank, the World Bank, Washington, D. C.
 Jenkins, G., Harberger, A., Kuo, Ch. (2013). “Cost–Benefit Analysis for Investment
  Decisions, the Integrated Analysis of Investment Projects”. Queen’s University,
  Kingston, Canada.
 Ministry of Social Development of Chile (2015). “Methodology of Social and Economic
  Analysis on Inter-Urban Transportation Sector”.
 Mishan, E. (1972). “Elements of Cost–Benefit Analysis”. Allen. & Unwin. London.
 UK HM Treasury (2011). “The Green Book, Appraisal and Evaluation in Central
  Government”.




                                          36
