Vu l n e r a b i l i t y
non-communicable disease                                           remoteness
disaster risk management                                       climate change
RISING                                SE A                     L E V EL
diseconomies of scale labor migration
volatile growth natural disasters
                                                             E X EC U TI V E S U M M A RY


                    World Bank Group Engagement
                                   in Small States
        The Cases of the OECS, Pacific Island Countries, Cabo Verde, Djibouti, Mauritius,
                          and the Seychelles — Clustered Country Program Evaluation
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction   This work is a product of the staff of The World   RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
and Development / The World Bank               Bank with external contributions. The findings,    The material in this work is subject to copyright.
1818 H Street NW                               interpretations, and conclusions expressed in      Because The World Bank encourages
Washington, DC 20433                           this work do not necessarily reflect the views     dissemination of its knowledge, this work
Telephone: 202-473-1000                        of The World Bank, its Board of Executive          may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
Internet: www.worldbank.org                    Directors, or the governments they represent.      noncommercial purposes as long as full
                                                                                                  attribution to this work is given.
                                               The World Bank does not guarantee the
                                               accuracy of the data included in this work.        Any queries on rights and licenses, including
                                               The boundaries, colors, denominations, and         subsidiary rights, should be addressed to
                                               other information shown on any map in this         World Bank Publications, The World Bank
                                               work do not imply any judgment on the part         Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC
                                               of The World Bank concerning the legal             20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail:
                                               status of any territory or the endorsement         pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                               or acceptance of such boundaries.
CONFERENCE EDITION

World Bank Group Engagement in Small
States: The Cases of the OECS, PICs, Cabo
Verde, Djibouti, Mauritius, and the Seychelles

Clustered Country Program Evaluation Executive Summary
AN INDEPENDENT EVALUATION
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org




This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and
conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive
Directors, or the governments they represent.

       The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The
World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution
to this work is given.

         Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail:
pubrights@worldbank.org.




ii
Contents
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................................................... IV

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ......................................................................................................................... V

OVERVIEW........................................................................................................................................... VII

1.          INTRODUCTION........................................................................................................................ 1
            Background and Context ........................................................................................................................................... 1
            Country Program Selection ....................................................................................................................................... 2
            Analytical Framework ................................................................................................................................................ 3
            Report Structure ........................................................................................................................................................ 3


2.          STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL APPROACHES IN THE SMALL STATE WORLD BANK
            GROUP PROGRAMS ................................................................................................................ 5
            Regional or Grouped Engagement and Support ....................................................................................................... 6
            Thematic and Operational Selectivity ........................................................................................................................ 9
            Maintaining Flexibility to Respond to Shocks .......................................................................................................... 10
            Addressing Institutional Capacity Limitations .......................................................................................................... 12
            Addressing Client Capacity for World Bank Portfolio Implementation .................................................................... 15
            Fostering Partnerships ............................................................................................................................................ 16
            Other Aspects of World Bank Group Engagement ................................................................................................. 18


3.          STRENGTHENING RESILIENCE............................................................................................ 22
            Strengthening Macroeconomic/Fiscal Resilience ................................................................................................... 22
            Strengthening Environmental Resilience ................................................................................................................ 24
            Strengthening Social Resilience ............................................................................................................................. 27


4.          IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS.......................................................................................... 31
            Enhancing the Policy and Regulatory Framework for Market-Led Growth ............................................................. 31
            Strengthening the Financial Sector ......................................................................................................................... 33
            Expanding and Better Managing Infrastructure ....................................................................................................... 35
            Promoting Leading Sectors ..................................................................................................................................... 39


5.          CONSIDERATIONS FOR WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT ...................................... 43
            Key Issues in Strengthening Resilience .................................................................................................................. 44
            Key Issues in Enhancing Competitiveness ............................................................................................................. 47
            Issues in the Operational Framework for Engaging with Small States.................................................................... 48


All volumes of the Cluster Country Program Evaluation on Small States are found online at
http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/evaluations/cpe-smallstates.




                                                                                                                                                                                   iii
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AAA           analytic and advisory activities
ADB           Asian Development Bank
ADDS          Agence Djiboutienne de Développement Social
CAT DDO       Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
CCRIF         Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility
CDD           community-driven development
CPE           country program evaluation
DDO           Deferred Drawdown Option
DPF           Development Policy Financing
ECCB          Eastern Caribbean Central Bank
ELECTRA       Empresa Publica de Electricidade e Água (Cabo Verde utility
              company)
EU            European Union
FY            fiscal year
GDP           gross domestic product
GFDRR         Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
HIV/AIDS      human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency
              syndrome
IBRD          International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICT           information and communication technology
IDA           International Development Association
IEG           Independent Evaluation Group
IFC           International Finance Corporation
IMF           International Monetary Fund
OECS          Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States
PICs          Pacific Island countries
RAS           reimbursable advisory services
SDR           special drawing rights

All dollar amounts are U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated.




iv
Acknowledgments
This Clustered Country Program Evaluation (Clustered CPE) represents a new
product prepared by the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG). It includes this
overview report as well as separate regional program evaluations of the World Bank
Group programs in the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS), the Pacific
Island Countries (PICs), and more selective reviews of the World Bank Group
programs in Cabo Verde, Djibouti, Mauritius, and the Seychelles.

Florence Charlier led this Clustered CPE, which was conducted under the guidance
and supervision of Mark Sundberg (Manager) and Nick York (Director), and the
overall direction of Caroline Heider (Director-General, Evaluation).

Ali Khadr and Swizen Rubbani (OECS) and Basil Kavalsky (PICs) led the regional
program evaluations. Team members include Stephen Hutton (disaster risk,
environment, and climate change for OECS, the PICs, and Djibouti), Pia Schneider
(human development for OECS), Andrew Stone (business environment and access
to finance for OECS), Xiaolun Sun (financial sector and infrastructure for OECS), and
Anna Aghumian (partnership aspects for OECS).

Claude Leroy (Djibouti), Chandra Pant (Mauritius and the Seychelles), and Xiaolun
Sun (Cabo Verde) led country case studies providing selected reviews of the country
programs.

Core team members for this overview report were Stephen Hutton, Basil Kavalsky,
Ali Khadr, and Swizen Rubbani. Yasmin Angeles and Aimée Niane provided
administrative support. Alan Gelb (Center for Global Development), Ali Mansour
(International Monetary Fund), and Jyoti Shukla (World Bank Group) were the peer
reviewers for this clustered CPE.

IEG is enormously grateful to the numerous representatives of governments, private
sector entities, and nongovernmental organizations in the OECS, the PICs, Cabo
Verde, Djibouti, Mauritius, and the Seychelles, and to World Bank Group
management and country team members (both present and former) who were
willing to devote valuable time and effort to providing the evaluation team with
information, views, and feedback.




                                                                                   v
Overview
This report selectively discusses the         resilience and enhancing
World Bank Group’s strategic and              competitiveness.
operational approaches and
development issues addressed in its           The World Bank Group programs used
engagement with small states over             a variety of strategic and operational
2006–14. The report’s goal is to facilitate   approaches to respond to the more
cross learning, and it focuses on the         constraining parameters that small state
engagement aspects of particular              country teams confront, including small
interest for small states, which are          IDA allocations and administrative
countries with a population of less than      budgets (in absolute size) and thin client
1.5 million. Small states differ widely,      institutional capacity. These approaches
but share several challenges, including       included engaging on a regional or
limited institutional capacity, acute         multicountry level, addressing country
vulnerability to economic and natural         capacity limitations (including capacity
shocks, and an inability to exploit           for program implementation), and using
economies of scale. Consequently, many        partnerships to engage jointly or in a
small states benefited from growing           coordinated way with others.
International Development Association
                                              From a thematic perspective, the
(IDA) access, despite exceeding the
                                              programs deployed several approaches
cutoff.
                                              and addressed key development issues
The cluster evaluated the programs of         tailored to small states. The programs
two regional groups: the six                  sought to strengthen macroeconomic,
Organisation of Eastern Caribbean             disaster and climate, and social
States (OECS) countries and nine Pacific      resilience; and enhance competitiveness
Island countries (PICs). It also assessed     by facilitating trade, strengthening the
four African country programs more            financial sector, expanding
selectively: Cabo Verde, Djibouti,            infrastructure and improving its
Mauritius, and the Seychelles. The            management, and supporting leading
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            sectors (such as tourism, fisheries, and
selected the programs to ensure a range       agriculture). In particular, the World
of country income levels and                  Bank provided support to client
geographical coverage, and significant        countries for managing disaster risk by
World Bank Group financing and                improving preparedness capacity,
knowledge work. The cluster                   helping to make infrastructure disaster-
evaluations used a common framework           resilient, and focusing government
based on two pillars: strengthening           planning processes more on resilience.



                                                                                      vii
OVERVIEW


The World Bank was the central              social resilience include preventing and
architect of the Caribbean Catastrophe      managing noncommunicable diseases,
Risk Insurance Facility, which provides     strengthening social protection, and
governments with liquidity to fund          enhancing mobility to larger countries’
emergency responses after major             labor markets (as the Bank helped to do
disasters to contain fiscal disruption.     for the PICs with Australia and New
                                            Zealand).
The program evaluations raise several
issues for World Bank Group                 Under the competitiveness pillar, a
consideration in its engagement with        sharper focus is needed on the most
small states. Selected issues to consider   binding business constraints, using
relate to the thematic aspects of           lenses specific to the leading sectors—
engagement—seeking to strengthen            typically fisheries, tourism, and
clients’ resilience and enhance their       agriculture. Several World Bank Group
competitiveness—and to the cross-           programs have started such an
cutting aspects at both at the country      approach. In the financial sector, key
team and institutional levels.              issues for attention include system
                                            soundness and risks (particularly in the
Under the resilience pillar, the            OECS), access to finance for small and
evaluations suggest that support for        medium enterprises, and remittance
strengthening macroeconomic resilience      costs. Finally, it is important for
needs to pursue a multifaceted              infrastructure work to continue focusing
approach to be effective. Guided by         on separating regulatory functions from
analytical tools such as the World          service delivery functions. Despite the
Bank’s Comprehensive Debt Framework         pitfalls, a strong case can be made for
for small states, the support needs to      continuing to support public-private
focus on the multiple drivers of fiscal     partnerships in infrastructure service
and debt sustainability, which are a        delivery and regional service provision
major challenge for many small states.      and regulatory initiatives.
The approach to disaster risk
management of directly supporting           To ensure impact and contain
resilience building (notably for            transactions costs of delivering support,
infrastructure) was helpful but had         small state programs need to consider
limits. Making real improvements in         the thin capacity in the field and be
vulnerability requires continuing efforts   selective when choosing what to
to foster wholesale changes in public       support to build resilience or foster
and private incentives and behavior,        competitiveness. World Bank Group
and the long-term risks of climate          comparative advantage can guide
change (including helping countries         program selectivity. Beyond competitive
access climate financing) need to be        and concessional financing, the World
addressed. Important focus areas for        Bank Group is well-placed to undertake


viii
                                                                            OVERVIEW


higher-level policy dialogue, engage       parties, and therefore small state
regionally to support public goods or      programs need to pursue (and deepen
shared and harmonized development          to the extent possible) collaboration
solutions, and foster synergy in public    with other development partners at the
and private efforts through concerted      overall program level and through joint
World Bank– International Finance          support vehicles embodying
Corporation (IFC) engagement.              harmonized procedures.

Cross-cutting considerations at the        Small state country teams need to
country team level include seeking         continue to find ways to navigate
opportunities to engage regionally or      constraints related to the business
with multiple clients at the overall       model, including financing envelopes
partnership framework level and under      and administrative budgets that are
individual operations while managing       small in absolute size. The programs
prospective risks. Keeping programs        provided notable examples of effective
selective thematically and limiting the    leveraging of World Bank Group
number of support delivery vehicles is     technical and financial inputs through
also important. Contingency planning,      appropriate partnerships (significantly,
including the use of contingent            in some cases). They also provided
financing instruments, has a key role in   examples of ensuring in-country
enhancing responsiveness to shocks,        representation at moderate cost—for
though ex post instruments (such as        example, through sharing liaison
IDA’s Crisis Response Window) can          officers with the Asian Development
also help.                                 Bank in some of the PICs.

Support for building institutional         Finally, at the institutional level, World
capacity seems most effective when it is   Bank Group small state programs were
sustained and focused on a concrete        responsive to shocks, often facilitated by
area of concern to policy makers.          IDA mechanisms. The small island
Regarding the fiduciary aspects of         economies exception, which makes IDA
World Bank portfolio implementation,       resources available to small states above
the requisite client capacity can be       the normal per capita income cutoff,
ensured in many ways, though none is       provides a wholesale response to
clearly superior in every context. The     vulnerability; however, the question
simplified procedures for investment       arises whether the IDA allocation
project financing in small states have     formula could encompass measures of
not eliminated procurement challenges,     vulnerability that are more specific, or
but clients say they made a positive       alternatively enhance and extend access
difference. Small state clients have       more uniformly in recognition of small
particularly limited capacity for          states’ vulnerabilities. Whether small
coordinating support from multiple         state-specific World Bank and IFC


                                                                                   ix
OVERVIEW


financing instruments are worth             its new global practice structure. Small
developing also merits consideration.       states could benefit from knowledge
Furthermore, the World Bank Group           brokering that is more intensive and
might want to monitor how well its          pursuing partnerships at the
technical staff serves small states under   institutional level.




x
1. Introduction
Background and Context
The purpose of this report is to facilitate cross-learning among World Bank Group
programs in small states. It selectively discusses the World Bank Group’s strategic and
operational approaches and the substantive development issues addressed in small
state programs that the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) assessed under the
clustered Country Program Evaluation. Based on this discussion, the report highlights
specific considerations for effective future World Bank Group engagement in small
states. Along with this report, the clustered country program evaluation (CPE) includes
two regional program evaluations covering the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean
States (OECS) during fiscal year (FY) 06–14, and Pacific Island countries (PICs) during
FY05–15. It also includes more selective reviews of World Bank Group programs in four
African states: Cabo Verde (FY05–14), Djibouti (FY05–15), Mauritius (FY07–15), and the
Seychelles (FY07–15). Since the findings and suggestions going forward are based on a
small and non-representative sample of country programs, they are not necessarily
applicable to other small states. Given its selective coverage, the report highlights
specific aspects of World Bank Group engagement with small states. It does not fully
summarize the underlying country reports or compare World Bank Group program
and country performance. Reading this report together with the underlying reports will
provide a more comprehensive treatment.

Small states are clearly a heterogeneous group and differ widely in their needs, but they
share a number of intrinsic characteristics and development challenges. Fixed costs in
the public or private sector can be high relative to the small scale at which the countries
operate, which implies high unit costs. Small states also face fixed costs in commercial
and financial sector transactions, which are similarly high relative to typical transaction
volumes in their economies. The countries are often in areas that imply high trade costs
and particular vulnerability to natural disasters, including susceptibility to the adverse
effects of climate change. Furthermore, small states face challenges relating to:

      Higher public spending and public sector wage bills relative to gross domestic
       product
      Output and trade (production focused on a few goods and services that are not
       scale-intensive, and concentration of exports, leading to higher exposure to trade
       shocks and contagion from partner country downturns)
      Labor markets (limited opportunity for employment, particularly the use of
       specialized expertise, entailing higher outmigration rates)



                                                                                          1
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
       Monetary and financial sectors (lower financial depth and banking sectors that
        are more concentrated, with some exceptions).

Small states also tend to have limited institutional capacity because of the extremely
small absolute (though not relative) size of their public sectors. Greater exposure to
economic and physical shocks leads to greater growth volatility in small states
compared with larger states, and repeated shocks coupled with the inherent stresses on
public finances and limited borrowing opportunities led to a buildup of significant debt
levels in several small states.

IDA made special accommodations for small states’ needs because of their vulnerability
to economic shocks and natural disasters. Under the small island economies exception
(in place since 1985), IDA granted 13 states access to IDA funding despite exceeding
IDA’s gross national income per capita operational cutoff. Furthermore, the 16th
Replenishment of IDA (IDA16) changed IDA funding terms under this provision from
blend to regular IDA credit terms, resulting in longer maturities and grace periods and
suppression of interest. Additionally, the minimum base allocation per country under
IDA’s Performance-Based Allocation system gradually increased from special drawing
rights (SDR) 1.1 million per year during IDA14, to SDR3 million per year under IDA16,
to SDR4 million per year under IDA17. This gave much larger allotments to many small
states, which have allocations not far above the minimum because of their size.1

Country Program Selection
The basis for the initial pool of countries considered for inclusion in the evaluation was
population size, income category, and borrowing status. The definition of a small state
can vary, but the most common definition is a population of less than 1.5 million. IEG
chose World Bank Group country programs for inclusion in the clustered CPE from a
pool further restricted to the group of countries with a low- or middle-income
classification,2 and active IDA or IBRD borrower status. This resulted in a pool of 30
low- and middle-income small states that accounts for at least 20 percent of current IDA
and IBRD client countries.

IEG then purposively selected countries from this pool based on several considerations.
The pool was considerably diverse in location, geography, and income levels. Therefore,
additional criteria for the final selection included the following:

       Global coverage—representing the three main regions where small states are
        clustered: Caribbean, Pacific, and Africa (including the Indian Ocean)
       Geographical diversity—inclusion of both island and non-island small states




2
                                                                                CHAPTER 1
                                                                             INTRODUCTION
      Income diversity—inclusion of a range of income levels within the middle-
       income classification, where small states are concentrated
      Exclusion of country programs covered by IEG evaluations in the past few years
      Significant World Bank lending (at least 15 operations during the evaluation
       period) and analytic work
      Regional approach—inclusion of at least one program in which the World Bank
       Group adopted a regional approach (which also helps increase the evaluation’s
       country coverage).

The final selection covered two regional groups and four African countries.3 Based on
these criteria, IEG selected World Bank Group programs serving the six OECS countries
and nine PICs (with a specific focus on Samoa and Tonga where the World Bank had
the most substantial programs) for full program evaluations. IEG also evaluated World
Bank Group programs in several African countries—Cabo Verde, Djibouti, Mauritius,
and the Seychelles. However, because of budget limitations, IEG decided to limit the
evaluations for these countries (mostly to competitiveness issues) instead of conducting
full CPEs.4

Analytical Framework
A common framework underpinned the approach and evaluation questions across the
regional program evaluations and country program reviews in the cluster.5 The
framework distinguishes the following two broad, strategic objectives (or pillars)
underlying World Bank Group engagement:

      Strengthening resilience to economic and natural hazard–related shocks and
       enhancing sustainability through macroeconomic policies providing greater
       resilience to macroeconomic shocks and ensuring fiscal and debt sustainability;
       improved natural disaster risk management, climate change adaptation, and
       sustainable use of resources; and human capital development through better
       education quality, enhanced labor force employability, improved health policies,
       and more effective social protection systems to improve social resilience
      Enhancing competitiveness through improved trade policies, a strengthened
       business environment, financial intermediation that is more effective, improved
       infrastructure services, and better-performing leading productive sectors.

Report Structure
The report has five chapters, including this introductory chapter. Chapter 2 discusses
how the World Bank Group’s strategic and operational approaches sought to respond
to a set of inherent challenges of working in small states in the programs assessed under


                                                                                        3
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
the clustered CPE. Chapters 3 and 4 selectively identify and discuss instances of World
Bank Group work in the programs that sought to help the countries strengthen their
resilience (chapter 3) and enhance their competitiveness (chapter 4), focusing on aspects
particularly relevant to their small size. Chapter 5 then identifies key issues for the
World Bank Group to consider as it seeks to provide effective support to small state
clients, based on the discussion in chapters 2–4.


1 Small states had additional advantages in accessing IDA funding. For example, although the
lending terms were adjusted for IDA-only countries under IDA17, those for small island states
remained unchanged. There are also substantial financing incentives for small states to
participate in regional IDA projects.
2The excluded countries are Bahrain, Barbados, Brunei Darussalam, Cyprus, Equatorial Guinea,
Estonia, Iceland, Malta, Qatar, San Marino, The Bahamas, and Trinidad and Tobago. The
evaluation retained Antigua and Barbuda and St. Kitts and Nevis because they are members of
the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States.
3Country visits included Cabo Verde, Djibouti, Fiji, Mauritius, Samoa, the Seychelles, Tonga,
and the six OECS countries. The team also visited Canberra and Wellington for discussions with
the Australian and New Zealand governments.
4   Coverage of environmental resilience and social protection in Djibouti was the one exception.
5Details on the choice of countries and the methodology used are provided in the approach
paper for the cluster, notably the section on the evaluation framework and the results chain as
well as appendix 6 (evaluation design matrix).




4
2. Strategic and Operational Approaches in the
Small State World Bank Group Programs
This chapter discusses how the World Bank Group programs sought to mold their
strategic and operational approaches to the client countries’ small size. The chapter
emphasizes the challenges in designing and executing a partnership framework, which
are greater in small states, and illustrates the various ways that programs responded to
these challenges, such as regional or grouped engagement, thematic and operational
selectivity, flexibility to respond to shocks, and efforts to enhance client capacity and
work jointly with other development partners. Note that these responses do not
generally apply to all small state programs. The chapter does not seek to justify any
judgments, the basis for which is in the underlying evaluation reports. The discussion in
this chapter is cross-cutting, unlike the discussion in chapters 3 and 4, which is
structured along thematic lines.

Challenges facing World Bank Group country teams in small states are particularly
acute and tend to favor specific approaches. Many parameters that constrain choices are
more tightly binding than in larger states. Financing envelopes (notably IDA
allocations) and administrative budgets, though often large relative to client country
population, are small in absolute terms, client institutional capacity is thin,1 and data
availability is a severe constraint. Furthermore, client countries’ small size imposes
additional constraints, including limited possibilities for exploiting economies of scale
in government and infrastructure, and high vulnerability to both economic and natural
shocks. These constraining parameters rarely point to a one-size-fits-all solution, but
they typically favor certain ways of working when engaging with small states. Such
approaches include:

      Working with client countries in a grouped or easily replicable way, which can
       facilitate World Bank Group support for joint or harmonized development
       solutions among the countries (with associated benefits to them) and help keep
       the unit transactions costs of delivering World Bank Group support in check
      Keeping a selective thematic focus of World Bank Group support and limiting
       the proliferation of financing and knowledge delivery vehicles. This increases the
       chances of making transformational contributions in specific areas while limiting
       unit transactions costs, given the small absolute size of financing and
       administrative budget envelopes
      Maintaining the World Bank Group program’s flexibility to respond to shocks.
       Such responsiveness can be vital to avoiding major development setbacks, given
       the magnitude of the impact that shocks can have on small state clients


                                                                                        5
CHAPTER 2
STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL APPROACHES
       Helping address the limitations on institutional capacity that are inherent to
        small size to alleviate bottlenecks to development initiatives
       Finding ways to deal with the World Bank’s portfolio implementation
        requirements, given the backdrop of limited client institutional capacity
       Working with other stakeholders in the most coordinated way possible
        (particularly aligning and harmonizing with other development partners) to
        contain transactions costs for the client countries and lessen the drain on their
        limited capacity
       Managing other aspects of World Bank Group engagement, including the
        constrained scope for in-country presence and the World Bank’s systems,
        particularly in procurement.


Regional or Grouped Engagement and Support
At the strategic level, using a common World Bank Group partnership framework
across countries can provide advantages in the right context. Engaging with several
small state clients as a group can facilitate World Bank Group support for joint,
harmonized, or replicated development solutions and can reduce administrative
transactions costs. However, it can be perceived as constraining customization to
country-specific needs, giving rise to a trade-off between engaging with small states as a
group versus individually. This trade-off was apparent in the Pacific Island countries
(PICs). In some of the small state programs reviewed (Cabo Verde, Djibouti, Mauritius,
and the Seychelles), the World Bank Group had little basis for engaging with
partnership frameworks serving more than one small country. Shared or closely
harmonized approaches did not link the countries with one another or with third party
countries except through broad cooperation platforms. World Bank Group financing
and even nonfinancial services could be planned and delivered for regional initiatives
and through multicountry platforms (alongside single-country operations) because the
Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) and the PICs, to a lesser extent, form
part of recognized regional groups with formal institutional structures covering aspects
of their cooperation.

The World Bank Group judiciously used a common partnership framework in the
OECS to guide its engagement with all six countries during the FY06–14 evaluation
period. Close political and economic ties among the countries—including a common
currency and movement toward an arrangement similar to the European Union (EU)—
anchored by regional organizations such as the OECS Commission and the Eastern
Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB) facilitated the use of two successive regional
partnership strategies. Largely because of this (and given the many similarities among
the countries), priorities broadly aligned, and use of harmonized or shared


6
                                                                               CHAPTER 2
                                                     STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL APPROACHES
development approaches was widespread. However, some factors went against the
grain of a common strategic framework. In practice, country needs and priorities could
differ, and shared approaches frequently met with skepticism. Perhaps most important,
eligibility for World Bank financing was not uniform—St. Kitts and Nevis and Antigua
and Barbuda were eligible only for IBRD terms, and the remaining four were blend
countries.2 However, these factors did not eliminate the usefulness of a common
framework. Among other things, they called for a selective and cautious approach to
engagement at the regional level. They also meant that World Bank Group engagement
drew on a blend of single-country, multicountry, and regional lending and nonlending
instruments, and that World Bank financing operations in Antigua and Barbuda and St.
Kitts and Nevis were rare compared with the blend countries, which accounted for
virtually the entire World Bank Group program.

Circumstances in the PICs led to alternating between regional and single-country
partnership frameworks. A regional partnership strategy also guided the World Bank
Group program in the PICs during the first part of the review period, but the program
moved to a country-based approach during the second half and is now reverting to a
regional approach. Budget stringency mainly drove the preparation of a regional
partnership strategy covering FY06–09. The countries, though numerous and more
heterogeneous than the OECS, were linked through multiple regional organizations
(notably the Pacific Islands Forum) and shared common challenges. However, the
World Bank prepared individual strategies to respond to demand for more tailored
engagement frameworks as the program expanded (fueled by increased country IDA
allocations and the additional administrative resources available through the Pacific
Facility, established by the governments of Australia and New Zealand). Country
strategies were prepared for the Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati, the Marshall
Islands, Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Tonga, and Tuvalu, during 2011–15; however, a
common regional framework (setting out the themes of promoting opportunities for
regional and global integration and strengthening resilience to shocks) underlay and
was attached to each of these. The World Bank is reverting to a regional approach and
preparing a regional Country Partnership Framework covering the eight Pacific Island
countries included in the Systematic Country Diagnostic.3 Overall, there was a tension
between the obvious need for a regional framework and the desire for a deeper
examination and presentation of some of the countries with relatively large support
programs.

Beyond partnership frameworks, both the OECS and the PIC programs appropriately
and abundantly used financing operations that involved multiple countries. Almost half
of the financing delivered under the OECS program was structured in a way that
benefited multiple countries, in some cases with a reach extending beyond the OECS to
the broader Caribbean. These included operations working with and through operating


                                                                                          7
CHAPTER 2
STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL APPROACHES
regional institutions. They also included multicountry operations that use a similar
template across countries. Regional operations supporting a shared or harmonized
development solution can bring significant benefits, but they hinge on strong country
commitment to the shared solution and to the regional institution implementing it.

Operations involving multiple countries were able to access IDA regional funds under
certain conditions, but they were not always free of difficulty. Several projects involving
multiple countries and satisfying certain criteria (including benefits that spill over
country boundaries) were able to access IDA funds from regional IDA allocations.4
These IDA regional funds were strictly additional to the country IDA allocations and
represented an important leveraging effect.5,6 Nevertheless, this pool of regional funds
is limited and in high demand, and cannot be counted on.7 In many cases, the projects
were blended with analytic and advisory activities (AAA) and/or trust fund grant
financing. Examples include the World Bank’s support for a pooled insurance
mechanism against catastrophic weather-related events in the Caribbean, e-government
services in the OECS, and support for fisheries in the Pacific, Western Africa, and the
Indian Ocean. Regarding e-government services, the World Bank’s Electronic
Government for Regional Integration Project, implemented by the OECS Secretariat,
mobilized regional IDA funds, and helped lay a foundation for harmonized e-
government service development among the countries and pilot services such as
electronic tax filing. The development of an e-platform (with associated transparency
and accountability gains) for the successful OECS joint pharmaceuticals procurement
program was among its contributions. Although the World Bank rightly promoted and
sought to support shared or harmonized solutions implemented through regional
organizations, political economy factors made progress difficult in some cases (for
example, in the efforts to back a regional energy regulator model for the OECS).

Multicountry project platforms helped contain transactions costs and support
harmonized action. The World Bank’s use of multicountry project platforms in the
OECS had the advantage of limiting transactions costs through replicable project design
and more streamlined processing. The program used the horizontal adaptable program
lending vehicle to deliver financing, notably to support human immunodeficiency
virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) prevention and control, and
secondary education.8 In the PICs, the Pacific Facility (funded by the governments of
Australia and New Zealand) provided a much larger operational budget. Nevertheless,
the World Bank continued to look for ways to reduce transaction costs in defining its
program modalities. The World Bank focused its multicountry financing operations on
areas that needed to harmonize regional and country-level program approaches and
management, such as aviation and disaster risk management.




8
                                                                                 CHAPTER 2
                                                      STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL APPROACHES
The use of regional or multicountry knowledge vehicles featured heavily in the OECS
and PICs programs and offered significant advantages. Most of the analytic and
advisory tasks in the OECS and half in the PICs program consisted of regional or
multicountry tasks. Coverage of regional issues, or similar issues across countries, was
significantly more cost-effective for the World Bank. Regional AAA work was
instrumental in bringing about transformational changes in some cases. A flagship
study on temporary labor migration in the Pacific is the prime example.9 Another
example is the Caribbean Growth Forum, a participatory, accountability-oriented
regional initiative for identifying and acting on growth-enhancing measures at the
individual country level. More examples include financial sector AAA in the OECS,
upstream AAA on the financial structure of the Caribbean Catastrophic Risk Insurance
Facility, the World Bank Treasury’s management of the risk pooling mechanism under
a similar facility in the Pacific, and analytic work on noncommunicable diseases in both
the OECS and the PICs. Similar to financing operations, much of the AAA work that
was not single-country covered a blend of regional and country-level issues.


Thematic and Operational Selectivity
Thematic and operational selectivity in small state programs can help manage small (in
absolute size) IDA funding and administrative budget envelopes. Thematic selectivity
allows financing envelopes that are limited in absolute size to be directed in a more
concentrated way, with a greater chance of transformational impact in the face of fixed
costs (in infrastructure, for example) where small state clients cannot take advantage of
scale economies. Furthermore, engaging on a given theme involves a measure of fixed
administrative transactions costs for World Bank Group support to have impact (for
example, staff with the relevant expertise need to invest in country-specific knowledge
and relationships). Similarly, each distinct World Bank Group operational support
delivery vehicle—whether it delivers financing or knowledge—typically involves a
fixed element of transactions costs for the World Bank Group and the client country,
such as dealing with country missions. These costs can be controlled to some degree (by
clustering tasks, for example). Compared with larger states, it is therefore particularly
important to limit the World Bank Group program’s thematic reach and avoid
proliferation of distinct operational activities in small states. But given their capacity
limitations, small states are also likely to turn to the World Bank Group for advice and
support in a broad range of areas, making the selectivity challenge a recurring one.

Some of the programs achieved operational selectivity through the concentrated use of
development policy financing (DPF), though the extent of their thematic selectivity
varied. A context of macroeconomic unsustainability in the Seychelles at the start of the
evaluation period gave the World Bank program a single-minded clarity of purpose.


                                                                                         9
CHAPTER 2
STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL APPROACHES
The World Bank focused its support on policy reforms to restore growth and financial
stability while protecting the poor and vulnerable, to complement International
Monetary Fund (IMF) support. Exclusive use of DPF, with largely just-in-time AAA
supporting reform implementation, concentrated the delivery of World Bank financing,
which contained unit transactions costs. Similarly, the World Bank program in
Mauritius and Cabo Verde was organized closely around a government program.
Although thematic selectivity was more difficult to discern in these countries, DPF also
had a dominant role in delivering World Bank funding.

Thematic selectivity was a challenge for the OECS and to a minor extent the PICs
programs, but efforts to limit the proliferation of financing instruments were visible in
both regions. Thematic coverage in the OECS during the evaluation period was
relatively broad. Selectivity tends to be a greater challenge in designing a regional
strategy, given the natural tendency to combine individual country priorities that often
are not precisely aligned. With respect to delivery vehicles, the OECS program saw
limited use of DPF (although this has increased in Grenada in recent years), but it was
notable for its use of regional and multicountry projects. Furthermore, the OECS
portfolio’s visible consolidation during the review period into fewer, larger operations
concentrated in disaster risk management worked to reduce transaction costs, though it
also made clear the binding nature of country absorption and execution capacity
constraints. In the PICs, the decision to limit World Bank social sector involvement to
areas in which governments requested it or where global trust funds were available as
well as to leave support for the water and urban development sectors to other donors
enabled increased depth of involvement in other key sectors. However, selectivity also
faced difficulties: in many areas where the World Bank was less active, donors with
programs in these areas complained about the World Bank’s failure to engage. DPF
support in Samoa and Tonga was an important part of the program, given the central
role of the World Bank’s macroeconomic and fiscal dialogue in the PICs and DPF’s
usefulness in promoting concerted donor action.


Maintaining Flexibility to Respond to Shocks
World Bank Group program flexibility to adjust in response to shocks is important
considering small states’ vulnerability to shocks and greater income variability. The
small state programs reviewed under the cluster were implemented against a backdrop
of numerous shocks to the countries—some generalized, such as the 2008–09 global
financial crisis and the food and fuel price shocks immediately preceding it, and some
idiosyncratic, such as hurricanes or storms. Although there was little detailed ex ante
contingency planning in the partnership frameworks, the programs generally showed




10
                                                                                  CHAPTER 2
                                                       STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL APPROACHES
significant flexibility in responding to such shocks —notably through changes in the
timing or volume of financing (or both) and in the focus of AAA work.

The World Bank provided quick-disbursing funds after natural disasters in several
countries. For example, the World Bank approved DPF operations in Samoa after the
2009 tsunami and Tropical Cyclone Evan in 2013, and in the OECS, it used emergency
recovery loans to respond promptly to the damage from Hurricane Tomas in St. Lucia
and St. Vincent and the Grenadines in 2010. The World Bank also used DPF (though
less intensively than in other small state programs) to help meet exceptional financing
needs in Grenada and St. Lucia in 2010 after the global economic crisis, and in Grenada
beginning in 2014, after the country’s fall into debt distress and selective default.
However, the one-time (as opposed to programmatic) nature of the 2010 DPF
operations limited their ability to provide ongoing momentum to support reforms,
leading to delays in some reforms. The severe floods in the Seychelles in 2013 showed
the need for prompt access to resources for emergency response. Although there was no
explicit provision in the FY12–16 Country Partnership Strategy, the World Bank
subsequently approved a DPF operation with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
Option (CAT DDO) to provide ready contingent funding if similar disasters occurred.
In Mauritius, flexibility was evident, among other things, in an increase in the size of
the planned DPF operations and a DDO introduced to cushion the impact of the
unexpected financial crisis of 2008. However, in the IDA-eligible small states, the World
Bank had limited scope for setting up contingent financing, as the CAT DDO is not
currently offered to IDA-only countries.10 Institutional sources of crisis support that can
be arranged ex post, notably IDA’s Crisis Response Window, though helpful, allow
only for limited responsiveness.

Several cases of World Bank responsiveness to shocks through nonlending work were
also laudable. In the wake of the global financial crisis, the World Bank Group provided
support for immediate crisis resolution and strengthening regulation and supervision.
In Cabo Verde, the World Bank delivered a macrofinancial vulnerability study to flag
banking sector risks to policy makers and identify remedial policy actions. A 2013
Country Economic Memorandum concentrated on fiscal issues to design a reform
agenda (focused on measures to augment domestic revenue and improve state-owned
enterprise management) that would help the country rebuild macroeconomic buffers to
absorb external shocks. Similarly, World Bank analytic work and technical assistance
sought to help several PICs build economic resilience after conditions of duress. In
Samoa, as the country was moving from moderate to high risk of debt distress, the
World Bank and the IMF provided two technical assistance follow-up missions to help
the country prepare a debt management reform plan focused on institutional
arrangements, debt policy, and risk management. In Tonga, the World Bank combined
agreement on a DPF operation with just-in-time support to the ministry of finance to


                                                                                         11
CHAPTER 2
STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL APPROACHES
guide government decision making as the fiscal situation worsened after natural
disasters and the global financial crisis. Furthermore, the World Bank supported post-
disaster needs assessments after natural disasters in several of the PICs and the OECS,
though in a few cases clients argued that they provided little added value to the initial
rough estimates and the later, detailed analysis.

World Bank support for the OECS financial sector (mainly AAA) also exemplified
responsiveness to crisis conditions. The global financial crisis precipitated the collapse
of two regional insurance companies with heavy exposure in the OECS countries and
more generally exposed weaknesses in the financial sector. Working in close
cooperation with other partners, including the United Kingdom (which funded much of
the work) and the IMF, the World Bank responded promptly to the ECCB and country
calls for assistance, helping to resolve the insurance company failures and strengthen
the legal and regulatory framework for both banks and non-bank financial institutions.
A new insurance act that filled several gaps in the existing insurance legislation became
effective in Grenada in 2010, though similar legislation in St. Lucia is pending. The
World Bank also helped build the foundation for additional, more comprehensive
improvements in bank and non-bank financial sector regulation and supervision,
though this work is still in progress.


Addressing Institutional Capacity Limitations
The limited skills pool in many small states makes it infeasible to build and sustain the
range and depth of policy making and service delivery capacity that larger states seek.
As Brown (2010) and several others emphasize, small states’ limited pool of skilled
human resources (with a lack of depth in specialization to perform vital public service
roles) makes the institutional capacity constraint uniquely binding and challenging to
relieve, despite their extremely high per capita cost of public administration. The World
Bank Group programs reviewed addressed a range of capacity constraint contexts (from
Kiribati at the most binding end to Mauritius at the least binding end). However, the
programs showed unanimous sensitivity to the constraint and responded with a variety
of initiatives (including training, equipment, and resident and ad hoc expertise) aimed
at enhancing client government and regional organization policy making and service
delivery capacity, and private sector capacity in some cases. These initiatives (which
varied in their effectiveness) were supported by World Bank financing operations,
packaged as World Bank AAA or IFC advisory services, or provided with trust
fund/third-party support. Project financial management arrangements that used
existing country systems also helped reduce the burden on capacity in some contexts.
Importantly, intensive e-mail and audio contact between World Bank staff and country
officials allowed for informal capacity support in many of the programs.


12
                                                                                 CHAPTER 2
                                                      STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL APPROACHES
Sustained technical assistance involving hands-on support for the nuts-and-bolts
aspects of ongoing reform implementation was generally effective in building capacity.
In the initial years of reform implementation in the Seychelles after the 2006–07 crisis,
World Bank AAA and sustained hands-on support had a crucial role in helping the
government rationalize public expenditures (particularly downsizing staff and
removing subsidies) while establishing safety nets to protect the poor from cuts. The
World Bank’s approach to building capacity for social protection reform was effective
because it was sustained. The approach began with initial technical assistance to the
ministry of finance to design a program for targeting subsidies in the 2008 budget,
followed by customized assistance to the new social protection agency. By contrast, the
World Bank did not sustain its capacity enhancement support into the second phase of
public sector reform that followed off-loading inessential functions from the state. The
World Bank could have been more proactive in continuing to help build capacity,
notably by helping line ministries conduct strategic and functional reviews to identify
their new roles and core functions.

Technical assistance also focused on helping countries strengthen data collection. In the
OECS, World Bank technical assistance in coordination with other development
partners helped improve education statistics and develop a strategy for education
quality of education, collecting administrative data and publishing country and
regional statistical digests on an annual basis. The technical assistance enabled the
countries to move from a situation of complete absence of data to publishing annual
statistics in a timely manner. The initiative involved working with the countries to
benchmark statistical capacity using the Systems Assessment for Better Education
Results, and was followed by training of staff responsible for statistics and education
planning in the countries and the OECS commission and establishment of a community
of practice for these officials.

Focused, just-in-time advisory input proved very useful in Mauritius’ higher-capacity
environment. Feedback from stakeholders underscored the need to find better ways to
build and sustain in-house capacity in line ministries (though it was unclear how much
the government was willing to pay for these services). In interviews, several officials in
line ministries noted that they welcomed discussion with the World Bank, but would
like further exchanges to validate what they are doing. They see scope for more World
Bank engagement in reviewing their work because this approach (pursued on an ad hoc
basis) was very useful in several cases (urban transport and e-government strategy, for
example). Yet, it was not clear how much the Government would be willing to pay for
these services. Overall, though World Bank Group advice was often considered of
better quality than alternatives, proposed instruments such as reimbursable advisory
services (RAS) were found prohibitively expensive. Although in some middle-income
countries RAS has become an instrument of choice and strongly shapes World Bank


                                                                                        13
CHAPTER 2
STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL APPROACHES
engagement, this is not the case in most of the small state programs. The exception was
the Seychelles, where the Government requested RAS in a few areas (such as social
protection).

A combination of technical assistance for reform implementation and DPF support
proved effective in several programs. In Samoa and Tonga, the World Bank helped
devolve responsibility for carrying out investment and routine maintenance to a new
national highway authority. The Public Works Ministry then focused efforts on
strategy, planning, and monitoring, and the World Bank provided substantial technical
assistance to strengthen capacity in these areas. DPF supported the overarching policy
changes, and investment project financing funded the investments needed to
operationalize the new model. Programs in the health sector took a similar approach
and were broadly successful in reaching their objectives. Hands-on technical assistance
through investment project financing in Grenada helped implement DPF-supported
reforms, notably to modernize and streamline customs administration.

Using limited public sector capacity more effectively often meant relying on private
sector capacity, which fell short on occasion. In the Seychelles, nonessential functions
were outsourced without first assessing the private sector’s readiness to provide the
services, and the potential capacity-building needs. For example, before the reform, the
ministry of health provided laundry and catering services for hospitals. After
outsourcing these activities, private operators proved unable to provide quality services
at the required scale. In Kiribati, the World Bank realized that outsourcing maintenance
of the main road (now under reconstruction) would need support to identify and train
private contractors capable of performing the work. Another significant example of
private sector capacity’s pivotal role involved programs to provide financing to small
and medium enterprises for business development services. The most successful
programs rely on institutions that can provide hands-on assistance. In Cabo Verde,
chambers of commerce were able to offer hands-on assistance to their members, and
this was a key factor in the matching grant facility’s success. The successful Mauritius
Business Growth Scheme finances specialized expertise to small and medium
enterprises in skills, technology upgrading, and marketing. The program relies on the
effectiveness of the Mauritius Business Growth Scheme Unit (staffed by contracted
professionals from the private sector) to respond to needs and help small and medium
enterprises find local experts when necessary.

Several capacity-building initiatives appropriately focused on regional institutions. In
the PICs, funding under the Pacific Facility (a trust fund established by the
governments of Australia and New Zealand) enabled stronger policy dialogue and
more intense AAA activity than was otherwise possible. The OECS has nothing
comparable to the Pacific Facility, but the program’s use of trust funds was particularly


14
                                                                                 CHAPTER 2
                                                      STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL APPROACHES
intensive—more than five times the World Bank average. Several World Bank-
supported capacity enhancement initiatives were organized regionally in both the
OECS and the PICs, even when they benefited individual country institutions. For
example, the ECCB benefited from capacity-building efforts and later took the lead in
implementing debt management initiatives in the OECS based on the newly acquired
capacity. This example also supports the notion that capacity building works best when
focused on a concrete, practical set of issues of central concern to senior policy makers.
By contrast, a trust-funded program to build capacity in a regional institution for
generating and monitoring information on public programs was ineffective, partly
because OECS country demand for such capacity was weak. World Bank support for
building regional institutions’ capacity in the PICs varied from good practice examples
in aviation, fisheries, and the disaster insurance program, to limited involvement in
other sectors.


Addressing Client Capacity for World Bank Portfolio Implementation
The programs used a variety of approaches to address the country capacity needs
associated with World Bank portfolio implementation. World Bank in-country
representation was not cost-effective in many cases because of the client country’s small
size. For example, the World Bank Group had no in-country presence in the OECS, but
proximity to Washington allowed frequent country visits, and the World Bank
provided fiduciary and procurement training in the Caribbean region every year,
benefiting client country staff responsible for project implementation. There was also
continuing informal support from World Bank staff in these areas in many of the
programs. A small office in Mauritius ensured an in-country presence; the office housed
the country economist, who was also the country liaison officer for Mauritius and the
Seychelles. Frequent missions to the Seychelles helped sustain in-depth dialogue with
the authorities. Travel in the PICs can be highly time-consuming. The World Bank
deployed a field presence in Kiribati, Samoa, Tonga, and Vanuatu11 by sharing locally
recruited liaison officers with the Asian Development Bank (ADB). This seems effective
in facilitating processing of World Bank operations and could be replicated elsewhere.
However, interlocutors in the PICs were concerned about the need for increased World
Bank technical staff presence in the field, and the World Bank is considering moving
some positions from Sydney to Suva, Fiji as they come up for rotation. Promisingly, the
PICs program also started appointing World Bank staff implementation support
specialists, whose job description centers on helping country counterparts execute the
World Bank portfolio. In Cabo Verde, counterparts considered the lack of in-country
presence a serious handicap for better dialogue and smoother program implementation.
Furthermore, the lack of daily flights to Cabo Verde prevents frequent missions, even
though the country director is based in Dakar.


                                                                                        15
CHAPTER 2
STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL APPROACHES
Intensive use of DPF in some programs reduced the need to cope with World Bank
procedures, but programs with more prevalent investment project financing found
several ways to mobilize the needed capacity locally. In Mauritius, for example, the
authorities chose to cancel an investment project financing operation because of
burdensome procedures and expressed a strong preference for almost exclusive use of
DPF. Various programs using investment project financing deployed a variety of
approaches (often a blend) that were well suited to the small size of the client countries,
such as institution building and supplementing capacity with outside expertise as
needed. In some OECS countries (Grenada and St. Lucia), country project coordination
units provided a capacity pool to implement portfolio-wide fiduciary functions and
received ongoing support from the World Bank. This helped safeguard portfolio
quality, though it also tended to raise issues of sustainability, and sector-agency
coordination and ownership. Other pooling models included the use of regional project
implementation units (OECS Electronic Government for Regional Integration Project),
and shared project implementation units, such as the Tonga-based single technical
fiduciary services unit that covers five countries under the PICs aviation project. In the
latter case, the program, despite its success, shows the difficulty of adopting a
multicountry approach because some countries express dissatisfaction and see the unit
as an additional bureaucratic layer. Project execution functions on some projects in
Samoa were outsourced to a private firm. In a few cases, line ministries or agencies (for
example, in health or public works) were directly responsible for portfolio
implementation, including fiduciary functions. However, in the small states programs
reviewed, this tended to be the exception rather than the rule.


Fostering Partnerships
Effective ways for development partners to join forces are particularly important in
small states, where financing from partners is often more of a lifeline to economic
viability than in larger states. Given small states’ limited capacity for coordinating
donor support, coordinated action among development partners crucially lowers
transactions costs for client countries. The World Bank needs to work particularly
closely with regional development banks to be effective in these countries. The
programs reviewed used a number of vehicles and modalities that facilitated unified or
at least coordinated support (in addition to for forums for regular coordination among
key donors, used notably in the Pacific and the OECS).12 These vehicles varied
significantly in permanence and formality, World Bank Group and other partner
resource outlays involved, the breadth of issues addressed, and the precise instruments
involved (financing, AAA, trust fund arrangements, and so on).




16
                                                                                CHAPTER 2
                                                      STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL APPROACHES
The Pacific Facility was a highly effective example of broad-based, strategic partnership
with Australia and New Zealand, though its replicability elsewhere is uncertain. Under
this trust fund arrangement, the donors provided the World Bank and IFC (separately
under the Pacific Partnership) with fully fungible administrative budget resources that
enabled the World Bank to increase its engagement with the PICs dramatically.13 The
Pacific Facility arrangement (along with a similar facility benefiting ADB) was driven
by a perception among the donor governments that both the PICs and the Pacific region
(including the donors) would benefit if the World Bank and ADB were involved more
intensively in policy dialogue. The circumstances that led to the arrangement are clearly
unique, but it is possible that other small state programs could benefit from similar
third party mechanisms.

The framework around the World Bank’s use of DPF in some of the programs helped to
align donor views in concerted support of the policy reform agenda. The use of DPF in
the PICs contributed to donor coordination that was more effective. A striking example
of clarifying and simplifying the donor interface with the government was in Tonga,
where ADB, the World Bank, and the EU initially decided to provide budget support on
an individual basis to offset the negative impact of the global crisis on remittances.
Overall, these programs had several pages of separate policy conditions. At the
government’s request, the World Bank took the lead to propose a coordinated approach
with a common framework with fewer conditions.

The World Bank and other development partners in many cases jointly delivered
support for specific subsets of single-country or shared development issues. Several
donors joined the World Bank in the Caribbean (and later in the Pacific) to support a
pooled disaster risk insurance facility. The World Bank has administered a program
since 2011 (the Supporting Economic Management in the Caribbean initiative funded by
Canada) to strengthen revenue and expenditure management, with a particular focus
on IT systems. The initiative mobilizes partners such as the Caribbean Regional
Technical Assistance Centre, and has an underlying goal of fostering collaboration and
shared support structures for harmonized systems across the beneficiary countries,
which extend well beyond the OECS. The World Bank was one of multiple partners
supporting the Caribbean Growth Forum, a process for identifying and acting on
constraints to competitiveness in which a regional platform underpinned country-
specific reform agendas. The World Bank’s financial sector AAA in the OECS (which
the United Kingdom supported) saw particularly close collaboration with the IMF and
other partners, and its training and advisory work on debt management similarly
involved other partners, including Canada and the IMF. A similar strategy to facilitate
country implementation has been for the World Bank to combine multiple sources of
financing, thus decreasing fragmentation and channeling funds to small states under a
single set of procedures.14


                                                                                       17
CHAPTER 2
STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL APPROACHES
The donor community in the Pacific uses the Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility to
coordinate efforts supporting infrastructure financing. The facility, established in 2008
and funded mainly by Australia and New Zealand, conducts research and analysis on
infrastructure needs and priorities and provides technical assistance to PIC
governments. The facility proved to be a useful mechanism to identify infrastructure
needs after natural disasters and plan how to meet those needs. The facility also helped
shape a strategic approach among the donor community in some sectors, such as
energy, but China’s absence is viewed a weakness because the country is a major actor
in infrastructure financing and construction.

The World Bank and ADB’s special efforts to coordinate their infrastructure
engagement in the PICs were particularly helpful. Along with alternating lead roles in
specific sectors and countries, the two institutions cofinanced specific projects and
worked to harmonize procedures. For a roads project in Fiji, the World Bank provided
$50 million in cofinancing to supplement ADB’s $100 million and decided to use ADB’s
procedures for both financing components—a major advantage for the implementing
agency. Similarly, it was agreed that ADB financing will be subject to World Bank
procurement procedures in a cable project in Samoa, building on an initial joint
financing experience under a similar project in Tonga. Yet it remains challenging to put
joint financing between the ADB and the World Bank into practice, especially applicable
rules and procedures on procurement. In the Samoa example, eligibility of bidders is
still an issue under the ADB procurement policy even though it was agreed to follow
the World Bank’s procurement procedures.


Other Aspects of World Bank Group Engagement
Many standard features of the World Bank’s business model, though tailored to sound,
accountable support delivery in larger states, are poorly adapted to small states. World
Bank administrative budgets in particular cannot meet many of the fixed costs of field
presence. Consequently, opportunities for policy dialogue and implementation support
are more restricted. Fiduciary procedures associated with World Bank financing place
demands on limited client institutional capacity. The programs reviewed had to find
ways to deal with these multiple challenges, and they found multiple ways—including
some mandated at the institutional level—of better adapting the World Bank’s standard
business model to small states.

Poor adaptation was visible in the extremely high preparation and implementation
support unit costs associated with World Bank financing in some of the programs. In
the OECS program, preparation and implementation support costs per dollar of
financing were at least 10 times the World Bank average. And costs were similar in the



18
                                                                               CHAPTER 2
                                                     STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL APPROACHES
PICs. In both cases, the high unit costs reflect both the small amounts lent and the
intensive hands-on engagement needed. By contrast, costs in Mauritius and the
Seychelles were significantly lower (neither was significantly above the World Bank
average in Mauritius), likely because financing was delivered almost exclusively
through DPF.

Small state country teams devised numerous creative ways to manage budget
constraints. Budget augmentation is a major tactic, and the PICs program is the most
striking example of its use. The Pacific Facility and Pacific Partnership provide the
World Bank Group with dramatically larger administrative resources and help
overcome the constraints of engaging and delivering financing, investments, and AAA.
The OECS program had no comparable wholesale administrative budget augmentation,
but instead used a number of trust fund arrangements to broaden and deepen the reach
of analytic and advisory work, such as backing from the United Kingdom in the
financial sector and from Canada on debt management. In these and other programs,
the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) funded much of the
technical assistance that contributed to the growing World Bank disaster risk
management engagement as well as to the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance
Facility and its equivalent in the Pacific.15 Much of this funding was World Bank-
executed, and helped complement constrained World Bank administrative budgets.
Many small states also benefited from increased budget allocations to fragile and
conflict-affected situations. Another major tactic for adapting to budget constraints in
the OECS and PICs programs was frequent use of regional and pooled or replicated
ways of cutting unit transactions costs. These included grouped partnership
frameworks and regional and multicountry instruments, such as the horizontal
adaptable program lending project arrangement. In some cases, these offered additional
advantages beyond reducing transaction costs—for example, regional projects could
mobilize regional IDA funds to supplement country IDA allocations. Without such
instruments and approaches, the unit costs of delivering both financial and nonfinancial
services would likely have been significantly higher. Another adaptation involved
diverse arrangements to support clients’ handling of procedures associated with World
Bank project financing, including outsourcing arrangements, and countrywide, cross-
country, and regional implementation units. Despite these various approaches (and
because of them, in some cases), administrative transaction costs associated with
preparation and implementation for the World Bank still tended to be high relative to
total project costs.16

Procurement was an ongoing challenge in the small state programs reviewed.
Interlocutors frequently cited procurement as the main problem they face in dealing
with World Bank procedures. However, the World Bank’s 2013 Operational Policy for
Investment Project Financing, which allows for simplified procedures (including


                                                                                       19
CHAPTER 2
STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL APPROACHES
simplified procurement procedures) in fragile—including small—states seems to have
significantly benefited the programs. The simplified procedures, which counterparts
viewed favorably, allow greater flexibility in competitive bidding, prior review
thresholds, and supplier and bidder numbers and qualifications. The streamlined
procedures simplify formalities and are better suited to the substance of small state
realities, including the frequent difficulty of generating bids at a reasonable cost. The
World Bank and client countries occasionally found more ways to adapt procurement
to small state realities. For example, a regional telecommunications project in the
Caribbean used pooled procurement (managed by the St. Lucia Project Coordination
Unit) for broadband assessment on behalf of several participating countries, with good
results. The PICs aviation program is using a similar approach (World Bank 2016a,
chapter 4; 2016b, appendix H).

References
Brown, Deryck R. 2010. “Institutional Development in Small States: Evidence from the Commonwealth
       Caribbean.” Halduskultuur—Administrative Culture 11 (1): 44–65.
IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2015. Pacific Island Countries Program Evaluation FY05–15, PICs
        Volume II: Appendixes. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2016a. Regional Program Evaluation of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States: Antigua and
       Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines .
       Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2016b. Pacific Island Countries Program Evaluation FY05–15, Volume I. Washington, DC: World
     Bank.


1   This limited capacity does not stop at the government but extends to the private sector as well.
2 Because of the OECS countries’ high debt levels, they have had little appetite for IBRD
financing. In some cases, they have been reluctant even to fully use their national IDA
allocations (this is the case with Dominica and St. Vincent and the Grenadines, for instance).
3The eight Pacific Islands included in the Systematic Country Diagnostic are the Federated
States of Micronesia, Kiribati, the Marshall Islands, Palau, Samoa, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.
The diagnostic excluded Fiji because a Country Engagement Note had been prepared just
before the Systematic Country Diagnostic.
4Subject to specific access criteria, regional IDA grants can also be provided to regional
organizations that support small states implementing regional IDA projects.
5For example, in the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) program, projects
designated as regional included operations to support catastrophe insurance, e-government,
communications infrastructure, a regional energy regulator, and disaster vulnerability
reduction. (However, in practice, the regional content of the disaster vulnerability reduction
operations was relatively minor.) All operations except the catastrophe insurance mobilized
regional IDA funds (totaling $42.6 million), along with the financing from country IDA
allocations from which they drew (a total of $53.6 million), with a leveraging effect of almost $4



20
                                                                                         CHAPTER 2
                                                            STRATEGIC AND OPERATIONAL APPROACHES

for every $5. Similarly, in FY15 the small states in the PICs contributed about SDR30 million
from their national IDA envelopes, which leveraged an additional SDR100 million from the
regional IDA envelope.
6 One potential risk with IDA regional funds is that they may unwittingly bias World Bank
operations towards activities that are eligible under these regional funds. This is particularly
important for climate and disaster resilience operations, since only some components of disaster
risk management—disaster risk financing, early warning systems—are eligible under regional
IDA funds. The majority of disaster risk management needs (and financing gaps) for Small
Island States are actually in risk reduction, which is national or sub-national in scope. That said,
the evaluations under the cluster did not find evidence of such bias in Bank activities. Disaster
risk management financing at the national level has been large and increasing fast. And regional
IDA funds were not a huge portion of the financing envelope.
7For example, under the FY15–19 OECS partnership framework, no regional IDA funding was
available to any of the six regional projects under preparation (even though each met the
relevant criteria) because of high demand for regional IDA 17 funds in the Latin America and
the Caribbean region.
8Other instances of using the horizontal adaptable program lending instrument, such as
supporting e-government and communications infrastructure, are counted as regional projects.
9   Chapter 3 of this report discusses this work.
10IDA’s Immediate Response Mechanism does however provide a means of setting up
contingent components in World Bank IPF such that undisbursed project funds can be drawn
upon quickly in cases of emergency.
11The position in Kiribati has been vacant for some time and a new recruitment process is on-
going.
 A key forum in the OECS is the Eastern Caribbean Development Partners Group, which
12

meets quarterly in Barbados to coordinate assistance to the OECS.
13See World Bank (2016b), chapter 2 for a more complete discussion of the Pacific Facility and
the factors leading to its establishment.
14The Pacific Resilience Program, for example, combined IDA grants and credits (both national
and regional allocations) as well as grants from the Global Environmental Facility, GFDRR, and
the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience.
15Over FY11–15, for example, GFDRR contributed about $44 million in funding for technical
assistance to small island developing states.
16Administrative transactions costs also tended to be high relative to total project costs on the
client side. For example, the project implementation cost in one project in the PICs was 30
percent of the total project cost.




                                                                                                    21
3. Strengthening Resilience
The resilience pillar reflects core development constraints that small states need to
address because of their vulnerability to shocks from the global economy and natural
disasters. IEG assessed the World Bank Group’s contributions to strengthening
resilience in-depth only in the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) and the
Pacific Island countries (PICs), and in the Djibouti program to a lesser extent (limited to
environmental and social resilience). Based on these assessments, this chapter
selectively reviews World Bank Group approaches and contributions to strengthening
resilience that bore special links (thematically or operationally) to the small size of the
client countries, but does not systematically provide evidence for evaluative judgments,
which can be found in the underlying country program evaluations. The resilience
pillar includes three dimensions of resilience: macroeconomic/fiscal resilience;
environmental, climate change, and disaster resilience; and social resilience. The
importance of these dimensions is not limited to dealing with shocks: a stable
macroeconomic environment, long-term environmental sustainability, and sound
human capital are all fundamental requisites of sustained economic growth with shared
benefits. However, vulnerability is a source of special difficulties that small states face
in addressing these issues, so this chapter emphasizes that aspect.


Strengthening Macroeconomic/Fiscal Resilience
Macroeconomic (particularly fiscal) resilience was a major issue driving World Bank
Group support in the OECS and many of the PICs. Budget deficits are a chronic
phenomenon for small countries facing diseconomies of small scale in government,
despite respectable revenue collection in most cases. This is especially true where
services delivery is to a widely dispersed population, as in some of the PICs. Frequent
natural disasters and economics shocks (including the 2008–09 global financial crisis
and the food and fuel price crisis immediately before it) compounded these structural
problems. The combination of these factors and occasional poor policy choices, such as
investment in overscaled infrastructure, often led to a buildup of high debt levels. For
example, debt levels in the OECS largely exceed the 60 percent debt-to-gross domestic
product (GDP) convergence criterion for the currency union. However, the debt
problem is also evident in some of the PICs, particularly Fiji and Samoa, and Tonga and
Tuvalu to a lesser extent. Confronted with these issues, the World Bank programs
sought to help strengthen sustainable fiscal and debt management through numerous
activities aimed at improving public revenue and expenditure policies and
management, fiscal and debt management, and broader public sector performance. This
chapter discusses two aspects of the World Bank’s work that particularly resonate with


                                                                                         22
                                                                                 CHAPTER 3
                                                                   STRENGTHENING RESILIENCE
small states: establishing pooled insurance mechanisms against catastrophic weather-
related events, and debt management, including fiscal and debt sustainability.1

The World Bank was the driving force in establishing pooled insurance programs that
provide liquidity payments after natural disasters in the Caribbean, and later in the
Pacific. The World Bank had an essential part in developing the Caribbean Catastrophe
Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF), a multicountry insurance pool that provides insurance
coverage to governments against parametric risk (specified hurricane wind speed,
earthquake magnitude, and excess rainfall) at significantly lower cost than previously
available. This allows rapid payout after a disaster to provide the liquidity needed for
urgent response. The facility is now independent and self-sustaining, operating on the
premium payments of member governments, including the OECS. Among other key
contributions, the World Bank worked on the development of in-depth country risk
profiles and the CCRIF’s financial structure, and helped convene donors who supported
the facility. World Bank financing helped capitalize the CCRIF and cover initial
premium payments for some member countries. The World Bank has since supported
similar efforts in the PICs with the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing
Initiative (managed directly by the World Bank Treasury), a pilot program involving
four countries (the Marshall Islands, Samoa, Tonga, and Vanuatu) that appears
successful to date, though it is unclear if a standalone facility like the Caribbean model
will be feasible. Both the CCRIF and the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and
Financing Initiative involved Japan and numerous other development partners besides
the World Bank in various capacities. Neither facility seeks to cover the value of assets;
their function instead is to provide governments with liquidity to fund emergency
responses after major natural disasters, thus avoiding disruption to normal spending
programs.

World Bank support, mostly analytic and advisory activities (AAA), helped build debt
management capacity in the OECS and the PICs. World Bank inputs to help build
capacity for debt management in the OECS were relatively modest and focused,
consisting of mostly AAA and training undertaken with funding from Canada. The
initiative was part of a larger effort coordinated through the Eastern Caribbean Central
Bank (ECCB) and involved the IMF and other partners. The initiative strengthened
capacity at the ECCB and in the individual countries for debt management assessments,
medium-term strategies, and sustainability analysis. In the PICs, the World Bank helped
establish debt units and debt monitoring systems and provided associated training.
Separately, the World Bank also introduced the Comprehensive Debt Framework, a
general framework for approaching debt management in small states that articulates
the multiple policy levers affecting public debt and their interconnectedness, including
growth and the underlying business climate, the fiscal position, resilience to natural
disasters, and active debt portfolio management. The framework underpinned


                                                                                        23
CHAPTER 3
STRENGTHENING RESILIENCE
subsequent World Bank work in the OECS—including the FY15–19 regional
partnership strategy and the Grenada programmatic development policy financing
(DPF) series that began in FY14—and was later presented in the Pacific .

The World Bank also used DPF in the PICs (and to a lesser extent in the OECS) to
address fiscal and debt sustainability issues, with mixed results. Donors in the PICs
looked to the World Bank for leadership in this area, and the DPF instrument proved
important for effective donor coordination supporting dialogue about a common
reform agenda. The fiscal situation in Tonga worsened because of natural disasters and
the global financial crisis, driving debt to above 50 percent of GDP by 2010. Four World
Bank DPF operations between late 2011 and 2014 supported measures to strengthen
public financial management. The World Bank’s program in Samoa also featured
intensive use of DPF to support enhancing fiscal resilience, and three DPF operations
were approved during FY10–15 in a context in which a combination of natural disasters
and the global crisis had similarly worsened fiscal and debt indicators. In both
countries, World Bank AAA and technical assistance were an essential part of the
package to support improved revenue and expenditure efficiency, debt management,
and public financial management. Some outcomes were favorable, and the operations
helped frame close coordination among donors providing budget support. However,
the Samoan government’s decision to borrow for the construction of a new Apia airport
terminal (on harder-than-agreed terms) undercut progress on debt sustainability. The
OECS program also used DPF, though less intensively. The World Bank delivered a
one-time DPF operation to Grenada and St. Lucia to help cope with financing needs
after the global crisis in 2010. Both operations supported measures to help strengthen
fiscal resilience (for example, introducing a value added tax in St. Lucia, and upgrading
the Automated Systems for Customs Data in both countries). In Grenada (in contrast to
St. Lucia), parallel hands-on project support helped secure better outcomes associated
with the operation. However, World Bank engagement in both countries through one-
time DPF was less sustained than in Tonga or Samoa, where the serial nature of World
Bank DPF ensured some continuity in dialogue and support for reforms. Approval in
FY14 and FY16 of two DPFs (part of a planned three-part programmatic DPF series)
accompanying IMF support changed this in Grenada. The series provided a useful
mechanism for coordinating with other partners providing budget support, such as the
Caribbean Development Bank.


Strengthening Environmental Resilience
Both the PICs and the OECS face severe risks from natural disasters because of their
location, geography, and size. Cyclones in particular occur frequently and have
potential for devastating impact. For example, Hurricane Ivan in 2004 caused damage


24
                                                                                  CHAPTER 3
                                                                    STRENGTHENING RESILIENCE
and loss to Grenada exceeding 200 percent of GDP, and Cyclone Pam in 2015 inflicted
damage and loss to Vanuatu of about 64 percent of GDP. Natural disasters cause direct
losses to property and people, but also affect development because reconstruction needs
contribute to high debt burdens and the resulting limited fiscal space. Because of the
amount of damage disaster events cause, disaster risk management is a central
development challenge of higher priority than in most other country contexts, and the
need for disaster preparedness and risk reduction is critical. Climate change will
exacerbate disaster risks, with rising temperatures increasing the frequency of the most
serious storm and drought events, and rising sea levels contributing to more serious
disaster effects on coastal areas, where most of the population resides. Poorly planned
development, such as construction in highly vulnerable coastal zones, has increased
disaster exposure. Many of these issues also apply to Djibouti—though not exposed to
tropical cyclones, other climate phenomena affect the country, such as flooding and
drought.

Disaster risk management was a core part of World Bank engagement in both the OECS
and PICs programs, covering three broad areas: reducing disaster risks by increasing
infrastructure resilience, enhancing capacity and preparedness (including financial
preparedness), and policy reform. The World Bank also supported some of these
elements in Djibouti. Project experiences and results were context- and case-specific
across the three country groups, but common themes emerged in each of these areas.
Many of the activities supported in disaster risk management engagements are similar
to those in larger countries, but they face particular challenges in the small states
context, often driven by capacity limits, thin markets, and higher unit costs from an
inability to exploit economies of scale. World Bank operations included emergency
response and reconstruction efforts, building disaster resilience into infrastructure
interventions; enhancing preparedness capacity for coping with disasters; developing
pooled risk reduction facilities to cushion the fiscal impact of disasters; supporting land
use and zoning policies that reduce disaster impacts; and helping countries cope with
the consequences of climate change. Both programs also featured multicountry project
platforms that offered reduced transactions costs and possible economies of scale in
certain areas. Beginning in FY11 the OECS program provided financing for disaster risk
management investments in the four IDA blend countries through the Disaster
Vulnerability Reduction Project, established as horizontal adaptable program loan
financing. The recently approved Pacific Resilience Program similarly established a
regional platform for World Bank engagement with the PICs on disaster risk
management.

Regarding infrastructure interventions, successive World Bank projects helped ensure
more disaster-resistant standards and funded risk reduction infrastructure such as
seawalls and dikes. World Bank reconstruction projects targeted high priority assets


                                                                                         25
CHAPTER 3
STRENGTHENING RESILIENCE
such as schools and medical clinics, which can function as emergency facilities after a
disaster by supplying water, sanitation, shelter, and services. Improved facilities can be
much more resilient. For example, infrastructure in Grenada financed under a 2001
emergency response project survived the devastating 2004 Hurricane Ivan, and two
retrofitted schools were the only schools in the country left largely undamaged after the
storm. However, some targeting had less leverage, such as housing reconstruction in
Tonga. Protective works reduced the risks to assets and communities, though designs
tended to focus on concrete measures (such as seawalls) instead of natural alternatives
that may be less disruptive. The World Bank also contributed to greater resilience by
ensuring that it financed infrastructure to higher design standards, as in the design of a
crucial bridge in St Lucia. However, the cost of building more resilient infrastructure
can be substantial, and available financing is sometimes sufficient to cover only a
portion of what is needed, such as for the West Coast Road in Samoa. Furthermore,
many works projects faced serious delays because of government capacity limits,
complications with land issues, procurement challenges, and cost overruns.

The programs included a range of activities aimed at enhancing preparedness and risk
management capacity, with mixed results. Early warning systems seem to be of high
value, though some disasters are still hard to predict and thus provided little warning,
such as a severe flood event in St. Vincent and the Grenadines and St. Lucia in 2013.
After-action reviews developed, implemented, and improved disaster plans. However,
planning processes rarely used the hazard maps and other analytic work produced, and
they can be difficult for the public to use. Technical training led to some improvements
in data management capacity, but high turnover limited the training program’s impact
because trained experts move to the private sector or emigrate—a challenge in all
countries, but particularly acute in small states like the PICs and the OECS, where
emigration rates are high and capacity is thin. Efforts to improve data collection
struggled with maintenance problems, and many once-functional stations are no longer
operational. Policy dialogue has the potential for shifting broader planning and
investment behavior, and it made a difference in a few cases (for example, encouraging
a state-owned water utility in St. Vincent and the Grenadines to invest in reducing its
pipe network’s vulnerability to storm damage). However, examples of a climate
resilience focus in government planning are rare except in donor-financed projects.

World Bank programs also sought to bring a broader resilience focus to government
planning processes. There was significant progress in increasing finance ministries’
awareness of disaster risk and ability to manage its fiscal implications, but examples of
other tangible policy changes are relatively few. World Bank efforts to shift land use
policy had limited impact because the tourism industry and private landowners oppose
zoning. The World Bank helped update building codes in some countries to provide
stronger standards against cyclones, but the codes often met with weak compliance and


26
                                                                                   CHAPTER 3
                                                                     STRENGTHENING RESILIENCE
enforcement except in the public sector. Development in highly vulnerable areas is a
major driver of increased disaster risk, and governments rarely supported preventive
resettlement, so the potential burden of World Bank resettlement safeguards hindered
engagement. The government of Samoa, with World Bank support, tried to encourage
voluntary resettlement inland after a tsunami by building a high-quality road and
relocating some services, but after some initial relocation in the years after the disaster,
many people returned to the coastal strip, which is the focus of their livelihoods and
community assets. After occupants of highly vulnerable flood zones in Djibouti were
resettled for creation of flood protection works, informal settlements encroached on
these zones soon after.


Strengthening Social Resilience
The PICs and the OECS shared certain challenges in education, employment and
skills, health, and social protection. High and rising unemployment was an important
shared challenge, particularly when growth slowed after the 2008–09 global crisis. Both
country groups drew significant remittances from temporary labor migration, but it was
much more important in the PICs. The rapid emergence of noncommunicable diseases
as a major threat to human capital was a significant shared health challenge among
these countries. In education and social protection, challenges tended to be more
country- or group-specific. However, shared concerns included education quality and
skills, and adequate protection of the poor and vulnerable, particularly after shocks. The
OECS countries’ education priorities included expanding access to secondary education
and addressing systemic issues, such as curriculum reform and teacher skills.
Regarding social protection, few of the PICs had formal social protection mechanisms,
except for Fiji. The OECS countries had systems that were more developed but poorly
targeted (despite being costly) and excluding many of the needy. Finally, HIV/AIDS
prevention and control was also a major concern for the OECS countries considering the
high and rising prevalence rate in the Caribbean in the early 2000s, which was second
only to Sub-Saharan Africa.

Three aspects of World Bank support for social resilience are of interest from a small
state viewpoint. The OECS, PICs, and Djibouti programs provided support for
strengthening social resilience in several ways during the evaluation period. The
programs included significant support for strengthening social protection mechanisms,
which itself is significant, but the support contained few elements particular to the
small size of the client countries (World Bank 2016, chapter 3).2 A key aspect of World
Bank project support for HIV/AIDS prevention and control and for secondary
education in the OECS that is interesting in a small state context was its structure as a
regional platform (discussed in chapter 2). The discussion here is confined to labor


                                                                                           27
CHAPTER 3
STRENGTHENING RESILIENCE
migration in the PICs, noncommunicable diseases in the OECS and the PICs, and the
use of community-driven development initiatives in support of the social protection
agenda in Djibouti. The temporary labor migration issue affected the long-term
economic viability of several PICs in a way that would not affect larger states with
greater diversification opportunities in domestic economic activity. However, the
World Bank’s work in this area exemplifies the potential for transformational impact in
small states using primarily multicountry policy dialogue and AAA. Similar
observations apply to the World Bank’s work on noncommunicable diseases in the PICs
and OECS, but the work’s impact is still unclear because the involvement is relatively
recent. The community-driven development initiatives are of interest inasmuch as the
Djibouti program was unique among the programs reviewed in using them.

The World Bank’s work on temporary PIC labor migration effectively used regional
policy dialogue and AAA to address a key constraint to social resilience. Pacific Islands
at Home and Away: Expanding Job Opportunities for Pacific Islanders through Labor Mobility,
published in 2006, was the cornerstone of the economic and sector work. The report
asserts that the PIC economies could not generate the employment needed to meet
demographic trends and presents evidence that remittances have a vital role in social
protection. The World Bank’s Pacific Futures report in 2012 argued that it is difficult to
see a path to economic viability without substantial reliance on remittances and
sustained development partner assistance in the long term. This body of economic and
sector work and, crucially, the policy dialogue with Australia and New Zealand during
its preparation and dissemination was instrumental in influencing the two countries’
decisions (especially New Zealand) to expand employment programs for temporary
migrants from the PICs. The blend of analytical rigor and practical guidance was
particularly valuable, including providing examples of similar programs elsewhere. The
World Bank also worked hands-on with specific PICs to help them implement the
programs on their end. A 2014 impact evaluation of New Zealand’s Recognized
Seasonal Employer program found large, positive effects on households in Tonga and
Vanuatu that sent migrant workers abroad, including per capita income increases of
more than 30 percent, greater ownership of durable assets and, in Tonga, a 20
percentage point increase in school attendance for 16- to 18-year-olds.

The World Bank helped client countries in the OECS and the PICs improve knowledge
and raise awareness of the growing noncommunicable disease burden, and began
institutionalizing prevention. Noncommunicable diseases have emerged as a new
challenge that needs to be addressed together with a myriad of other health challenges,
including the continuing threat of communicable diseases and the objective of ensuring
universal health coverage. Widely disseminated FY11 analytic work covering the OECS
highlighted noncommunicable diseases’ high contribution to life years lost (70 percent,
which is above the 60 percent average for middle-income countries in Latin America


28
                                                                                 CHAPTER 3
                                                                   STRENGTHENING RESILIENCE
and the Caribbean) and recommended health promotion and prevention programs,
better surveillance, regional legislation and policies, and staff training. Major risk
factors included childhood obesity, which is a specific target of subsequent Caribbean-
wide World Bank nonlending technical assistance to support awareness-raising and
prevention activities such as toolkit distribution to health ministries. The World Bank is
working with several other development partners and governments in the PICs, where
obesity rates are among the highest in the world, to support implementation of a
roadmap that will improve understanding of noncommunicable diseases and help
reduce their burden. The World Bank is advocating for policy changes in many
sectors—including education, transport, and agriculture—to help educate the
population and promote healthier behaviors. World Bank DPF already supports some
key actions, such as increased taxation of tobacco, sugar drinks, and high-fat foods.
Diabetes early detection and treatment was a particularly important part of the
countries’ approach.

A series of community-driven development (CDD) projects in the Djibouti program
sought to target urban poverty, with modest results.3 The first project in the series,
initiated in 1999 as part of the post-conflict reengagement program was mostly
successful in developing basic urban infrastructure and generating temporary work in
20 of the poorest neighborhoods and in establishing a CDD implementation agency
which later became the social development agency, the Agence Djiboutienne de
Développement Social (ADDS). Subsequent World Bank operations in the series were
accompanied by parallel projects funded by several development partners, all
implemented by the ADDS and now part of the Djibouti Poverty Reduction Program.4
Nevertheless, the more recent World Bank operations (the 2008 Urban Poverty 1 and
the 2014 Urban Poverty 2, which is still ongoing), which focus on one neighborhood in
Djibouti Ville, have produced only modest results thus far despite the long-standing
World Bank support to the urban sector.5 The main concerns include little use of some
infrastructure, poor maintenance,6 and the absence of targeting measures to improve the
living conditions of the poorest in this neighborhood.7

The Djibouti program’s response to the 2008 food crisis paved the way for the
institutionalization of broader social protection mechanisms. The sharp increases in
international food prices in 2008 underscored the inability of existing social protection
programs to mitigate the negative impact of food price increases on the poor in order to
respond adequately to crises of this kind. The World Bank’s 2008 Food Crisis Response
Development Policy Grant, complemented by a medium-term technical assistance
program, laid the groundwork for an unprecedented government commitment to a
social protection program. A pilot social safety nets project that simultaneously
addressed the two most serious human development challenges in Djibouti—
malnutrition and unemployment—was launched in 2010. The pilot project was


                                                                                        29
CHAPTER 3
STRENGTHENING RESILIENCE
followed by a scaling-up project in 2012 in response to a severe drought in 2011, and
two additional financing operations were approved in 2014 and 2016. The series of
operations, which combines nutrition and workfare activities that target households
with pregnant women and children 0-2 years of age (0-5 in certain areas), created the
foundations of a social safety net system. It helped create a social registry to identify
and target poor and vulnerable households, which is now being used to implement the
first national cash transfer program (launched in January 2016). This first and very basic
cash transfer program covers the entire country. Preliminary results from a rigorous
impact evaluation confirm the benefits of providing participants with access to income
through the workfare program compared to nutrition activities alone.

Reference
World Bank. 2016. Regional Program Evaluation of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States: Antigua and
       Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines.
       Washington, DC: World Bank.


1A more comprehensive discussion of macroeconomic issues is provided in the OECS and PICs
RPEs.
2For example, the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) program consisted of
comprehensive diagnostic work on existing social protection mechanisms in the countries,
followed by financing to support reforms in some countries. For details, see World Bank (2016),
chapter 3.
3The series consisted of the 1999 Social Development and Public Works operation (P044584);
the 2003 Supplemental (P082221); the 2008 Urban Poverty 1 operation (P088876); the 2010
Additional Financing (P120190); and the 2014 Urban Poverty 2 operation (P145848).
4The African Development Bank, the Islamic Development Bank, the French Development
Agency, and more recently the United Nations Children’s Fund financed parallel projects to the
World Bank’s.
5World Bank engagement in Djibouti’s urban sector dates back to 1984 with the first
government urban upgrading programs.
6The 2015 Implementation Completion and Results Report points out that there is still no
systematic policy for maintenance of existing infrastructure, and that facilities and roads built
with World Bank support are not cleaned routinely and are likely to deteriorate rapidly.
7The project focused on the better-off part of Quartier 7 and did not include specific actions to
improve the living conditions for the Djaga Bouldouq slum residents.




30
4. Improving Competitiveness
The enhancing competitiveness pillar was prominent in all the World Bank Group
programs evaluated under the cluster. The pillar covers enhancing the policy and
regulatory framework for market-led growth, strengthening the financial sector,
expanding and better managing infrastructure, and promoting leading productive
sectors. IEG assessed World Bank Group contributions to enhancing competitiveness in-
depth in the programs in Cabo Verde, Mauritius, and the Seychelles, and in the
Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) and the Pacific Island countries (PICs).
Based on these program assessments, this chapter selectively reviews World Bank
Group approaches and contributions under the competitiveness pillar where the subject
matter or the approach are of particular interest or importance in a small state context.
Similar to other parts of this report, this chapter does not typically provide evidence to
support judgments about effectiveness (which are found in the underlying evaluations).

Small economies generally need stronger competitiveness than larger states because of
their limited scope for diversifying and producing at efficient scale. It became apparent
during the evaluation period that traditional growth sources were not generating
strong, sustainable growth rates, especially when considering periodic natural disasters.
The World Bank Group programs reviewed (like programs in other small states) need
to increase their competitiveness through enhanced policy and regulatory
environments, better-functioning financial sectors, improved infrastructure, and better-
performing leading productive sectors. Therefore, World Bank Group programs
evolved to concentrate more on competitiveness than in the past, and this was
particularly striking in the PICs, where the strategy is evolving toward “bending the
growth curve upward” (in the words of the country director).


Enhancing the Policy and Regulatory Framework for Market-Led Growth
World Bank Group programs sought to address key areas such as liberalizing and
facilitating trade and enhancing skilled labor availability. Many of the programs
included wide-ranging efforts to improve the business environment, often based on the
Doing Business framework and involving collaborative World Bank–IFC work.
However, many features of its work in this area was not of specific interest to small
states, except for the possibly greater intrinsic importance of a conducive business
environment for small states. This section confines the discussion to two areas: trade
policy and facilitation, and labor skills. Regarding foreign trade, openness is vital since
small states cannot capture economies of scale through production for the domestic
market, and facilitated trading arrangements are particularly important to lowering


                                                                                         31
CHAPTER 4
IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS
costs and fostering transparency and better governance. Regarding labor skills,
investment climate assessments and similar work consistently highlighted the need for
technical and commercial skills, given the limited supply in small states. For example,
the World Bank’s 2011 enterprise survey in the OECS identified “an inadequately
trained workforce” as one of the top constraints to private business success (behind
only access to finance and electricity).

The programs’ coverage of trade policy and facilitation was selective. A focus on trade
policy was evident in Mauritius and the Seychelles (where trade barriers were more
significant at the start of the evaluation period), but was less evident in Cabo Verde, the
OECS, and the PICs, where tariff and nontariff barriers were less significant. However,
some OECS countries focused on trade facilitation. A 2010 World Bank report on trade
and labor in Mauritius catalogued nontariff trade restrictions and implementation
bottlenecks, and was instrumental in subsequently dismantling some of the nontariff
barriers. However, support for continuing protection remains strong in some areas, and
nontariff barriers such as administrative procedure and discriminatory regulations
(between imported and locally produced products) remain important despite being
eliminated de jure. World Bank support in the Seychelles helped produce substantial
reductions in the cost of importing and exporting during the evaluation period, and it
improved customs administration in some of the OECS countries. The support was
particularly effective in Grenada, where coordinated World Bank–IFC activities helped
the country transition to the Automated System for Customs Data World, introduce
paperless customs processing, and streamline procedures, resulting in a significant
decrease in the time needed to import and export.

The programs typically did not address labor mobility, skills development, and training
in a systematic way. Few programs focused on labor skills shortages (often because
support was forthcoming from other partners) even though diagnostic work suggested
that shortages are one of the most significant constraints to competitiveness. As
discussed under the social resilience subpillar, the World Bank was instrumental in
helping to enhance temporary labor migration opportunities in the PICs. Although the
initiative was important, it did not intend to help build skills (and evaluative evidence
suggests it has not done so). Recognizing this, Australia and New Zealand established
add-on skills training that allows workers to receive formal qualifications. Although
skills development issues are complex and fraught with difficulties, World Bank–
supported initiatives in the OECS suggest some scope for effective support. A 2007
Caribbean-wide World Bank report found that despite up to 11 years of formal
education, school leavers had no diploma and lacked the skills needed in the job
market. The report recommended scaling up youth training programs and increasing
workforce job training, relying (among other things) on regional training programs,
transparent funding mechanisms, and increased labor union participation in training


32
                                                                                CHAPTER 4
                                                                 IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS
programs. The World Bank supported projects in St. Lucia and Grenada afterward
under a framework originally intended to accommodate more countries. The projects
helped establish vocational training systems in the two countries and harmonize
certification. Training agents help graduates with their job searches, mentor them, and
monitor their performance, and social workers and psychologists help youth with social
and life skills. Although the projects were not successful in every respect, they helped
lay a foundation for the countries to continue building the training systems (World
Bank 2016a, chapter 3).1 More generally, depending on the country context, attention
may be needed in the small states to the prevalence of and dependence on foreign
workers at all professional levels, and the policies and laws behind this. For example,
the Seychelles is heavily dependent on imported labor, which is a debated political
topic in the context of promoting economic diversification and building a more resilient
economy around local content development, and a subject of World Bank dialogue.2


Strengthening the Financial Sector
World Bank Group programs in the financial sector responded to context-specific
circumstances, with some commonalities. For example, most countries in the cluster
had high financial penetration, but access to financial services in many of the PICs was
underdeveloped. Furthermore, the remittances associated with the region’s large,
temporary labor migration flows highlighted the significant transfer costs. As discussed
in chapter 2, the failure of two multinational insurance companies with heavy exposure
in the OECS countries after the 2008–09 global crisis created significant systemic risk,
underscoring the urgency of strengthening the legal and regulatory environment.
Increasing access to finance—particularly for small and medium enterprises, which
have can constitute most of the means of production in small states—was an area of
concern in nearly all of the programs (diagnostic work consistently identified access to
finance as a top business constraint). Except in the OECS after the global crisis, World
Bank Group support for the financial sector did not add up to a strategic approach to
the sector and rarely formed part of results frameworks. However, all of the programs
included periodic interventions that made useful—if mostly modest—contributions to
financial resilience and deepening. This section confines the discussion to two small
state–related financial sector elements in the programs aimed at expanding access to
financial services and reducing remittance costs in the PICs program, and at improving
access to finance for small and medium enterprises in several of the programs.

World Bank Group assistance in the PICs sought to improve access to financial services
and reduce remittance costs. IFC was instrumental in supporting banking development
and provided support to Bank South Pacific, the largest local bank in Papua New
Guinea, with branches in Fiji, Samoa, the Solomon Islands, and Tonga. Partly because of


                                                                                       33
CHAPTER 4
IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS
this support, Bank South Pacific now reaches 200,000 formerly unbanked people. The
World Bank Group also worked with governments and private financial institutions to
help reduce remittance costs on Pacific routes. The World Bank-IFC–supported Pacific
Payments Legislation Project contributed to lowering these costs—for example, the
average cost of transferring $200 decreased from 15 percent in 2010 to 11.5 percent by
2015.

World Bank Group programs pursued several avenues to help improve access to credit
for small and medium enterprises. A World Bank–supported 50-50 matching grant
facility in Cabo Verde helped enhance the capacity of private operators (especially small
and medium enterprises) to acquire new technology and managerial expertise.
Chambers of commerce had a key role in expanding services to their members under
the project. In the OECS, IFC support to a large commercial bank in St. Lucia sought to
catalyze financing for small and medium enterprises. The initiative helped offer a range
of financial services and saw some uptake in lending, but the practice was largely
confined to vehicle loans and lacked dynamism because critical constraints in the
broader environment were only partially addressed. IFC and the Australian Agency for
International Development developed the Pacific Microfinance Initiative in the PICs to
promote innovative ventures and broaden access to basic financial services. The
initiative provides entrepreneurs with performance-based grants through financial
institutions on a matching basis. The initial experience had mixed results—the initiative
had some success when it worked with a robust institution, but it had difficulty
building a viable project pipeline. Aside from provision of financing, some of the
programs also sought to address underlying constraints, including credit information.
IFC provided advisory services toward establishing a credit bureau in Cabo Verde, and
undertook a similar project in the Caribbean. World Bank support also helped extend
coverage of the Mauritius credit bureau (established in 2005) to include nonfinancial
institutions and utilities along with banks and insurance and leasing companies.

The Mauritius program supported a package of reforms to facilitate financing for small
and medium enterprises. The World Bank’s 2012 Private Sector Competitiveness
Development Policy Loan operation supported efforts to facilitate the use of movable
and intangible assets as collateral and establish a modern movable collateral registry.
However, amendments to laws are necessary and were drafted, but they are not yet
adopted. The World Bank also helped design an initial version of the successful
Mauritius Business Growth Scheme (later modified). The revised program offered
reimbursable government financing on a 90–10 cost-sharing basis to buy specialized
expertise on skills and training, technology upgrading, standards, and marketing.
Repayment is on a royalty-based system linked to the beneficiary enterprise’s
incremental growth. Similar programs are being replicated in other countries, based on
the Mauritius Business Growth Scheme’s sound performance. However, World Bank


34
                                                                                 CHAPTER 4
                                                                  IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS
efforts to help restructure the Development Bank of Mauritius through the private
sector DPF operation failed, and the government is now considering creating a new
bank to serve small and medium enterprises. Finally, IFC support to selected banks
helped train loan officers for expanded small and medium enterprise lending.


Expanding and Better Managing Infrastructure
Infrastructure raises special issues in small states that the World Bank Group (among
other donors) can help address and was typically a key part of the programs. Small
states bear large infrastructure costs relative to gross domestic product (GDP).
Infrastructure planning and investment require technical skills that are often not locally
available, and low financial returns make it difficult to attract private investment.
World Bank financing can help stretch costs during the time it takes to realize the
benefits of infrastructure investments. When provided on grant or highly concessional
terms, World Bank financing can subsidize investments that are not financially viable,
but are indispensable for nation building and poverty reduction. Furthermore, small
state capacity constraints make donors’ technical expertise in project design,
contracting, and implementation highly valued. Donors can help involve the private
sector, resolve information asymmetries to enable negotiation of fairer contracts, and
provide support for the legal and regulatory frameworks required for corporatizing
public service providers and for private participation.

The World Bank Group programs used multiple approaches tailored to the small states’
needs to help close remaining gaps in access and enhance quality, increase affordability,
and ensure greater fiscal sustainability of investments. IEG reviewed program
approaches to help improve management and regulation; involve private partners in
investments and operations; foster telecommunications development through a holistic
approach that includes legal and regulatory reform, private sector participation, and
infrastructure investment; support investments in renewable energy; and (where
appropriate) encourage regional initiatives to reduce costs and enhance infrastructure
effectiveness and efficiency. Infrastructure in particular is often poorly maintained in
small states because of the extraordinary complexity of developing policies, planning,
and overseeing project design and preparation, and the thin, overstretched institutional
capacity—a phenomenon characterized in the PICs as build-neglect-rebuild (PRIF 2013).
In response, the World Bank Group sought to help develop and monitor sector
programs and prepare projects, devolve program management to independent
authorities (including responsibility for implementation and maintenance), outsource
routine maintenance to the private sector, prepare sound legal and regulatory
frameworks, and establish independent regulators (World Bank 2016b).3




                                                                                        35
CHAPTER 4
IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS
World Bank Group support made significant contributions to improved roads sector
management, but was less successful in St. Lucia’s water sector. The program in Cabo
Verde contributed strongly to improving road network financing and management. For
example, the Ministry of Infrastructure and Transport made steady progress in its
capacity to plan and manage the sector, and the General Inspectorate of Public and
Private Works progressed in regulating civil construction and the housing market.
Similarly, the Road Agency improved in planning and implementing road network
works; the Civil Engineering Laboratory made progress in testing and conducting road
quality control; and the Road Maintenance Fund progressed in generating sustainable
financing. The performance-based management contracts worked so well that they are
now more widely applied and scaled up to include rehabilitation works and a longer
duration (up to five years).4 World Bank project support in Samoa was instrumental in
downsizing the Public Works Department and making outsourcing the default
mechanism for road maintenance. World Bank support resulted in the complete
separation of policy and regulation from service provision in all transport modes, with
additional outsourcing of services (Tonga’s roads sector is now taking a similar
approach). However, World Bank Group support to improve water sector management
in St. Lucia had little impact. A new Water and Sewerage Act in 2006 (amended in 2008)
made creation of a regulatory commission possible in 2009, though it did not begin
functioning until 2012. A tariff review in 2013 allowed the Water and Sewerage
Company of St. Lucia to start recovering operating costs, but financial performance
remained poor during much of the evaluation period, and St. Lucia’s aging water and
sewerage infrastructure periodically leads to severe water shortages.

Outside of telecommunications, World Bank Group efforts to foster private
participation in infrastructure investments and operations encountered difficulties. The
remoteness, small scale, and risks of political interference in places where “everyone
knows everyone” often deter investors, despite the prospective advantages of public-
private partnerships for addressing capacity and fiscal constraints in small states. The
World Bank Group’s support for public-private partnership approaches faltered in
several cases, partly because it had insufficient in-depth understanding of political
economy constraints.5 Examples include the efforts in St. Lucia to bring private
management into the water and sewerage company to improve the utility’s financial
performance (with IFC acting as transaction adviser), and efforts in Mauritius to bring
private participation into the Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd. to lead the company’s
turnaround and mobilize much-needed investment for port operations. In both cases,
lack of government consensus and opposition from vested interests aborted the process.
In Cabo Verde, against an initially failed privatization of the water and energy company
Empresa Publica de Electricidade e Água (ELECTRA) and other constraints, continued
support by the World Bank and other partners for energy and water sector reform is



36
                                                                                  CHAPTER 4
                                                                   IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS
slowly yielding results. ELECTRA recently reorganized under an improved legal and
regulatory framework and began more sustainable cost recovery. World Bank Group
efforts in the PICs to help attract private investment in infrastructure have not yet been
effective, but its consideration of a partial risk guarantee generated some interest.

Holistic approaches to developing telecommunications (a lifeline for many small states)
involving support for legal and regulatory reform, investments, and competition were
among the World Bank Group’s most effective areas of engagement. Information and
communications technology (ICT) is a critical factor in many small states’ long-term
economic viability. ICT offers the potential for diversifying growth sources (particularly
into services and small and medium enterprises, and creating opportunities for local
income generation. It also has potential for achieving greater equity in economic
opportunity by facilitating access to job information or price information to primary
producers, and in social service delivery across diverse islands (such as diagnostic
services in health care and learning networks in education. Furthermore, ICT can help
build more capable and sustainable institutions. Telecommunications fits World Bank
Group strengths, given the blend of policy changes and infrastructure investments that
the World Bank can support, and IFC’s ability to catalyze private sector participation. In
the PICs program, World Bank–IFC synergies possibly had the largest impact in
telecommunications. The World Bank supported legal and regulatory reform to foster
market liberalization and competition and provided financing for cable infrastructure,
and IFC investments had a major role in encouraging the entry of new private
operators, resulting in dramatically lower telecommunications costs and wider
coverage. The number of mobile cellular subscriptions nearly quadrupled between 2006
and 2014. However, access to broadband Internet has still not progressed significantly,
and its pricing remains high in many islands.

World Bank Group support for second-generation telecommunications reforms
encountered difficulties. World Bank support in the OECS during (and especially
before) the evaluation period facilitated increased competition and lower cost of
services. However, the later support was less effective in securing the legal and
regulatory framework updates needed to keep pace with a rapidly evolving ICT
industry. In addition, implementation of World Bank-supported universal service
projects to broaden access to broadband Internet met with difficulties and were scaled
back. World Bank support in Mauritius helped decrease telecommunications prices by
enhancing Mauritius’ capacity on the South Africa Far East fiber optic cable,
strengthening the regulatory authority’s role, and facilitating large private sector
investment in broadband networks. However, Mauritius has yet to amend its
Information and Communication Technologies Act regarding the major issue of
spectrum management to align the regulatory framework with international best
practice. Although reforms contributed to ICT’s remarkable growth in Mauritius, the


                                                                                         37
CHAPTER 4
IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS
unfinished reform agenda is starting to weigh on performance. Mauritius began to lose
ground recently compared with neighboring countries (such as Kenya), which have
greater capacity to attract traffic with lower wholesale bandwidth prices.

The World Bank Group programs reviewed provided some support for renewable
energy development. Along with offering many small states an economical, emission-
free way to meet energy needs (particularly in providing access for outer islands or
remote areas), renewables can reduce dependence on costly oil imports, and decrease
vulnerability to oil price shocks. The World Bank Group developed several interesting
approaches to this area, but World Bank–IFC collaboration that is more intensive may
be desirable. In Tonga, a World Bank-supported energy road map was significant in
establishing the cost advantages of solar and wind power, particularly for outer islands.
The country has now set a target to generate 50 percent of its energy through
renewables by 2020. In Dominica, a World Bank technical assistance credit supported
drafting alternative energy legislation to define the legal and regulatory framework for
developing alternative energy technologies (hydropower, wind, and geothermal). The
World Bank also provided technical and policy advice on geothermal energy
development in Dominica and St. Lucia, which can help in attracting potential
investments. A World Bank project (with Global Environment Facility support) in Fiji to
finance sustainable energy was highly successful, by all accounts. The program consists
of a guarantee fund channeled to commercial banks through the Fiji Development Bank.
The loans triggered numerous small, village-based projects that helped the government
move closer to its objective of 100 percent electricity access by 2020. However, similar
programs in other PICs and in the Seychelles were not as effective, and loan uptake was
limited. In Mauritius, the World Bank supported the use of bagasse (a by-product of the
sugar industry) for electricity generation, serving multiple objectives to promote clean
energy by reducing fossil fuel dependency and reducing oil import costs.

World Bank Group support for joint infrastructure regulation, policies, and
management through regional institutions and arrangements had a mixed record.
Individual countries were ambivalent regarding the usefulness of such institutions,
often viewed as competing with national agencies. World Bank support for regional
institutions was effective in some cases, but encountered setbacks in others. The
experience illustrates the political reality–laden pitfalls in a model that offers a sound
small-state development solution (at least from a technical standpoint), and emphasizes
the need to tread carefully. The World Bank supported a major aviation upgrade in the
PICs. To receive support under the program, participating countries had to commit to
implementing the regional safety program (starting with Tonga, where the World Bank
had been engaged to help corporatize the airports since 2000). They were also required
to separate operations from regulation, and implement a $5 safety and security levy on
all international departing passengers (to fund membership in the Pacific Aviation


38
                                                                                 CHAPTER 4
                                                                  IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS
Safety Office, the regional organization). When the program expanded to other
countries, the World Bank decided to use the Tonga-based advisory implementation
unit (which had proved its capacity) to reduce overall transaction costs. Although the
unit is working effectively, some officials (in Samoa and Kiribati, for example)
expressed dissatisfaction and saw it as another bureaucratic layer. In the OECS, the
World Bank designed its project support to help establish the Eastern Caribbean Energy
Regulatory Authority as a full-fledged regional regulatory body for energy that could
eventually serve all the countries, but project implementation encountered difficulties.
The OECS governments agreed in principle on the advantages of a regional approach,
but practical doubts about costs, duplication of mandates with national authorities, and
forfeiture of sovereign interests—even by the two countries participating in the
project—caused the World Bank to scale back the prospective regional arrangement.


Promoting Leading Sectors
The fisheries, tourism, and agriculture sectors account for dominant shares of
production in the countries. Mauritius attained greater diversification (with textiles and
ICT, for example), but most of the smaller countries in the cluster highly depend on
tourism, fisheries, and tropical agricultural products for income and export earnings.
Tourism also offers potential for the domestic fisheries, horticulture, and livestock
sectors. World Bank Group programs engaged on one or more of these areas, and IFC
efforts to mobilize private investors through technical services and investment
promotion complemented World Bank work—typically on sector policy frameworks.
Fisheries, in particular, could be an area of World Bank Group comparative advantage
(and of synergistic World Bank–IFC collaboration), given the need for adherence to
global or regional agreements, good policy and implementation frameworks,
infrastructure, and value chains to derive benefits from fish processing.

Support for fisheries in Cabo Verde and the PICs typically blended analytic work,
World Bank and IFC investment financing, and support for regional approaches. The
World Bank’s fisheries sector strategy assessment in Cabo Verde in FY08 provided
suggestions on how to create a viable fishing industry. In FY10 the first phase of the
West Africa Regional Fisheries Program Adaptable Program Loan (cofunded by a
Global Environment Facility grant and implemented in nine West African countries)
financed technical assistance to design and implement a registration system and a
national plan to combat illicit fishing activities, review the national fisheries
development plan, and revise the legal framework. The program also financed
construction of facilities to increase value added. In the PICs, the World Bank analyzed
fisheries in the economies of Pacific Island countries and territories in 2009, and
prepared a fisheries engagement strategy for the Pacific Islands in 2012. Funding of


                                                                                        39
CHAPTER 4
IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS
nearly $40 million was approved in late 2014 for the Federated States of Micronesia, the
Marshall Islands, the Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, and the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries
Agency to support both marine and coastal fisheries. The project (the Pacific Islands
Regional Oceanscape Program) supports enhanced fisheries management in the region
to ensure sustainability and protect coastal habitats. A key feature of the project—which
built on regional IDA and Global Environment Facility funding—is to draw on regional
agencies, notably the Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) and the Oceanscape Unit within
the Pacific Island Forum Secretariat, to support an implementation unit and to explore
options for sustainable financing for conservation of critical fishery habitats. At the
same time, IFC is supporting fish processing development to enhance the value added
locally to tuna caught in the countries’ waters and provide a significant increase in local
employment.

World Bank Group support for fisheries in the Seychelles followed a similar approach.
The Indian Ocean Tuna Ltd. cannery, in which the government owns a minority stake,
is the largest single employer in the country. The World Bank undertook an analysis of
the local tuna cannery, helping the government renegotiate its agreement with its
private partner on fair terms, and developed a model to evaluate tuna’s contribution to
the national economy. DPF-supported measures, such as publication of fishing
agreements and license information in 2013, helped enhance discussions on fisheries’
contributions. The Seychelles also took part in the 2007 regional South West Indian
Ocean Fisheries Project, a Global Environment Facility–financed project with the
participation of coastal countries that sought to improve scientific knowledge, build
capacity, and move toward a regional management framework while mainstreaming
biodiversity. The Seychelles (along with Mauritius and the Comoros, among others)
also takes part in the regional South West Indian Ocean Fisheries Governance and
Shared Growth, a regional component of a follow-on project series designed to
strengthen regional cooperation and aimed at developing sustainable fisheries
management. Another World Bank and Global Environment Facility fisheries
development and shared growth investment project financing operation is under
preparation.

World Bank Group work on tourism was selective and had limited but growing focus
on the overarching policy and regulatory framework. The weight and circumstances of
the industry and the extent of World Bank Group engagement varied significantly
among the countries in the cluster. For example, stayover and cruise tourism were a key
engine of growth for several decades in the OECS, accounting for about 30 percent of
GDP, but the countries face issues of declining market share. Competition among
islands to attract operators was tight, often leading governments to grant large fiscal
incentives. However, the picture was markedly different in the Seychelles, which had
positive growth in its share of world tourism arrivals. Tourism in the PICs is somewhat


40
                                                                                  CHAPTER 4
                                                                   IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS
less developed (except in Fiji), but the countries are significantly focused on growth
prospects. Highly selective World Bank Group interventions characterized much of the
evaluation period, but assistance with strategy development (which the World Bank
Group can provide) is becoming visible in some places. For example, the World Bank
helped develop a new tourism strategy in Cabo Verde through analytic and advisory
activities, including advising on international best practices and facilitating exchange of
experiences on the institutional framework needed for coordinated sector
management.6 The World Bank also provided analytic work in the OECS on backward
links for the tourism sector (notably to agriculture) as well as on connectivity,
particularly air transport and ferry. Concrete initiatives aimed at strengthening local
and regional tourism links with the rest of the economy (especially agriculture) are
being developed under the latest partnership framework. IFC provided well-regarded
advisory work on tourism development in St. Lucia, and the World Bank provided
institutional support in Grenada. IFC undertook a diagnostic of impediments to tourism
development in five Pacific Island countries, and several activities were undertaken in
Samoa (with the New Zealand Agency for International Development’s support) based
on the findings. IFC launched the Pacific Regional Tourism Initiative in 2012 (with a
focus on Samoa, Tonga, and Vanuatu) aimed at mobilizing new investments to support
up to 4,000 new tourist arrivals across the three pilot countries. IFC also has an advisory
project aimed at creating new markets by promoting Pacific tourism in China and
airline and cruise vacations originating in Fiji instead of in Australia, New Zealand, or
other countries.

The World Bank Group programs had limited engagement in agriculture. Many
countries in the cluster traditionally produced sugar, but with the dismantling of EU
preferential trading arrangements for the crop, interest is growing in orienting
agriculture toward commercial ventures through value chains in horticulture, and
livestock production that can supply both domestic needs and the substantial demand
from the tourism sector. However, World Bank Group engagement in agriculture was
limited,7 and World Bank–IFC synergies do not seem to be as significant as in fisheries
or tourism. A substantial World Bank intervention was in Samoa, where a project
supports greater production of livestock and fruits and vegetables by subsistence and
semicommercial farmers. The key will be to develop viable models of commercial
farming linked to value chains that could be replicated. The project’s success will
depend on establishing links with the companies that currently import raw and
processed foods, and contracting with reliable suppliers to Samoa’s domestic and
tourism markets. The World Bank provided analytic work on logistics in Grenada’s
cocoa and nutmeg sectors, and prepared an agriculture risk management strategy
followed by a grant-funded initiative that enabled small nutmeg, cocoa, and livestock
farmers to adopt improved technologies and improve resilience, productivity, and



                                                                                         41
CHAPTER 4
IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS
incomes. The reasons for the limited World Bank Group engagement in agriculture
during the evaluation period are unclear, but they might reflect the need for substantial
upfront investment in analytic work to better understand key factors such as land
tenure systems and customary farming arrangements,8 and the need for substantial
capacity building. This implies a long-term, staff-intensive engagement, which could be
beyond the budget of country units.

References
PRIF (Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility). 2013. Infrastructure Maintenance in the Pacific: Challenging the
        Build-Neglect-Rebuild Paradigm. Sydney: PRIF.
World Bank. 2016a. Regional Program Evaluation of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States: Antigua and
       Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines .
       Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2016b. Pacific Island Countries Program Evaluation FY05–15, Volume I. Washington, DC: World
     Bank.


1Both projects received moderately satisfactory outcome ratings. See World Bank (2016a),
chapter 3 for a discussion.
2 In Mauritius, with growing unemployment, especially among the youth, the prevalence of
low-cost foreign labor in construction, textiles, and services is a similarly a growing political
issue.
3World Bank Group support embodying these elements was particularly significant in the
roads sector in Samoa and Tonga. For a discussion, see World Bank (2016b), chapter 4.
4The introduction of performance-based contracts in Cape Verde also helped shift incentives
towards better maintenance, as payments are based on operations and maintenance standards.
5   For more details, see, for example, chapter 4 of the Mauritius Country Case Study.
6This further led to the approval in 2016 of an IDA credit to support Competitiveness for
Tourism Development.
7According to World Bank Management, part of the reason why the World Bank Group has
had limited engagement in agriculture is historical: among the PICs, the early World Bank
operations were implemented through the International Fund for Agricultural Development,
and their multi-sectoral approach was not particularly successful.
8 In the PICs, for example, traditional land tenure arrangements is not the only constraint to
agriculture. Other challenges include the lack of a well-developed value chain linking domestic
farm production to local or export markets and the lack of financing. Beyond these difficulties,
the problem of agriculture is structural in nature, linked mainly to high concentration of the
population in rural areas, the lack of appropriate technologies and extension support, low
literacy rates, cultural norms, and the perception of agriculture more as a default livelihood
rather than a farm enterprise with growth and profitability objectives.




42
5. Considerations for World Bank Group
Engagement
This chapter identifies key issues for the World Bank Group to consider in its
continuing efforts to strengthen engagement in small states, but restricts discussion to
issues arising from the program evaluations in the cluster. Therefore, they are not
necessarily relevant to World Bank Group small state programs in general, and they do
not capture all issues that can arise in small state programs. The issues discussed relate
to the substantive, or thematic, aspects of World Bank Group engagement in seeking to
help reduce poverty and foster greater shared prosperity: its support to the small state
clients in the various areas under strengthening resilience (chapter 3) and enhancing
competitiveness (chapter 4). They also relate to cross-cutting aspects of engagement—
the operational framework or business model for World Bank Group engagement in
small states (chapter 2).

Areas of apparent World Bank Group comparative advantage can guide selectivity in
engaging with small states. Although the issues discussed in this section relate to wide
range of thematic aspects, a World Bank Group country program cannot accommodate
all of them. As discussed in chapter 2, thematic selectivity is particularly important in
small state programs. Beyond providing investment financing and budget support on
competitive and often concessional terms, the World Bank Group appears well-placed
in certain respects, which can also help determine where to focus its engagement.1 One
area is undertaking higher-level policy dialogue (both on overall macroeconomic
management and on a wide range of sectors and cross-cutting themes), backed by a
strong capability for analytic work (including cross-country knowledge and analysis),
where its effectiveness can often be enhanced by providing supporting investment or
development policy financing. Another area is regional engagement (with client
countries as a group and regional institutions) to support regional public goods or
shared development solutions, though regional development banks may be equally
well-placed in this respect.2 A third area is aligning public and private sector efforts and
action through concerted World Bank–IFC engagement, and a fourth area is acting as
convener among development partners, helping to align and harmonize their support.
The right areas for World Bank Group engagement will clearly vary across country
contexts.

Continued World Bank Group engagement on regional development solutions and
cooperation will be particularly important, despite the pitfalls. Strengthening resilience
and enhancing competitiveness calls for World Bank Group support for individual
countries’ domestic reforms and investments in a range of areas. However, actual and


                                                                                          43
CHAPTER 5
CONSIDERATIONS FOR WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT
prospective regional agreements and arrangements in areas as diverse as fisheries,
tourism, labor migration, disaster risk management, health, education, and
infrastructure regulation can help significantly broaden development opportunities and
increase their sustainability, at least for the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States
(OECS) and the Pacific Island countries (PICs). The World Bank Group is well placed
among development partners to take an advocacy role with respect to regional
initiatives and provide the technical and financial resources to support their
implementation.


Key Issues in Strengthening Resilience
A multifaceted approach focused on the multiple drivers of fiscal and debt
sustainability will be crucial to strengthening macroeconomic resilience. The World
Bank deployed numerous efforts to help address the deterioration in fiscal and debt
indicators in many of the countries during the evaluation period. Although progress in
several areas (such as government employment and wage bill management) was
difficult and will probably continue to see periodic setbacks, the World Bank has a
continuing role in helping client countries determine appropriate fiscal policy stances,
including the underlying revenue and expenditure policies. Public expenditure in
particular poses unique, challenging problems in small states because of the fixed cost
element in many government functions. The World Bank may also want to assume a
more hands-on role in supporting countries with debt (stock) management, including
advocacy with the donor community about the need for debt restructuring in some
contexts. Furthermore, the World Bank can help country policy makers understand and
address the role of other drivers of fiscal and debt unsustainability that are uniquely
acute in the small state context: weak growth because of competitiveness deficiencies,
and reconstruction spending resulting from vulnerability to natural disasters.

Fostering a wholesale shift in public and private incentives and behavior toward
reducing vulnerability is a continuing challenge in disaster risk management. The
World Bank did many things right in its disaster risk management engagements in the
reviewed programs. It used relationships built from emergency response operations to
its advantage to develop stand-alone lending platforms on vulnerability reduction
under nonemergency circumstances, and it contributed to increased awareness of
disaster and climate change issues in governments, especially in finance ministries. It
used disaster risk management’s heightened priority after severe events to deploy
emergency interventions and then established nonemergency operations. The World
Bank established and sustained continuous engagements and built a critical mass of
experts with local knowledge and relationships, and it increased project size over time
to reduce the burden of transaction costs. It deployed resources from the Global Facility


44
                                                                                   CHAPTER 5
                                             CONSIDERATIONS FOR WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT
for Disaster Reduction and Recovery for high-priority activities, and drew on the IDA
Crisis Response Window and climate funds to enable interventions that IDA resources
alone could not manage. It used investment operations to support policy dialogue, and
improved recognition of implicit liabilities. It also contributed to improved data and
knowledge, including quantitative information of disaster risk. The World Bank
provided good service to client governments through finance and technical expertise,
yet its efforts only modestly reduced the overall level of disaster vulnerability. The
strategy of direct financing for infrastructure has limits. IDA envelopes and current
levels of climate finance compared with the high cost of making infrastructure climate
resistant mean that only a small portion of assets can be covered by upgrades and
retrofits. Without additional funding sources, it could take decades to make a major
impact on vulnerability through direct financing, emphasizing the importance of
finding ways to shift the behavior of public and private sector investors.

Disaster risk management activities have potential for expanded scope. Although its
own financing volumes cannot match the scale needed, the World Bank can continue to
fund resilience-building investments, capacity building for preparedness and disaster
response, and (where appropriate) coordinate and assist with financial risk
management. Furthermore, it could build on existing platforms and seek to involve
other small states with high disaster vulnerability, but with which the World Bank has
had little engagement to date. It could also work to ensure that other threats, such as
earthquakes, are more widely addressed. Strengthening monitoring and evaluation,
particularly by seeking to quantify reductions in vulnerability, is another important
area of work.

Addressing the long-term risks of climate change needs additional efforts. Many World
Bank experts see little difference between improved management of current disaster
risks and climate change adaptation. However, although the overlap is substantial, the
World Bank’s approach sometimes neglected anticipatory adaptation to long-term
climate change issues, and the activities it supported were too modest considering the
threat level, especially in countries facing existential threats from sea level rise. Some of
the World Bank’s first explicit climate change adaptation projects were in the Caribbean
(outside of the OECS) and Kiribati, but these operations struggled, trying to cover many
sectors or countries and spreading themselves too thin, and sometimes struggling to
achieve policy reform in the absence of concrete investments to harness public support.

The World Bank also has a role to play in helping countries access climate finance
resources. The large number of funds (each with its own requirements) imposes high
costs on small states with limited capacity. Similarly, the proliferation of donors
interested in climate change adaptation in the countries led to a complex array of
agencies, which imposes high coordination costs on governments. Although it helped


                                                                                           45
CHAPTER 5
CONSIDERATIONS FOR WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT
some clients access climate funds, the World Bank could also encourage more
coordination among donors, such as cofinancing larger programs or merging climate
funds.

Engagement that is more intensive on environmental management will also be
important, though not necessarily by the World Bank. The World Bank programs
reviewed offered only limited engagement on environmental issues beyond natural
disasters and climate change adaptation. Natural resources and the beauty of the
natural environment are the basis for many small states’ heavy dependence on tourism.
Unchecked development, pollution, and degradation are a threat to terrestrial and
marine environments. However, environmental protection was rarely a high priority for
governments, which were often unwilling to use IDA or IBRD resources for these
purposes. Therefore, environmental projects were limited to what was feasible with
Global Environment Facility resources. The World Bank could do more through
analytic work to convince countries of the economic rationale for environmental
protection. A notable exception is the World Bank’s recent engagement on fisheries in
the Pacific, a sector that is a crucial part of the development strategy for several
countries. The World Bank is also engaging in dialogue with Mauritius and the
Seychelles on developing the “blue economy” (the Seychelles’ term) or “ocean
economy” (Mauritius’ term), to orient future development around exploiting undersea
resources3 and developing maritime services as an environmentally and socially
sustainable growth path.

Continued engagement on noncommunicable diseases, in particular, will be crucial to
strengthen social resilience. The World Bank has played an important role in raising
consciousness about the threat of noncommunicable diseases, including the cross-
cutting nature of viable ways to address the growing burden (such as higher taxation of
foods and beverages that contribute to obesity). Going forward, support will be
important for the design and implementation of prevention and treatment programs—
both the overall policy framework and specific programs. Effective prevention
programs will require a multisector approach that includes fiscal measures, education,
health, infrastructure, and agriculture to address key risk factors, such as poor nutrition,
alcohol and tobacco use, and lack of physical activity. The World Bank can also help
with sustainable health care financing (which received minimal attention so far) and
feasible ways of organizing tertiary care delivery when the cost of replicating facilities
in individual countries can be prohibitive. At the same time, IFC can help catalyze
greater private investment in health care and related services.

Social protection and labor mobility are also important. Regarding social protection,
support in designing and implementing safety nets is particularly important to protect
vulnerable households from the frequent large shocks that affect the countries. The


46
                                                                                 CHAPTER 5
                                           CONSIDERATIONS FOR WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT
World Bank can provide support for designing and implementing appropriate social
protection mechanisms. However, effective engagement centers particularly on good
data systems and implementation capacity, which take time to build, and the OECS
experience shows that effective engagement needs to be a long-term effort. Together
with a focus on education quality, dialogue about how to increase labor mobility and
broaden employment opportunities in larger states (possibly an area of World Bank
Group comparative advantage) and providing support for it could also be a promising
avenue for future work, particularly if it results in building technical and commercial
skills. Still, the scope for replicating the transformational experience with increased
temporary labor migration in the Pacific is uncertain. Existing PIC labor mobility
programs might have scope for broadening country participation and better targeting
poor households.


Key Issues in Enhancing Competitiveness
The World Bank Group arguably needs a sharper focus on the most binding business
constraints, using sector-specific lenses. Engagement based on the Doing Business
framework and similar cross-cutting approaches led to useful reforms (such as those
related to customs procedures), but engagement did not always focus on the most
binding constraints. Many World Bank Group programs already take the approach of
diagnosing and addressing constraints to competitiveness in the dominant sectors
(fisheries, tourism, and agriculture), and this could prove to be a crucial complement in
relieving bottlenecks to growth. A crucial role for IFC that can help catalyze private
investment to encourage stronger growth in leading sectors is to actively search for
investment opportunities in countries in which the World Bank is engaged on sector
strategy and policy frameworks, and where it funds necessary public investments.

System soundness (including dealing with risks), access to finance (and financial
services, where relevant), and remittance costs are important issues in the financial
sector. The World Bank and other partners—notably the IMF—have a vital role in
strengthening regulation and supervision and assuring system resilience to shocks in
countries with an unfinished reform agenda, such as the OECS. Increased access to
finance is a crucial ingredient in enhancing competitiveness (particularly for small and
medium enterprises). A joint approach can yield important dividends, with systematic
World Bank engagement on underlying policy constraints (such as collateral and credit
information) in parallel with IFC efforts to catalyze the provision of financing and
provide training to entrepreneurs through robust intermediaries (the choice of which
matters). Learning through South-South exchange of experiences (for example, on the
Mauritius Business Growth Scheme) can be of particular benefit in this context.
Broadening access to financial services among the population in some countries, such as


                                                                                       47
CHAPTER 5
CONSIDERATIONS FOR WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT
specific PICs, will also be important to ensure greater savings mobilization and
channeling of resources toward productive investment. In countries where remittances
from migrant labor are significant, continued engagement aimed at reducing remittance
costs (which remain large despite the downward trend) can yield important benefits in
additional savings mobilization.

The need to strengthen policy and regulatory frameworks while ensuring that the
associated functions are separate from service delivery functions (and attracting private
participation in the latter) is an important issue in infrastructure. Despite difficult recent
experiences in some areas, encouraging incremental progress toward more harmonized
and joint regulatory approaches across countries (where applicable) is an essential role
for the World Bank Group. (Multisector regulatory bodies may offer advantages for
small states in which opportunities for regional cooperation are more limited.)
Facilitating greater private sector participation in infrastructure service delivery—an
area of World Bank Group comparative advantage—similarly deserves continuing
effort, though the recent experience in the World Bank Group programs reviewed was
not smooth and alternative approaches may need to be considered in some cases.
Helping countries adapt their legal and regulatory frameworks to technological
advances in the industry (for example, the progressive blurring of the boundary
between telecommunications and information and communication technology (ICT)) is
an important issue in telecommunications. The World Bank can also contribute on the
policy and regulatory framework needed to encourage renewable energy development
while IFC actively helps attract the necessary private capital to underpin widespread
production and use.


Issues in the Operational Framework for Engaging with Small States
CONSIDERATIONS AT THE WORLD BANK GROUP COUNTRY TEAM LEVEL
Regional approaches can offer significant benefits in some contexts, but they can face
obstacles. Regional-level engagement is an area of World Bank Group comparative
advantage in places where regionalism is relevant and tangible (as in the OECS and the
PICs). Regional approaches are worth pursuing when prospective gains are large and
regional institutions have member country support (fisheries in the Pacific, for
example). However, significant upfront work is often needed to establish (and help
build) commitment to shared development solutions. The countries’ concerns include
costs, encroachments on sovereignty, and uncertain benefits capture. In areas with few
prospects for genuinely regional engagement (supporting shared development
solutions, for example), multicountry vehicles for strategy, analytic and advisory
activities, and financing can address shared agendas in a harmonized way while
facilitating collaboration across countries on a scale that is more limited (such as


48
                                                                                CHAPTER 5
                                           CONSIDERATIONS FOR WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT
specialized laboratory facilities to serve a group of countries). Using such vehicles can
also help reduce the World Bank Group’s transactions costs. Trade-offs between
regional and country-specific approaches at the overall partnership framework level
could be resolved through a hybrid approach that combines a regional framework with
short notes on selected countries. In particular, any regional-level results framework
can at best be a partial reflection of World Bank Group support for country objectives,
and results frameworks for the larger country programs can supplement it.

Thematic selectivity and moderating the number of delivery vehicles have important
advantages. Thematic selectivity enables fewer projects of critical mass (reducing unit
transactions costs) and more in-depth staff engagement, particularly where distance,
lack of integration, or both precludes grouped engagement and multicountry
knowledge or financing vehicles. Crucially, it can also help limit the number and size of
visiting missions, reducing the strain on the client country’s limited institutional
capacity. Delivery of financing through programmatic development policy financing
(DPF) operations can similarly help contain transactions costs in countries with a
significant policy reform agenda that the World Bank can support.

Contingency planning, including the use of contingent financing instruments, has a key
role in enhancing responsiveness to shocks. A shock is more than likely to require the
World Bank to respond, given the impact of natural or economic shocks relative to the
size of small states’ economies. Contingent funding and insurance instruments (like
those offered by the CCRIF, CAT DDOs, or emergency components in disaster risk
management IPF operations), which disburse quickly and in a predictable manner, can
help provide better responsiveness to disasters. The scope for using World Bank
contingent financing instruments for disaster response is more restricted in countries
that are IDA-only because CAT DDOs are currently not offered to them, although some
instruments are available, such as IDA’s Immediate Response Mechanism. The use of
financing mechanisms that are arranged ex post, such as emergency recovery loans and
DPF (more recently coupled with the ability to access IDA’s Crisis Response Window)
is also an essential part of responsiveness, but they take time to prepare and so have
limited ability to support rapid emergency response.

Emphasis on data collection and knowledge work in small states is key. Data is a
priority, because it is vital to monitor and measure progress. Moreover, the World Bank
has generally not conducted sufficient research on small states, and, as an institution,
still has many knowledge gaps in areas that are relevant for small states. The priority
areas for additional work need to be guided by Systematic Country Diagnostic
priorities. For example, in the PICs this evaluation points to a need for additional work
on social resilience as well as on agriculture, including land tenure issues.



                                                                                       49
CHAPTER 5
CONSIDERATIONS FOR WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT
It is also important for small state programs to pursue opportunities to improve
governance. Wherever possible, it is important that the World Bank press for increased
transparency and accountability in government and help promote reforms that break
the “cycle of fraternity” which often plague institutions in small states. Countries with a
very small population have weaker accountability mechanisms, as people know each
other and are often part of the same communities of families. The adverse effects range
from non-transparent procurement and discretionary granting of licenses to vindictive
state action against businesses competing with those close to the ruling elite—and in
extreme cases, elite capture of the state.4 Many developing countries face such
challenges, but they tend to be more acute in small states. Promoting better governance,
especially greater transparency and accountability, is critical to the effectiveness of
World Bank efforts to help strengthen resilience. In macroeconomic management,
transparent accounting of public funds and their use is crucial, especially in natural
resource-rich small states. Effectively enhancing competitiveness often hinges on World
Bank willingness to press for reforms that go beyond passage of suitable legislation to
genuine implementation on the ground (which fell short in some areas in the programs
reviewed). It is important for the World Bank to consider broadening its agenda to help
foster greater accountability in such areas as the selection of CEOs of public bodies,
where favors can often be dispensed to allies and opponents penalized. Independent
watchdog bodies, such as the press and the judiciary, have a crucial role in holding the
government to account, and World Bank support to strengthen the role of such
institutions can help ensure the effectiveness of its support more broadly.

Capacity building seems most effective when it focuses on a concrete subject of
immediate relevance and has client commitment and sustained World Bank Group
support. Sustaining capacity for many highly specialized functions in small states will
not be a viable proposition, and in such cases it is appropriate to supplement capacity
instead of seeking to build it. When building capacity is the right solution, arranging to
share capacity on a regional basis may be a viable option, and the World Bank Group
can facilitate it. The cluster evaluation found little definitive guidance on the capacity
building approaches that work best, and a variety of financing and delivery vehicles can
be used. Crucial ingredients for an effective intervention seem to include concrete,
practical subject matter (relating to ongoing reform implementation, for example) that
holds sufficient interest and priority at the client country policy maker level, together
with sustained attention and resources from the World Bank Group. Also, the World
Bank Group could play a more active role in facilitating peer learning not only through
the Small States Forum, but through practical, problem-focused knowledge exchanges
between small states.

Client capacity for World Bank portfolio implementation can be ensured in different
ways, and simplified procedures help, though they do not eliminate challenges.


50
                                                                                CHAPTER 5
                                           CONSIDERATIONS FOR WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT
Examples of approaches used include project implementation or coordination units in
varying configurations—project-specific, national portfolio-wide, housed in a regional
organization, and even shared across countries—to fulfill fiduciary functions. Other
approaches include direct implementation by the line ministry concerned and
outsourcing. World Bank field presence also varied. Although pooled arrangements
(across projects, countries or both) seem more cost-effective for small states, evidence
from the cluster evaluation does not conclusively show one model to be superior to
others. The World Bank’s simplified procedures for investment project financing helped
make the challenge more manageable, but appropriate arrangements to ensure the
requisite implementation capacity on the client side remain crucial. Lessons from
program evaluations in the cluster point to the importance of continuing dialogue with
clients during project implementation via video or audio in order to improve results
and lower costs.

Investing in multiple forms of partnership is clearly at a premium. It is especially
desirable for development partners (and the World Bank in particular) to ensure
coordinated support, given the importance of official development assistance flows, and
small states’ lower capacity to coordinate development partner activities and handle
multiple sets of interlocutors and procedures. Therefore, the extra effort and resources
needed to pursue and sustain partnerships should factor into program planning. Better
functioning partnerships can range from strengthened donor coordination mechanisms
to increased use of joint support delivery vehicles, especially joint financing. The
harmonization of procedures that joint financing embodies offers particularly
significant benefits in small states, and it is important to extend their use as much as
possible.

The World Bank Group needs to find ways to work around constraints related to the
business model. The many constraints rooted in the small absolute size (not relative
size) of financing envelopes and administrative budgets, though tightly binding, can be
managed in various ways. As shown most dramatically by the Pacific Facility and the
Pacific Partnership, World Bank Group technical and financial inputs can be
significantly leveraged through appropriate partnerships, including using existing trust
funds administered by the World Bank and IFC more intensively (though in many cases
this does not come with additional administrative budget). Sharing staff and facilities
with other development partners can manage the continuing challenge of World Bank
and IFC representation in the field in small states, especially in countries that are far
from World Bank Group hubs or with difficult access to them. National staff can help
better understand and interpret the country governance environment, so using them
seems particularly promising as a way forward.




                                                                                       51
CHAPTER 5
CONSIDERATIONS FOR WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT
CONSIDERATIONS AT THE INSTITUTIONAL LEVEL
Funding allocations in IDA are not fine-tuned to vulnerability measures, though its
mechanisms allow some responsiveness to shocks. IDA financing clearly provided
major benefits to many IDA-only and blend small states under the small island
economies exception, providing a wholesale response to their greater vulnerability.
Furthermore, changes in the allocation formula (the increases in the base allocation and
suppression of the per capita allocation ceiling) have significantly increased funding
volumes in recent years. However, the allocation formula does not embody
differentiation based on more specific measures of vulnerability (to natural disasters,5
for example), though IDA mechanisms such as the Crisis Response Window and the
Immediate Response Mechanism can provide some measure of help to small states in
coping with shocks. Whether such differentiation is worth pursuing could merit
consideration. An alternative to differentiation could involve enhancing and
broadening special treatment for small island states as a group in recognition of their
inherent and unique forms of vulnerability. Empirically, many small island states
struggled with high and unsustainable debt levels (some in spite of extraordinary access
to concessional resources), though this was at least partly attributable to poor policy
choices along with inherent vulnerability.

Are small state–specific financing instruments needed? Evidence from the cluster
evaluation does not provide a conclusive answer (affirmative or negative), but the high
unit transactions costs associated with World Bank financing in the OECS and PICs
suggest the question is relevant. A simpler, more streamlined (perhaps modular)
investment project financing vehicle could significantly facilitate World Bank business
in small states. Similarly, the challenges that IFC has confronted in identifying
investment opportunities of sufficient scale to be worth pursuing suggests it may be
useful to examine the feasibility of more streamlined ways of delivering financing,
perhaps through multipurpose country or regional venture funds that could help
catalyze larger investment opportunities later.

Consideration could also be given to ways of surmounting the challenges that the
institution faces in engaging with high-income small states. The World Bank’s inability
to provide financing in high income countries constrains its role as an active
development partner in these countries. This concerns Nauru and Palau in the PICs6
and St. Kitts and Nevis and Antigua and Barbuda in the OECS.7 Most trust funds
exclude them in view of their high income status. While RAS offers a potential means of
World Bank engagement in the high income small states, their cost has mostly been
seen as prohibitive, even by upper-middle- and high-income countries (with the
exception of the Seychelles).




52
                                                                                         CHAPTER 5
                                               CONSIDERATIONS FOR WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT
Does the World Bank’s new global practices organization put small states at a
disadvantage? This is ultimately an empirical question. The cluster evaluation can shed
little light on the subject because the reorganization is too recent and not enough time
has elapsed. However, a World Bank staff structure with greater thematic specialization
globally (and inevitably less country specialization) risks short-changing small states in
staff time and focus, and the World Bank might want to monitor the issue. To the extent
that small state programs with limited budgets have difficulty attracting needed staff
with the requisite experience, making the small states agenda a stronger corporate
priority could help strengthen incentives to work on these countries.

Knowledge brokering that is more intensive and pursuing partnerships at the
institutional level could serve small states well. The World Bank Group could examine
the scope for additional activities to facilitate knowledge and experience exchange
among small state policy makers and practitioners. The cluster evaluation found a
number of approaches and experiences in the World Bank Group programs that could
be of interest to other small states. For example, the well-regarded Small States Forum
could be modified into a more continuous platform. At the same time, the World Bank
could systematically publicize its small states website as the first stop in a brokering
mechanism for virtual exchanges among countries. Regarding partnerships, pursuing
closer working relationships with key donors engaged in small states at the institutional
level could lead to more joint programming, greater use of joint delivery vehicles, and—
crucially—harmonization of procedures. Efforts in specific areas, such pursuing greater
global uniformity in sources and procedures for climate finance resources, would be of
particular benefit to small states.


1Under the current World Bank Group’s country engagement framework, in addition to World
Bank Group comparative advantage, selectivity is guided by country development goals and
priorities emerging from the Systematic Country Diagnostic for achieving the World Bank
Group’s twin goals of reducing extreme poverty and fostering shared prosperity.
2The World Bank Group is of course uniquely well-placed among development banks to
support global public goods and development solutions.
3Potential yields from marine biology, minerals, and other resources are in pharmaceuticals,
food, cosmetics, manufacturing, and vitamins, for example.
4Elite capture and patronage is an explicit risk mentioned in the Djibouti FY14-17 Country
Partnership Strategy.
5Existing vulnerability indices do not fully capture the specific challenges small states face. For
example, those based on past vulnerability to shocks/disasters do not correctly reflect the
existential threat suffered by atoll nations under climate change. Most atolls are located near the
equator and thus were not historically exposed to cyclones; hence, they rate low in many of the
indices based on historical exposure.



                                                                                                 53
CHAPTER 5
CONSIDERATIONS FOR WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT

6Palau cannot access IBRD without credit enhancements. Its GNI per capita of $11,110 (2014) is
far above the operational cut off for IDA, even to be considered for IDA’s small island states
exception. At the same time, Palau’s insolvency and liquidity risks preclude it from accessing
IBRD under normal borrowing terms. Nauru recently became a member of the World Bank
Group and is classified in the same way as Palau.
7Antigua and Barbuda and St. Kitts and Nevis are only eligible for IBRD. However, in light of
their high public debt levels, these countries have not been able to borrow from IBRD for
several years. St. Kitts and Nevis’s last active IBRD project became effective in FY06 and with no
new lending, its exposure to IBRD will fall to $0.1 million by end-2018 (from $2.1 million today).
Antigua and Barbuda has only one active project with IBRD and its debt outstanding to IBRD
was only $2.5 million at end-March 2016.




54
