 2016 Practical Worksheet V 1.0. Simp
 Public Investment Project Selection a



Practical Worksheet V 1.0
     May-16
Priorization for Ex Ante Evaluation



  Start new Prioritization
V 1.0. Simplified Methodology for
Selection and Prioritization in
1. Project Descriptors
Project Name
Project Code
Project Sector
Institution
Geographic Location
Total Project Cost (USD)
Total State Funding (USD)


2. Project Scoring

Key Criteria & Sub-criteria
                                              Key Indicators
      for Evaluation
Relevance, design, strategic consistency& readiness
                                 Statement of project objectives and
                                 expected development outcomes and
                                 outputs in relation to the need of the
                                 locality/sector.
1.1. Assess the rationale and
                                 A report form stating inputs, outputs,
justification for the project/
                                 outcomes, and impacts, and monitoring
program (6 points) .
                                 plan.

                                  Compliance with relevant laws and
                                  regulations.

1.2. Assess the realism of the   Project implementation
implementation plan (4 points) . arrangements/readiness.

                                  Stakeholders and beneficiaries
                                  consultations.

1.3. Assess the appropriateness
                                  Location, land acquisition and
of choice of location, land
                                  resettlement (LAR) plan, where relevant.
acquisition, and technical
option (9 points) .
                                  Choice of technology, basic engineering
                                  design, and analysis of technical
                                  feasibility.
                                  Total investment requirement and
                                  financing plan.
  1.4. Assess how realistic and
feasible the financing plan is (7
              points)
  1.4. Assess how realistic and
feasible the financing plan is (7
                                  Funding sources (own, state, borrowing
             points)
                                  as relevant).


1.5. Any other governorate- or
sector-specific sub-criteria that To be defined case by case
may be added (4 points) .
Short-term assumptions performance

                                     Reliability of forecasts.
2.1. Assess the user satisfaction
                                  Beneficiaries who received attention and
and quality indicator.
                                  were satisfied with the goods and services
                                  received.
2.2. Assess the economic          Percentage of budget executed per year;
indicator.                        percentage of credit recovery.

2.3. Assess the costs indicator.     Percentage deviation of total cost.

2.4. Assess the timing indicator. Percentage deviation of total timing.

                                     Percentage of beneficiaries that receive
2.5. Assess the quantity
                                     the goods and services, compared to the
indicator.
                                     percentage that was intended.

Efficiency in resource use

3.1. Assess the plan to ensure    Project’s implementation schedule.
process efficiency (timelines) (5
                                  Procurement plan and fund utilization
points) .
                                  schedule.

                                       Financial internal rate of return (to be
                                         viable it should be higher than the
3.2. Assess financial viability (6
                                        weighted average cost of capital).Or,
points) .
                                       project unit cost comparisons for non-
                                            revenue generating projects.

                                     Identification and quantification of
                                     economic costs and benefits.
                                      Estimation of economic internal rate of
                                      return (IRR) (higher than the economic
3.3. Assess economic viability
                                        opportunity cost of capital). Or, cost
(8 points) .
                                        effectiveness (compared with cost of
                                      alternatives and unit costs in the sector)
                                       in the case of projects/programs where
                                      economic benefits are not quantifiable).
                                  Positive impact on employment creation
                                  and gender equity – jobs for girls and
                                  women.


   3.4. Assess plan for social
     efficiency (10 points).


                                  Resettlement of project-affected
                                  households and likely improvement in
                                  their welfare (income, health, education).

                                  Improvement in household income.

                                  National defence and social security, as
                                  appropriate.


3.5 Environmental efficiency (4 Plan for addressing environmental issues
points).                        (if relevant).


3.6. Any other governorate- or
sector-specific sub-criteria that To be defined case by case.
may be added (3 points).
Effectiveness (achieving outcomes)
                                Targets for achieving project outputs and
4.1. Assess how realistically
                                outcomes (consistent with that stated in
targets and indicators for
                                the RF).
outputs and outcomes are set (8
                                Baseline target (beginning) and end-lines
points) .
                                (final) for outputs and outcomes.

4.2. Any other governorate- or
sector-specific sub-criteria that To be defined case by case
may be added (2 points) .
Sustainability

                                  Risk identification.
5.1. Assess the plan for the
sustainability of outputs and
                                  Financing of O&M.
outcomes of the proposed
project (16 points) .
                                  Capacity development plan.
5.2. Any other governorate-
specific sub-criteria that may   To be defined case by case
be added (4 points) .
                  Scoring Basis/Justification                         Score   Max Score



Objectives and outcomes are clearly defined, linked to provincial,
sector and national socioeconomic development plan, and targets
realistically set.
                                                                       0         2
Outcomes and outputs are clearly defined and measurable, and
data sources and responsibility for monitoring identified.             0         2
To what extent the design of the project complies with major
laws, regulations and technical standards (e.g. investment,
budget, procurement, and environment).
                                                                       0         2
Quality of the approach and content (including logistics, budget
and staffing) of the implementation plan.                              0         4
Coverage and quality of the consultations with stakeholders and
beneficiaries..                                                        0         3
Justification for the location.                                        0         1
Coverage and appropriateness of the LAR plan for the project.          0         2
How realistic are the technical justifications given in the project
document and the justification for the choice of technology?           0         3
How realistic is the estimation of the total investment
requirement and financing plan (sources of funding)?                   0         3
Normal mark for state capital funding (2.5).                         0   2
Extra mark for governorate’s off-budget resources and PPP
planned (2 as maximum on top of normal mark).                        0   2
To be defined case by case                                           0   4

The range of variation of forecast was not higher than 20%.          0   2
More than 80% of beneficiaries were satisfied with the goods and
services provided by the project.                                    0   2
The percentage of the budget executed per year was above 80%.        0   4
The percentage of deviation from the total cost was below 80%.       0   4
The number of days of delay in given activity was below 25%.         0   4
The percentage of total beneficiaries that received the goods and
services per year was above 80%.                                     0   4
Schedule for project implementation, including construction,
where appropriate.                                                   0   3
Whether approach, timelines and milestones for procurement and
fund utilization are realistic.                                      0   2
Financial viability based on estimated returns on investment (the
higher the EIRR the better, minimum should be not less than the
cost of borrowing). Or, where it is not possible to estimate EIRR,
 comparison of unit cost with similar projects in the governorate
                                                                     0   6
         or nearby locations and construction standards.

How realistically has the economic cost and benefit been
identified and estimated?                                            0   4
Economic viability based on the estimates of EIRR, higher then
better but minimum should be not less than the opportunity cost
of capital. Or, where it is not possible to measure EIRR (e.g. in
 small-scale projects, social sector projects), cost effectiveness
    analysis may be used or unit cost comparison within the
                                                                     0   4
 governorate or within the sector, or cost of alternative may be
                               used.
How realistic are the plans for ensuring social efficiency and
safeguards?
Total jobs likely to be created.
Of which, jobs created for women and girls, where applicable
(gender: % of women/girls among the total beneficiaries of the
program/project as determined by a social impact assessment).
Other benefits to women and girls (e.g. health, education, anti-       0   4
trafficking, where relevant).
Or, where the above is not relevant due to the specific nature of
the project, assessment may be based on the estimate for total
jobs creation



Whether all the number of affected households are going to be
resettled and their welfare (income, health, education) improved.      0   2
Increase in household income in the project-influenced area(s).        0   2
Realistic plan for ensuring national defence and social security.      0   2
How realistic is the plan to (a) address positive or negative effect
in local environment as identified in environmental impact
analysis; (b) reduce % CO2 emissions (where applicable); and (c)       0   4
comply with green standards and others (where applicable)?


To be defined case by case.                                            0   3

How realistic are targets and timelines for achieving project
outputs and outcomes?                                                  0   4
How well are the baselines and targets for outputs and outcomes
defined?                                                               0   4
To be defined case by case                                             0   2
Assess nature and extent of risks to continuity of outputs and
outcomes, and their mitigation measures.                               0   10
How realistic is the financing plan for O&M? What are the main
sources of funding O&M cost?                                           0    3
How plausible are the plans for staff training, equipment, spare
parts, as applicable to the project?                                   0    3
To be defined case by case   0   4
Clear Information

  Save Results

      Finish




   Remark (Further Justification for the Score)
A. Criteria Weight
 Aggregated Indicator                      Evaluation Criteria
   Relevance indicator    Relevance, design, strategic consistency& readiness
                          Short-term assumptions performance
                          Efficiency in resource use
  Performance indicator
                          Effectiveness (achieving outcomes)
                          Sustainability




                          B. Sector List
                                             Transport Sector
                                             Education Sector
                                               Healt Sector
                                     Agriculture and Irrigation Sector
                                             Electricity Sector
                                           Water Supply Sector
                                       Public Infrastucture Sector
                                              Culture Sector
% Weight     Av Weight
 50.0%         50.0%
 12.5%                   25.0%
 18.8%                   37.5%
               50.0%
  6.3%                   12.5%
 12.5%                   25.0%
    100.0%
