                           Expanding Youth Engagement in Jordan


Following various exchanges with the CMU on how to expand the youth engagement in Jordan,
here are the proposed activities which would be implemented along three pillars involving: (i)
the introduction of a youth lens in the portfolio, (ii) technical assistance to the Government on
the implementation of the new Youth Policy, and (iii) the support for a Jordanian youth advisory
group for the country work program.

   1. Introducing a youth lens in the portfolio. Currently the Jordan portfolio has several
      entry points to introduce a youth lens. In particular:

          The “Emergency Services and Social Resilience” project will be able to introduce a
           15 percent earmark for youth-targeted activities, among other criteria, in the next
           round of grant making. To support the effective implementation of these activities,
           some capacity building and knowledge sharing from international good practices
           could be offered to interested municipalities. The outreach/effectiveness of these
           activities on young people in the relevant municipalities would then be measured
           through a mobile-phone based youth beneficiary feedback tool.
          The upcoming “Economic Opportunities for Jordanians and Syrian Refugees P4R”
           could also benefit from youth being systematically included in consultations, and for
           youth-focused activities being designed as part of the program.
          A pre-approved JSDF of USD 3 million, is being redirected towards “Integrated
           Services and Engagement for Disadvantaged Youth” in East Amman, and Tafilah
           communities, which encounter exclusion and radicalism factors directly affecting
           young people. Implementation would include a strong engagement with an NGO to
           support the Higher Council for Youth.

       In fact, most ongoing operations could be enhanced through the inclusion of young
       experts, or by at least keeping young people in the country informed about project
       activities and results. Youth-led third party monitoring of activities could be a useful tool
       to help inform young people about the Bank’s activities, as well as to provide projects
       with information on performance. Youth-led third party monitoring activities are most
       often used for projects that have measurable results on the ground, but a modified version
       could be applied so that young people can monitor the results of development policy
       lending. This could providing information to the Bank that could help guide future policy
       support, while at the same time helping young people in Jordan understand the process of
       policy-making and implementation in their country.

   2. Technical assistance for youth policy development and implementation. The
      Government of Jordan, through the Higher Council for Youth, has been working closely
      with UNDP on the update of its National Youth Strategy. The policy is expected to be
      completed in March 2016, and the Government will then need support in the
      implementation of the strategy. The Bank could offer a comprehensive technical
      assistance package which would include assistance to help the Government (1) ensure
      that implementation of the policy is tailored to specific segments of the youth population,
   (2) build the government’s capacity to implement the policy, and (3) participate in
   knowledge exchange programs. The Bank’s assistance could start through an analytical
   piece helping to understand the characteristics and relative size of each sub-group of
   youth. This would include understanding exclusion factors encountered by various
   categories of Jordanian and Syrian youth, existing gaps in addressing them and proposed
   solutions. The Bank would then build the capacity of the Higher Council of Youth to
   implement the newly developed Youth Strategy in such a way that it includes the various
   segments within the youth population in Jordan. In addition, the Bank would promote
   knowledge exchanges between Jordanian officials working on youth issues and officials
   in countries like Morocco, where a similar comprehensive, programmatic approach has
   been successfully delivered.

3. Establishment of a Jordanian youth advisory group. This youth advisory group would
   assist in ensuring a more systematic World Bank engagement with youth in the country
   program. As part of the Arab Youth Initiative, a mapping of youth organizations was
   conducted for Jordan and could be used as a starting point for an initial consultation to
   assess the stakeholders’ readiness to step up the engagement with the World Bank. As
   part of the process, this group could receive capacity building similarly to what is
   currently being provided for the Tunisian Youth Council, albeit the goals and
   circumstances are different. Youth advisory groups, such as the one proposed for Jordan,
   have been successfully tested in the ECA Region, in countries such as Georgia, and a
   knowledge sharing could be offered to MNC02 and other interested CMUs in MNA.
