Vu l n e r a b i l i t y
non-communicable disease                                  remoteness
disaster risk management                              climate change
RISING                        SE A                     L E V EL
diseconomies of scale labor migration
volatile growth natural disasters
                                                            PIC S VO LU M E 2


           Cluster Country Program Evaluation
                              on Small States
                           Pacific Island Countries Program Evaluation (FY05–15)
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction   This work is a product of the staff of The World   RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
and Development / The World Bank               Bank with external contributions. The findings,    The material in this work is subject to copyright.
1818 H Street NW                               interpretations, and conclusions expressed in      Because The World Bank encourages
Washington, DC 20433                           this work do not necessarily reflect the views     dissemination of its knowledge, this work
Telephone: 202-473-1000                        of The World Bank, its Board of Executive          may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
Internet: www.worldbank.org                    Directors, or the governments they represent.      noncommercial purposes as long as full
                                                                                                  attribution to this work is given.
                                               The World Bank does not guarantee the
                                               accuracy of the data included in this work.        Any queries on rights and licenses, including
                                               The boundaries, colors, denominations, and         subsidiary rights, should be addressed to
                                               other information shown on any map in this         World Bank Publications, The World Bank
                                               work do not imply any judgment on the part         Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC
                                               of The World Bank concerning the legal             20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail:
                                               status of any territory or the endorsement         pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                               or acceptance of such boundaries.
Pacific Island Countries Program Evaluation (FY05–15)
Cluster Country Program Evaluation on Small States

PICs Volume II: Appendixes


AN INDEPENDENT EVALUATION
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The
World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.
        The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not
imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination
of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as
long as full attribution to this work is given.

       Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World
Bank Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-
522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.




ii
Contents
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................................................... IV

APPENDIX A. REGIONAL INSTITUTIONS IN THE PACIFIC ISLANDS ............................................... 1

APPENDIX B. ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA .................................. 3

APPENDIX C. WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN TONGA FY05–15 ............... 25

APPENDIX D: ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA ............................... 41

APPENDIX E. WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY05–15 ............... 65

APPENDIX F. PACIFIC ISLANDS TABLES ........................................................................................ 86

APPENDIX G. EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE
IN THE PICS ....................................................................................................................................... 103

APPENDIX H. EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING
COMPETITIVENESS AND PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT ..................................................... 124

All volumes of the Cluster Country Program Evaluation on Small States are found online at
http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/evaluations/cpe-smallstates.




                                                                                                                                                    iii
Abbreviations and Acronyms
ADB         Asian Development Bank
ANZ         Australia and New Zealand Banking Group
AusAID      Australian Agency for International Development
BSP         Bank South Pacific
CAS         country assistance strategy
CEDAW       Convention for Elimination of Discrimination Against Women
CROP        Council of Regional Organisations
DFAT        Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (Australia)
DPO         development policy operation
DRM         disaster risk management
FFA         Forum Fisheries Agency
GDP         gross domestic product
GFDRR       Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
GFMIS       Government Financial Management Information Systems
IBRD        International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICAO        International Civil Aviation Organization
ICT         information and communication technology
IDA         International Development Association
IEG         Independent Evaluation Group
IFAD        International Fund for Agriculture Development
IFC         International Finance Corporation
IMF         International Monetary Fund
MTEF        Medium Term Expenditure Framework
OECS        Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States
PASO        Pacific Aviation Safety Office
PCRAFI      Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative
PEARL       Pacific Early Age Readiness and Learning
PER         public expenditure review
PFM         public financial management
PICs        Pacific Island countries
PICASST     Pacific Islands Civil Aviation Safety and Security Treaty
PIDP        Pacific Islands Development Program
PMU         Program Management Unit
PPA         Pacific Power Association
PPP         public-private partnership
PRIF        Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility
PSD         private sector development
SCD         Systematic Country Diagnostic
SME         small and medium enterprise
SPC         Secretariat for the Pacific Community
SPREP       Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Program
TFSU        Technical and Fiduciary Services Unit
UNDP        United Nations Development Programme
USP         University of the South Pacific

All dollar amounts are U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated.




iv
Appendix A. Regional Institutions in the Pacific
Islands
Regional Institutions
PIFS: The Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat was set up in the early 1970s. It is the
Secretariat to the annual Pacific Island Forum meeting of Pacific leaders. At the Forum
the leaders agree on priorities for the region as part of the Pacific Plan. There are 100
staff members.

CROP: The Council of Regional Organisations in the Pacific is an interorganizational
consultative process which aims to prevent either overlaps, or gaps, appearing between
the work programs of its various members.

In addition to the Forum Secretariat, the members of CROP are:

      FFA: The Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency is an advisory body that was
       established to help countries sustainably manage their fishery resources that fall
       within their 200 mile Exclusive Economic Zones. FFA provides expertise,
       technical assistance and other support to its members who make sovereign
       decisions about their tuna resources and participate in regional decision making
       on tuna management.
      PIDP: The Pacific Islands Development Program was established in 1980, is to
       assist Pacific islands leaders in advancing their collective efforts to achieve and
       sustain equitable social and economic development consistent with the goals of
       the Pacific islands region's people. PIDP began as a forum through which island
       leaders could discuss critical issues of development with a wide spectrum of
       interested parties.
      SPC: The Secretariat for the Pacific Community is a regional intergovernmental
       organization which serves 22 Pacific Island countries and territories through
       technical assistance, policy advice, training and research. It operates in a wide
       range of sectors with the aim of achieving three development outcomes—
       sustainable economic development, sustainable natural resource management
       and development, and sustainable human and social development.
      SPREP: The Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Program is a
       regional organization established by the governments and administrations of the
       Pacific region to look after its environment. This is reflected in the Mission
       Statement of SPREP that calls on the organization, "to promote co-operation in
       the South Pacific region and to provide assistance in order to protect and


                                                                                            1
APPENDIX B
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
        improve its environment and to ensure sustainable development for present and
        future generations."
       SPTO: The South Pacific Tourism Organization, established in 1983 as the
        Tourism Council of the South Pacific, is the mandated organization representing
        tourism in the region. It has 18 government members and its mission is to market
        and develop tourism in the South Pacific.
       USP: The University of the South Pacific is the premier provider of tertiary
        education in the Pacific region and an international center of excellence for
        teaching, research consulting and training on all aspects of Pacific culture,
        environment and human resource development needs. Established in 1968, USP
        is jointly owned by the governments of 12 member countries: Cook Islands, Fiji,
        Kiribati, the Marshall Islands, Nauru, Niue, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tokelau,
        Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu. The University has campuses in all member
        countries.
       PPA: The Pacific Power Association is an inter-governmental agency to promote
        the direct cooperation of the Pacific island power utilities in technical training,
        exchange of information, sharing of senior management and engineering
        expertise and other activities of benefit to the members. The PPA’s objective is to
        improve the quality of power in the region through a cooperative effort among
        the utilities, private sector and regional aid donors.
       PASO: The Pacific Aviation Safety Office is a regional international organization
        overseeing aviation safety and security in the Pacific Islands using guidelines
        provided by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). PASO was
        created on 11 June 2005, as a result of the Pacific Islands Civil Aviation Safety
        and Security Treaty (PICASST) and is managed by a permanent staff based in
        Port Vila, Vanuatu. States that are currently parties to the PICASST are Cook
        Islands, Kiribati, Niue, Nauru, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands,
        Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu. Countries that are also members of PASO, but not
        parties to the PICASST are Australia, Fiji, and New Zealand.




2
Appendix B. Assessment of the World Bank
Program in Tonga
This appendix is an adjunct to the main report. It is not intended as a free-standing CPE
on the World Bank in Tonga. It provides additional underpinning and evidence for the
overall story of the Bank’s relevance and effectiveness in the PICs provided in the main
report.

Tonga’s Development Challenges
Tonga illustrates many of the challenges that the PICs face. Tonga has a population of
just over 100,000 (but estimates are that between 100,000 and 200,000 Tongans live
abroad, mainly in Australia, New Zealand, and the United States). The country was
governed by the monarchy until 2008. In November 2006, pro-democracy riots took
place in the capital Nuku’alofa. In 2008, the King took a number of steps to establish a
constitutional monarchy, including ceding power to the Prime Minister and divesting
many of the key economic entities in the country. In 2010 a new Parliament with most
of the seats democratically elected, cemented the political progress that had taken place.
Further elections and an orderly transition of power took place in 2014.

The economy of Tonga was buffeted by a series of shocks during the period under
review. Given its heavy reliance on imported fuel and food, the price increases prior to
the global financial crisis impacted GDP growth and weighed heavily on the poor.
During the global crisis, remittance receipts which were 30 percent of GDP in 2007–08
fell to 22.5 percent of GDP in 2009–10. At the same time tourist receipts fell by 13.3
percent in 2009–10. After this came a series of natural disasters. A Tsunami in
September 2009 was followed by cyclones in February 2010, February 2011 and
February 2012. As a consequence, economic growth in Tonga declined from an annual
average of 2.6 percent over the 2008–10 period to -0.1 percent over the 2011–13 period.

Absolute poverty is rare, and social indicators are relatively strong. In 2014 GDP per
capita was $4,114 with a human development ranking of 100 out of 188 countries.
Strong family and church networks, as well as extensive subsistence agricultural
production, mean that food poverty is virtually nonexistent. There is almost universal
literacy, with 98 percent of children ages 6–14 enrolled in school, and little or no
difference between enrollment rates for boys and girls. Health indicators have
improved steadily, and access to safe water and sanitation is widespread. Life
expectancy is 73 years for women and 70 years for men. About 98 percent of Tongan
women give birth in the presence of skilled birth attendants. Under-5 mortality is 23 per


                                                                                           3
APPENDIX B
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
1,000 live births (the best of any of the Bank’s Pacific island member countries), and
continues to decline steadily. Maternal mortality is low, with an average of two
reported deaths per year associated with birth related complications.

The Bank’s Strategy and Program in Tonga
The Tonga country assistance strategy (CAS) was prepared in 2010 and covered the
period from FY11 to FY14. The CAS signaled a considerable scaling up of analytic and
financial support for Tonga (and the other PICs). It identified connectivity as the Bank’s
major contribution over the previous five years, through the support for increased
temporary migration opportunities and the encouragement of telecoms reform that led
to the opening of the market for mobile telephones. In addition to the two broad themes
in the regional framework (connectivity and resilience), the CAS added a third:
Supporting policy reform to strengthen growth prospects and improve service delivery.
Going forward the Bank planned to make increased use of the development policy
operation (DPO) instrument which would support Tonga during the very difficult
period it was going through at the time, given the combination of coping with the
global crisis and with natural disasters. There was to be emphasis on support for
improved governance and public financial management (PFM) reforms. Under the
theme of Building resilience against shocks, the Bank looked to tap the Global Facility
for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) to provide support for integrated
adaptation and disaster risk management (DRM) activities. The GFDRR would also be
used to “climate proof” future infrastructure investment. The CAS also declares the
intention in small island states like Tonga to be “more nimble in project preparation and
give greater attention to implementation support. The Bank can at times be more of an
elephant than a lynx.” Between its first project in 1987 and the most recent one before
the CAS in 2008, the Bank had committed a total of $33 million of the International
Development Association (IDA) and trust fund money in six operations in 20 years. In
the CAS period it proposed to commit $50 million in eight operations in four years.

Bank Support for Building Resilience in Tonga
BUILDING ECONOMIC RESILIENCE

Tonga’s fiscal situation worsened as a consequence of natural disasters and the global
financial crisis. The 2011 CAS noted the growing fiscal deficit as revenues declined
through reduced tourism and particularly, lower levels of remittances. The spike in
petroleum and food prices in 2008 was also a serious problem even though prices fell
subsequently. As a consequence Tonga’s debt level which had been maintained at
around 30 percent of GDP until 2008 had moved to above the 50 percent of GDP
threshold, considered as high risk, by 2010. In addition the government had adopted



4
                                                                                          APPENDIX B
                                                       ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
expansionary fiscal policies to provide a stimulus to the economy during the global
crisis so that the fiscal deficit had risen to 7 percent of GDP by 2011. Starting in 2012, the
government made a strong effort to get the deficit under control. Table B.1.present
trends in central government ratios since 2010.

Starting in 2010 donor funding increased to provide budget support for Tonga during
this period including four World Bank DPOs. In September 2009 the Tongan authorities
asked the Bank to extend a DPO to assist the government respond to the cumulative
external shocks. Other donors such as the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and
European Commission had already provided or agreed to provide budget support, and
delays could potentially affect service delivery in Tonga. The Bank initiated a series of
DPOs along with analytic work and technical assistance for supporting Tonga’s
economic resilience. The first DPO, approved in 2010, was focused on the energy sector.
The subsequent DPOs supported a wide range of measures to improve public financial
management in each of the areas identified above. The second World Bank DPO was
approved in November 2011, the third in November 2012, the fourth in October 2013
and the fifth in August 2014. The total IDA funding provided under these four latter
DPOs amounted to about $24 million. The focus of these DPOs in the fiscal context was
on strengthening public financial management and fiscal policy. The DPOs played an
important role by swinging the weight of the donors behind particular policy measures
and providing a seal of approval. As in many other countries they were an especially
useful tool for the Ministry of Finance in its inter-actions with the line ministries.

Table B.1. Central Government Finance Indicators over 2010–15




Source: IMF Article IV, 2015 (extract from table 5).




                                                                                                  5
APPENDIX B
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
Supporting Increased Revenue

The DPOs supported a range of measures to strengthen domestic taxes (see figure B.1).
This included Cabinet approval of a bill to amend the Income tax act to provide for
simplified taxation for small business and to provide for the taxation of extractive
industries (DPO 2013). In addition, based on the 2013 IFC/World Bank investment
incentive report, a new revenue policy committee was established to review/advise on
all requests of discretionary tax exemptions and to approve a framework for
standardized and transparent investment incentives in priority economic sectors (DPO
2014). Also given the concerns that were emerging about the prevalence of
noncommunicable diseases (NCD) particularly those related to smoking and obesity,
adjustments were made to the excise duty regime for the associated products, based on
the 2012 World Bank financing options for financing the health sector in Tonga report
and the 2014 World Bank NCD roadmap.

                     Figure B.1. Tax Revenue in Tonga




                     Source: IMF Article IV, 2015.

Improving Public Expenditure Efficiency

For public expenditure efficiency the Bank combined agreement on the DPO with just
in time support to the Ministry of Finance. A joint public expenditure review (PER) was
carried out with the authorities and in coordination with other donors. It was
completed in 2012 and has helped guide subsequent government decision-making. The
key to the fiscal strengthening that has taken place since 2011 has been the
implementation of centralized control of recruitment and a partial hiring freeze in 2011–
12 to improve management of the public service wage bill (DPO 2011). However, the
2014 PEFA noted a deterioration in the effectiveness of payroll controls (from B+ to C+)
compared to the 2010 PEFA) (see figure B.2). Recently, when the Prime Minister agreed
on a salary increase of 28 percent for public servants, the Bank provided analytic work
to demonstrate that this was not affordable and the amount was reduced. The Bank has
also been working on rationalizing expenditures e.g., through better health sector


6
                                                                                 APPENDIX B
                                              ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
procurement Overall, the composition of expenditure out-turn compared to budget has
improved from 2010 to 2014 (see figure B.2).

Improving Debt Management

In 2011 the DPO enabled agreement to be reached on not incurring additional debt.
Tonga was in debt distress but the government wanted to continue borrowing. The
DPO was the instrument which enabled agreement to be reached on no further
borrowing. In the words of a senior official “We asked the politicians, do you want to be
known as the government that bankrupted the country?” Tonga’s public debt currently
stands around 50 percent of GDP. The recent Article IV welcomes the government
conservative policy (no external commercial borrowing and limited concessional
borrowing) and notes that Tonga remains at moderate risk of debt distress.

However the International Monetary Fund (IMF) notes that though Tonga has
introduced a three year budget framework in 2013 it has not set a clear fiscal target for
the medium term, and that it would be important for the authorities to gradually
increase the fiscal surplus to around 1 percent of GDP so that external debt stabilizes at
35–40 percent of GDP, to allow the country to safely absorb external shocks.1

Improving PFM Systems

For improved PFM the focus has been on getting the basic budget process as accurate,
quick and transparent as possible (see box B.1). The Bank has not supported more
ambitious approaches such as the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) and
Government Financial Management Information Systems (GFMIS). The approach has
been to try to fix major problems rather than move to best practice. The Bank has helped
introduce BOOST, an Excel-based system for managing public expenditure. As far as
the GFMIS is concerned, ADB has already spent $2.5 million on the system in Tonga,
but serious issues remain. In the view of a senior official in the Ministry of Finance in
Tonga an upgrade of the system is badly needed. “There are still areas of the budget
and accounts that are handled manually—and this is a nightmare when it comes to the
annual budget with small errors holding up the process. The payroll software is not
connected. There needs to be ongoing support from the Bank and ADB in this area.”

New procurement regulations were introduced in 2010 and a new Central Procurement
Unit was established. This remains work in progress however as the Central
Procurement function is still weak given the limited capacity and absence of a




1   Source: IMF 2015 Article IV, para 10.


                                                                                             7
APPENDIX B
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
procurement career stream in the PICs. The PEFA assessment noted a deterioration in
procurement processes (from C to D) between 2010 and 2014 (see figure B.2).

Overall the evaluation rates the outcomes achieved for fiscal sustainability in Tonga as
Satisfactory. Interlocutors were positive in their assessment of both the analytic work
carried out by the Bank as preparation for the DPOs, and the just in time support
provided. Improvements are reflected in both the fiscal data (see table B.1) and a
number of Tonga’s PEFA scores (see figure B.2), in particular significant improvement
in the oversight of fiscal risk from public enterprises, and the quality and timeliness of
in-year budget reports. Nonetheless, some PFM areas still require attention including
the effectiveness of tax collection, the internal and external audit, public procurement
processes and revitalized effectiveness of payroll controls. All the CAS milestones were
achieved (see table B.2). The DPOs themselves directly strengthened the dialogue
between the government and donors on PFM reforms, as the CAS had envisioned.


    Box B.1. PFM Measures Supported By The DPOs In Tonga
       Better budget reporting through the introduction of in year budget reporting system on
        monthly and quarterly basis (DPO 2011);
       Reform of the budget calendar to improve transparency in the process (DPO 2011);
       Publication of audited accounts of major SOE (DPO 2011);
       Publication of quarterly reports on the website on a timely basis (DPO 2012);
       Submission to parliament of the audited financial statement up to FY2010–11 (DPO 2012);
       Implementation of a treasury single account for all government funded operations (DPO
        2012);
       Approval of procurement reform action plan (DPO 2013);
       Restructuring and staffing of the central procurement unit and setting up of new
        threshold (DPO 2013);
       Implementation of a new policy to prevent misuse of contingency fund (DPO 2014);
       Passing of an appropriation act to standardize between budget sub-programs and the
        issuing of a treasury circular to introduce new controls on transfers between programs
        (DPO 2014).
    Source: The authors (from DPO’s project Documents).




8
                                                                                              APPENDIX B
                                                           ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA

                            Figure B.2. Change In PEFA Indicators In Tonga Over
                            FY10–14




                            Source: Tonga PEFA report.

Table B.2. TONGA: Achievement of CAS Outcomes for Fiscal Sustainability
    CAS Outcomes Expected (FY11–14)                                                Achievement
    Budget revenue estimates to be improved, including through   Achieved. Revenue outcomes have been close to
    better data systems.                                         budget estimates in recent years.
    Debt management system functioning with new external         Achieved. Government has limited new external
    assistance on grant or concessional terms only.              assistance to grant or concessional terms.
    Quality of PFM systems improved as reflected in improved     Achieved. PEFA scores improved from in 2010 to
    PEFA scores—particularly in audit—from 2010 baseline.        in 2014.
Source: Authors.

BUILDING ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE IN TONGA

In Tonga the Bank’s interventions in support of environmental resilience have focused
on post-disaster housing reconstruction. Three emergency response operations have
each focused on housing reconstruction combined with some strengthening of disaster
response capacity. There has been little support for physical risk reduction other than
through directly constructing or repairing housing (and limited support for improving
building codes). The first operation (after Cyclone Waka in 2002) supported 470 new
houses, along with reconstruction and retrofits of public buildings and establishment
and support for a national disaster management office. The second operation (after a
2009 tsunami) supported construction of 73 houses, similarly of stronger standard and
on higher, less vulnerable ground, but at high cost.2 Beyond reconstruction, support
was provided for capacity building (hazard assessment, Geographic Information
System training, and creation of community disaster planning) but not for other risk

2
    Actual costs per house were 32 percent higher than expected.


                                                                                                                  9
APPENDIX B
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
reduction measures. A third operation (after Cyclone Ivan in 2014) again focused on
housing construction, remains active, and has seen considerable implementation
problems (see box B.2). The decision to focus operations on housing was driven by a
recognition that most disaster damage was for housing, combined with social
development goals for supporting vulnerable people in remote outer islands.

The overall impact of these operations in Tonga has been modest. Newly constructed
houses are somewhat more resistant to cyclones and are much less likely to be
destroyed or damaged—though studies carried out during the third project noted that
designs from the first two projects did not meet necessary cyclone standards. Yet the
model of direct provision of housing is expensive, and 100 percent public financing of
private assets may not be the most efficient use of scarce funds. The projects have
affected only a small portion of at-risk assets, and so there has been little impact on the
overall vulnerability of Tonga to natural disasters. At current funding levels donor
funds will not be sufficient to support climate-proofing of a high proportion of assets,
so project interventions might be more effective if they aimed to affect public and
private decision-making. The current strategy also risks creating expectations that will
be hard to meet in future—which is already a contributing factor in problems facing the
current project. If the Bank is to continue with housing provision, it could consider
alternative models with at least some level of matching support from those receiving
houses, but still providing technical oversight on housing design and materials quality.3

The Bank has also supported financial disaster risk management in Tonga through the
PCRAFI. Insurance products have been functioning in a pilot stage for three years in
Samoa, Tonga, and Vanuatu. Two payouts have been made to date, to Tonga and
Vanuatu, each of roughly $2 million, and both very rapidly after the disaster.
Government officials in Tonga interviewed by IEG were enthusiastic about the system,
and understood the benefits and limitations. Policy engagement and dialog with finance
ministries through the PCRAFI has helped the Bank increase awareness of the need for
improved DRM.

Improvements to disaster risk management capacity in Tonga have been incremental.
Disaster plans have been created. Hazard risk information is more widely available,
especially for tsunamis, but there is little evidence that this had led to behavioral change



3
 Another interesting model for housing reconstruction is that used in Samoa after Cyclone
Evan involving concessional lending for private reconstruction, discussed below. But that
model would not be feasible for the Tongan outer islands; the model requires a credible lender
with access to customers, and requires a substantial private market for construction and
materials, which does not exist in low population remote islands.


10
                                                                                        APPENDIX B
                                                     ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
by public or private entities or by communities.4 Some improvements have not been
sustained.5 Training programs have had limited impact due to staff attrition: most of the
users trained in spatial information under Bank projects have left the public service,
either emigrating or moving to the private sector. While there has been ongoing policy
dialog with senior officials, there is not yet much evidence of change in building
disaster and climate risk into investments outside of donor projects.


    Box B.2. Housing in Ha’Apai
    After Cyclone Ian in January 2014, the Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction project was designed to
    rebuild and repair houses in Ha’Apai, a remote outer island group with a population of
    roughly 6,600. The project used a similar model to two previous disaster response projects in
    Tonga, which also supported housing. But this time, there was a disconnect between the
    available level of funding and expectations by the community. In previous projects, the Bank
    had financed two-room houses for a large number of applicants. But the level of damage here
    was higher and funds were scarce. So the Bank used a model where 350 households would
    receive one room houses while 200 others received two room houses, based on criteria that
    aimed to provide the larger houses to those with greater need or higher vulnerability. This
    created social and political challenges; the one room houses were seen by communities as
    being too small and “undignified.” Politicians made promises to voters beyond what the
    project funding could support or what were indicated by eligibility criteria. The beneficiary
    lists were revised multiple times, and thousands of complaints were registered.
    Another challenge was on who would live in the new houses, as most destroyed houses were
    not owner-occupied. The Bank insisted as in previous projects that those living in houses at
    the time of the storm would have guaranteed long term occupancy rights in the houses
    receiving project support, as they were the intended project beneficiaries. But this time the
    government argued that this was not fair to nonresident house-owners; there were intense
    negotiations which ended with an agreement requiring 5 year occupancy rights for those
    living there, after which the houses would revert to full control of the original owner. But this
    agreement had to be sought individually from each owner before reconstruction could
    proceed. While agreements from owners were obtained after some delay and house
    construction was mostly completed by January 2016, the agreements provided only 6 months
    of guaranteed occupancy, meaning that the targeted beneficiaries face uncertainty going
    forward. Recognizing these issues, the Bank is supporting a learning exercise aimed at
    supporting smoother future implementation.




4
 For example, hazard maps have had limited use. The maps led to proposals to increase use of
culverts in vulnerable areas, but these were not constructed due to budget limitations.
5The emergency operations center constructed under the first project is no longer used by the
emergency management office, who have been moved elsewhere temporarily. It turns out that
the site was within the high tsunami risk zone, and so there are plans to construct a new office
further inland.


                                                                                                    11
APPENDIX B
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
The Bank’s support for environmental resilience in Tonga is rated Moderately
Satisfactory. The first CAS objective is less relevant for the period as a whole, relating to
a specific disaster in 2009 and the reconstruction effort based on that. While earlier
reconstruction and rehabilitation targets were largely met, in the most recent disaster in
Ha’apai the Bank has struggled. On the second outcome, the Bank supported
institutional strengthening, but as discussed, the results have been mixed with
difficulties in retaining the staff that have been trained and in utilizing hazard risk
information (see table B.3).

Table B.3. Tonga Achievement of CAS Outcomes for Environmental Resilience
 CAS Outcomes Expected (FY11–14)                                                    Achievement
 Niuatoputapu reconstruction                                                           Achieved
 Improved national disaster management and planning                                Partially achieved
 capacity
Note: Niuatoputapu is an outer island of Tonga that was severely impacted by the Samoan Tsunami or 2009. The island has
about 1,000 inhabitants. The CAS indicator was to finance 85 houses and rehabilitate 60 other buildings; 73 houses were
financed by the Bank project and 12 by other donors (costs were higher than expected). There were 38 houses rehabbed, plus
16 other buildings, but the ICR and PAD say the initial target was 40 houses not 60.
BUILDING SOCIAL RESILIENCE IN TONGA

Fostering Migration

The most important contribution of the Bank to social resilience in Tonga has been its
involvement in the migration issue since 2008. The Bank provided knowledge of other
temporary migration schemes worldwide (e.g., the Canadian scheme with Jamaica) and
credibility, and this was instrumental in particular in giving the New Zealand
authorities the confidence to go forward. There were issues of how to prepare workers
for the scheme. The Bank learned from piloting the scheme. It was able to help the
Employment Services Unit in Tonga with the kinds of information they needed to
gather and the systems they needed to have in place. The evaluation of the scheme that
has been carried out found that the selection of migrants in Tonga was pro-poor and
that this made a significant contribution to poverty reduction.

Health

In Tonga the health sector program supported successful efforts to rehabilitate Tonga’s
hospital services. By strengthening core tertiary care, this has provided a foundation to
underpin continuing improvements in health service delivery. Tonga’s key health
indicators—already among the best in the Pacific—have continued to improve during
this period. The Vaiola hospital reconstruction was undertaken in close cooperation
with parallel Australian and Japanese investments. The Bank financed the first phase.
The Bank’s program had two key policy elements—health financing and health



12
                                                                                   APPENDIX B
                                                ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
systems. A World Bank supported study looked at the possibility of developing social
insurance to cover medical costs. The Bank supported the introduction of user fees, paid
by working age people over 14 and under 55. The Bank also supported the establishing
of a Health Promotion Fund to educate people about the need for better nutrition and
try to stem the growing epidemic of obesity.6 The second Economic Reform support
DPO included a prior action on tobacco taxation.7

Education

The Bank has provided support for education in Tonga over the period with mixed
results. A Bank-supported education project in Tonga appears to have had limited
impact however. A $1 million IDA credit was provided for a $5 million Education
Support Project in 2005 with cofinancing from New Zealand. The core of the project was
a school grant program with funds provided directly to schools for nonsalary
expenditures to be selected from an approved list by principals and parents. The project
completion report was reviewed by IEG in 2013.8 The IEG review found that the project
objective, of improving the quality of both primary and secondary education, while
highly relevant, was unrealistically broad and there was no clear results chain linking
the project investments to the outcome. Achievement of the outcomes was rated as
unsatisfactory. In addition the IEG review points to serious implementation issues
particularly in weak monitoring and evaluation and the lack of any audit of the project
on completion. The project also failed in achieving a better budgetary balance between
salaries and key nonsalary expenditures for teaching materials. At the end of the
project, salaries continued to account for 95 percent of the Ministry’s budget. As far as
greater involvement by the local communities in decisions on use of funds for nonsalary
expenditures, initially the project appears to have had some effect, but the IEG review
reports that by the end of project decisions were being made by the administrators (see
table B.4).

The Bank is now providing assistance through the early age of childhood education
through the PEARL project supported by the Global Partnership for education and the
Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID). The project works at the

6
 Ninety percent of the population of Tonga is considered overweight using NIH interpretation
of body mass index (BMI) data, with more than 60% of those obese. 70% of Tongan women
aged 15–85 are obese. Tonga and nearby Nauru have the world's highest overweight and obese
populations.
7
 “The Recipient’s Ministry of Finance and National Planning has, through its 2014/2015 Budget
Statement, made adjustments to the excise duty regime in line with NCDs health policy.”
(Tonga Development Policy Credit Program document).
8
    IEG Review of the Tonga Education Support Project: ICRR13813; 02/08/2013.


                                                                                           13
APPENDIX B
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
policy and intervention fronts to improve efficiency by improving the students’
readiness and preparedness early in life. This initiative is expected to help Tonga make
a transition from a focus on enrolments to a focus on improved learning outcomes.
Bank support in the education sector in Tonga included a significant number of studies
of the Systems Approach for Better Education Results, which contributed to provide
technical advice to the Pacific Benchmarking for Education Results initiative, led by
Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. This analytic work looked not
only at student and child outcomes in early childhood and early grade reading, but also
at the state of policies and the enabling environment in early childhood, teacher
policies, and student assessments, as well as the effectiveness of education expenditure
(PER).

Table B.4. Tonga: Achievement of CAS Outcomes for Education

 CAS Outcomes Expected (FY11–14)                                              Achievement
 Net enrolment, dropout, retention rates and student   While these rates have improved somewhat this is
 test performance improved from 2005 baselines         not attributable to the Bank’s intervention and the
                                                       results train linking the Bank program to this is
                                                       unclear.

 Increase local participation and accountability       Partially achieved. The approach supported by the
 through introducing school based management, with     project has not been sustained.
 schools engaging communities in planning,
 budgeting, and results assessment


Gender

While Tonga has made significant strides in women’s access to health and education,
providing economic opportunities for women remains a challenge. IFC’s 2010 Tonga
Gender and Investment Climate Reform Assessment states that “women’s economic
participation is constrained by gender specific elements of the legal framework for
property rights and employment, weakness in women’s access to justice through the
courts, absence of public private dialogue with women business people, and gender
regulatory constraints to start a business.” Another problem is that, while women are
well represented among owners of micro-enterprises, the evidence is that very few of
them graduate into ownership of small and medium enterprises (SMEs). The view is
that this reflects lack of access to finance, but also the inadequacy of networks and
support systems for women entrepreneurs.

Other significant issues are the representation of women in Parliament and the
pervasiveness of domestic violence. While fully half of the CEOs in the government of
Tonga are women (five years ago there were none), in Parliament, the high



14
                                                                                   APPENDIX B
                                                ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
representation of traditional leaders who are mostly men, brings down the share of
women overall. With regard to domestic violence, at the time of writing, there is a
serious internal debate in Tonga as to whether to become a signatory to Convention for
Elimination of Discrimination Against Women. This is an important instrument for
promoting a national commitment to reducing domestic violence. The hold-up does not
relate to this aspect of the convention, but to its requirement for rights to land
ownership by women which is opposed by the traditional chiefs.

The Bank has mainstreamed gender issues in the design of infrastructure projects in
Tonga. The Bank program has not addressed directly issues such as domestic violence
and land ownership for women. However, through its project lending, the Bank has
played an important role in pushing gender equality in the energy sector for example.
The electricity authority is now using women linemen in the outer islands and they are
proving they can do the job. They are also recruiting youth to do the job, with the extra
incentive that they could move into jobs of this kind abroad. More women are now
going into training. This is seen as not just ticking a box, but good for business.

Bank Support for Improving Competitiveness in Tonga
THE BUSINESS CLIMATE AND THE FINANCIAL SECTOR

IFC (together with ADB) has taken the lead in working with the government of Tonga
to improve the enabling environment and lower the costs of doing business while the
Bank has focused on the regulatory environment. The legislative framework for
business activity in Tonga was very weak at the start of the period. The government
worked closely with IFC on the business environment, and the country is now highly
rated in the ease of doing business.9 In the words of a senior official: “IFC has been of
great assistance in reducing the cost of doing business.” The Bank has been supporting
independent regulators in areas such as energy, telecoms and water. Given the small
size of the market the Bank has argued to a single multi-sectoral regulator rather than
separate regulators for each utility.

 The Bank has also provided support for enhancing the enabling environment in Tonga
through its DPOs. Prior actions included the approval of two bills on receivership and
on business registration to improve the business environment, and Cabinet approval of
a policy framework for foreign investment in order to open the fisheries and agriculture
sectors to foreign investment.



9In Tonga, there has been a large expansion of SME between 2010 and 2014. In 2010, 1,013
businesses were registered versus 3584 in 2014.


                                                                                           15
APPENDIX B
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
Doing Business indicators show that Tonga remains competitive compared to other
PICS though this should be interpreted with caution due to a limited number of
respondents, limited geographical coverage and information availability (see figure
B.3). Tonga ranks lower in protecting investors and registering property.

Access to finance is still an obstacle in Tonga for MSMEs. In 2013 only 28 percent of the
population had access to financial services, for example. Micro-enterprises and SMEs in
the PICs identify access to finance and access to markets as key constraints. For their
part, financial institutions identify lack of collateral and information asymmetry as key
limitations they face in expanding lending to SMEs. Getting credit remains difficult,
with limited publicly available credit information, and insolvency resolution can be
time consuming and costly. The information provided by Tonga’s credit bureau is
perceived as incomplete and this hinders the screening process of borrowers. Lack of
legal titles to customary land, and an inability to transfer ownership, also impedes
access to finance. As a result, banks tend to concentrate on extending credit to larger
established businesses.

 Figure B.3. How Tonga Ranks In The Ease Of Doing Business




 Source: IMF 2015 Article IV report.

IFC has been instrumental in supporting banking development and building the
capacity of the banks to lend. IFC has provided support to the Bank South Pacific (BSP),
the largest local bank in Papua New Guinea, with branches in the Solomon Islands, Fiji,
Tonga and Samoa. IFCs 2010 investment in the BSP has led to a major expansion. IFC
owns 9.5 percent of BSP. This is now the only bank able to compete with ANZ bank in
the region. IFC has steered BSP toward an increased focus on small business. Partly as a
consequence of this, BSP has now reached 200,000 formerly unbanked people.




16
                                                                                              APPENDIX B
                                                           ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
The Tonga CAS had three outcomes relating to the business environment, all of which
were achieved (see table B.5).

Table B.5. Achievement of CAS Outcomes for Business Environment
 CAS Outcomes Expected (FY11–14)                                   Achievement
 Improved business environment, as reflected in Doing              Achieved
 Business indicators
 Reduced cost of connectivity translating into reduced business    Achieved (see discussion under Telecoms below)
 transaction costs
 Reduced number of procedures for obtaining a business             Achieved
 license
INFRASTRUCTURE

Aviation

The Bank has been engaged with aviation in Tonga since 2000 when it provided support
for corporatizing the airports authority. The Bank assisted with the transfer of assets
and people and the setting up of the legal process. In 2007 Tonga Airports Limited was
established. From 2005 to 2007 the facilities were starved of budget and seriously sub-
standard. Airlines were threatening to pull out. After TAL was set up, a comprehensive
list of investment needs was prepared including upgrading of the paving and this has
been supported under the Bank Transport Sector Consolidation Project. The Bank also
supported technical consolidation, safety equipment, technological support and
surveillance equipment.

The Tonga CAS included an outcome on aviation and marine safety. The latter reflected
a ferry disaster which occurred in 2009 with substantial loss of life. The outcome has
been substantially achieved (see table B.6).

Table B.6. Achievement of CAS Outcomes for Aviation and Marine Safety

 CAS Outcomes Expected (FY11–14)                                                              Achievement
 Improve civil aviation and maritime sector compliance with international safety           Substantially Achieved
 standards

Roads

The Bank’s support for the Tonga Road Transport Rehabilitation project has contributed
to strengthening the management of infrastructure assets. The main focus of the project
is on institutional change, primarily to support improved road maintenance by
increasingly contracting such functions to local private sector firms. It was not easy to
sell this radically different approach to the government but the timing of the project,
during the global crisis, helped since the argument could be made that it had the



                                                                                                                17
APPENDIX B
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
potential to provide counter-cyclical employment opportunities at a time of economic
slowdown. The Bank initiated a change management program as part of the
preparation, with a specialist from the Bank to help consolidate the Ministry of
Infrastructure and focus it on its core functions. Management of a quarry for example
was transferred to the private sector, and the Department of Meteorology was
transferred to the Ministry of Environment. The Bank is now providing additional
finance for the project.

The key component of the project—the outsourcing of routine road maintenance—
sealing, potholes, branch-cutting signage and drainage—has continued to be a source of
tension with government ministers. Some politicians have wanted to revert to force
account for carrying out the maintenance and the Bank and the Australian government
which has co-financed the project have had to take a strong stand on the need for
outsourcing, fortunately with the support of the Ministry of Finance. A further review
of the outsourcing is scheduled to be undertaken with the additional financing that has
been provided. A key part of the assessment will be the sustainability of the approach. 8
to 12 companies have been bidding for the work and it has had a positive impact on the
development of the private sector. In the view of a senior official in the government of
Tonga, there has been a major improvement over the past two or three years. “Bank
support has enabled the Ministry and Department to focus on their core functions. I
worked for the Ministry for 23 years, using Force Account (i.e., direct contracting by the
Ministry) for 20 years. There were endless problems especially corruption and safety
issues around road and worker safety. The new contract management section is
working well. Before the project there was not a single contractor. Now there is a group
who have received proper training and in some cases have gone ahead to obtain
equipment. Most of the former workers were hired by the new contractors. There were
no redundancies. Now they get better paid for working, instead of being paid for doing
nothing.“

The Tonga CAS outcomes for the road sector have been achieved (see table B.7). Some
experts reported that increased expenditure on road maintenance had reduced road
travel time, though no quantitative evidence was collected. However, there are still
implementation problems in contracting. Contractors may need longer-term contracts if
they are to invest in new equipment needed for maintenance. And many of the initial
contracts had to be cancelled as winning bidders were unable to complete the works at
the price they bid, and work had to be completed by other contractors. While the reform
efforts so far represent a promising start, there is little as yet little evidence of cost
savings or quality improvements. An upcoming review of the experience by the finance
ministry may offer additional evidence on impacts on cost and quality.




18
                                                                                  APPENDIX B
                                               ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
Table B.7. Achievement of CAS Outcomes for Road Sector
 CAS Outcomes Expected (FY11–14)                            Achievement
 Consolidate MOT as unified transport sector                  Achieved
 policy, planning and regulatory ministry
 Strengthened domestic private sector road                   Achieved
 maintenance capacity

Telecoms

In Tonga the Bank Group has played a significant role in the past few years in
supporting telecoms reform to encourage competition and allow new private sector
operators. Due to concerns in the governance and management of the Tonga
Communication Corporation (TCC), the Minister of Public Enterprises commissioned
an independent report on TCC in 2010. The final report, completed in January 2012,
identified investment and management decisions made by TCC that have led to
substantial investment in inappropriate assets and weakened overall financial
performance. The Tonga DPO 2013 supported approval of a policy to restructure TCC
through the introduction of private participation in order to improve its services and
profitability. With the opening of the market, the Bank has been helping to put the
reforms more securely in place by providing policy advice to strengthen regulation. An
IFC investment of $6.8 million encouraged total new investments by Digicel of $29
million—the largest single investment in the country. Mobile phone usage has increased
from about 6 percent of the Tongan population to almost 60 percent in only a few years.

In 2009, when the Tonga Cable company was established by the government, the World
Bank and ADB were approached for funding. Since the government was not able to
borrow, 80 percent of the project was funded by grants from the Bank and ADB. In
August 2013, the cable was commissioned. The impact has been huge. Capacity has
increased about 8 fold. This has opened up capacity for research and has assisted in
education. It has attracted new companies to Tonga and has enabled families to Skype
to their relatives abroad at low cost. It has also impacted tourism. A particular benefit
has been in medicine where, for example, mammogram images can be sent to a
company in New Zealand which reads them and patients can be treated in Tonga. In
the words of the authorities, “Without the financial support of the Bank and ADB there
is no doubt that this would not have materialized.” However, some experts argue that
prices remain higher than they could be, and utilization of the new capacity is lower
than it could be, in part because of the monopoly nature of the newly created cable
company. The Tonga CAS outcomes for telecoms have been substantially achieved (see
table B.8). While the quantitative targets below were not met by the completion date of
the CAS, substantial progress was made and continues to be made toward meeting
these. The objective of a competitive environment has been met.


                                                                                         19
APPENDIX B
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
Table B.8. Tonga: Achievement of CAS Outcomes for Telecoms and Information and
Communications Technology

 CAS Outcomes Expected (FY11–14)                                                     Achievement
 Internet use to increase from 15% to 40% of the population                Not met by CAS completion date
 Wholesale Connectivity (bandwidth) costs to be reduced from $3,500        but substantial progress has been
 megabits per second per month to $800 Mbps/month or lower, flowing                      made
 through to reduced retail internet and telecoms costs
 Regulatory environment that allows competition with equal access by all              Achieved
 market players to buy international bandwidth on a fair and transparent
 basis at the cable landing station


Energy

In Tonga, the Bank’s entry point has been support for the preparation of a
comprehensive energy road map 2010-2020. This establishes targets, defines the
necessary regulatory frameworks, identifies the role and prospects of renewable energy,
and reviews the petroleum supply chain. In Tonga the National Power Utility has done
a good job, but the government is moving slowly with implementing the road map and
appears to lack the capacity to follow through. The Bank is providing support for
setting up an implementation office. In the words of one Bank staffer: “Tonga was the
first and we struggled. The roadmap needs to be backed up by a competent
implementing agency.” The government arranged for the Bank to present the roadmap
at a cabinet meeting and endorsed it, and subsequently there have been a number of
meetings with development partners. The roadmap is also providing the building
blocks for an Energy Act which would for example create the potential for independent
power producers, and require that all government procurement should follow energy
efficiency standards. In the Bank’s view one of the lessons emerging from the Tonga
experience is the need to put in place an Energy engineering master plan for the sector
as a follow up to the direction-setting role of the roadmap.

The Tonga roadmap has played an important role in establishing the potential of
renewables and the cost advantages that solar and wind power represent particularly in
the outer islands. Although the Bank has not been directly engaged in financing
renewables, one interlocutor in Tonga saw the Bank as playing a key role in changing
the philosophy of the energy authorities in Tonga toward renewables, and perhaps as
its most important contribution in the sector. Tonga has now set a target of having 50
percent of its energy generated through renewables by 2020. ADB has been supporting
renewables in Tonga’s outer islands, with New Zealand and Japan supporting wind
power. Another impact of Bank work is that resilience is no longer looked on as a
luxury in Tonga. It is recognized that this needs to be standard in projects. There are
disaster recovery systems in place for all business processes in the energy sector.



20
                                                                                               APPENDIX B
                                                            ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
Bank technical assistance to Tonga has also addressed issues of reducing the cost of
petroleum imports and the potential role of lifeline tariffs. Bank support has provided
the basis for paper to the cabinet looking at the costs and benefits of bypassing Fijian
petroleum storage in terms of the potential impact on fuel security and fuel price
reductions. In the words of one official. “The Bank’s advice is much appreciated. It
lends credibility to the eventual approach that is adopted.” Another area raised by the
Bank that is getting some traction is the option of adopting lifeline tariffs. This has been
implemented with a link to the level of petroleum prices. Lifeline tariffs are factored in
when the price rises above a certain level. As of now this has only required the tariff for
one month, but it remains an option when petroleum prices rise again.

                      Figure B.4. Electricity Industry Tariffs in USD per KW 2011–13




                      Source: IMF 2015 Article IV Report.

The CAS outcomes for energy have only been partially achieved (see table B.9). For the
most part these are still work in progress and were not achieved by the end of the CAS
period reflecting in part the slow implementation of the energy roadmap.

Table B.9. Achievement of CAS Outcomes for the Energy Sector

 CAS Outcomes Expected (FY11–14)                                         Achievement
 Improve petroleum supply chain to reduce price                Not achieved by end of CAS period.
 and volatility of energy supply.
 Increase efficiency of grid power system, including
 reducing technical and nontechnical losses from
 17.5% on Tongatapu grid
 Increase renewable energy for grid power to 20%
 by 2014.


SUPPORT FOR KEY SECTORS WITH GROWTH POTENTIAL: FISHERIES, TOURISM, AND AGRICULTURE

The Bank Group has recently carried out some AAA in Fisheries and Agriculture in
Tonga and has supported the Tourism sector through IFC. In late 2014, the Bank joined
with the International Fund for Agriculture Development and the United Nations


                                                                                                      21
APPENDIX B
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA
Development Programme to support the preparation of the Tonga Agriculture Sector
Plan and the Tonga Fisheries Plan. These plans will aim to guide future investment
decisions in the two sectors.10 The Tonga Agriculture Sector Plan in particular has a
strong focus on building resilience to a changing climate. In the tourism sector, IFC was
engaged in supporting the re-opening of the Gateway Hotel in Tonga through
transaction advice to the government, but disengaged when the government decided to
proceed with a contract which IFC had advised against. The 2013 Tonga DPO included
as a prior action approval of a plan for private sector participation in the management
of the International Dateline Hotel. The government brought the deal to the point of
transaction through a rigorous tender process but was unable to secure a final
agreement, though it signed a new deal in 2015 without the involvement of IFC. IFC is
also playing an important role in exploring various options for promoting tourism in
the region as a whole. In 2012 IFC launched the Pacific Regional Tourism Initiative
(PRTI), with three focus countries—Samoa, Tonga, and Vanuatu. The initiative aimed at
mobilizing $15 million in new investments in tourism infrastructure as well as $30
million in new tourism investment to support up to 4,000 new tourist arrivals across the
three pilot countries over three years.11 Table B.5 notes that tourist arrivals from New
Zealand have increased steadily (and more rapidly than for Samoa and Vanuatu) as
Tonga is becoming a more attractive destination.

                   Figure B.5. Tourism Trends In Selected Island Over 1990–2013




                   Source: IMF 2015 Article IV Report.


10The Tonga Agriculture Sector Plan (TASP) and the Tonga Fisheries Sector Plan (TFSP)
provide the foundation for Tonga’s application to the Bank’s Global Agriculture and Food
Security Program (GAFSP) in mid-2016. This has opened up the opportunity to seek substantial
financing for an agriculture and fisheries sector project that addressed the gaps identified in the
TASP and TFSP.
11
     Project Supervision Report for the Pacific Tourism project FY15 Q4.


22
                                                                                        APPENDIX B
                                                     ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA

OVERALL ASSESSMENT for Tonga Program
Table B.10 below summarizes the ratings under each pillar for the Tonga Program.

Table B.10. Overall Assessment for Tonga Program
               OBJECTIVE               Rating                           COMMENTS
 Pillar 1: Building Resilience
 1. Building Economic Resilience         S

 More efficient public expenditures     MS      Outsourcing of health service delivery and road maintenance,
                                                but more efficient staff allocation needed to moderate the
                                                share of wage bill in current spending
 Sustainable debt management             S      Significant progress supported by DPOs
 Enhanced PFM                            S      Steady improvements and just in time support
 Selected revenue increases              S      Increase in domestic tax, recently focused on tobacco and
                                                sugar
 2. Building Environmental              MS
 Resilience
 Disaster Risk Management               MS      Good progress in general but disappointing outcomes on the
                                                Ha’ai disaster relief support
 Climate Change Adaptation
 3. Building Social Resilience           S
 Increased labor migration              HS      Major beneficiary of the Recognized Seasonal Employer
                                                (RSE) and Seasonal Worker Program (SWP) schemes
 Better health outcomes                  S      Enhanced management and greater emphasis on NCDs
 Better education outcomes              MU      Mixed results, limited project outcomes
 Gender Equality                        MS      Gender effectively mainstreamed in Bank operations but slow
                                                progress on economic opportunity
 Pillar 2: Improving Competitiveness
 1. Building a Stronger Financial       NR      Not strategic but effective support for women’s groups,
 Sector                                         payments etc.
 2. Enhancing legal and regulatory      NR      Not strategic but enhanced private involvement in
 frameworks                                     infrastructure
 3. Improving Infrastructure             S
 Enhanced aviation                      HS      Effective Bank leadership
 Road rehab. and resilience             MS      Major contribution through outsourcing and resilience, yet
                                                reform ownership by the Ministry of Infrastructure has to be
                                                strengthened and very significant impact on outcome are yet
                                                to be seen as more round of biddings take place, and
                                                contractors’ capacity is strengthened
 Telecoms connectivity                   S      Opening sector and investment in enhanced cable
                                                connections
 Energy access and man.                 MU      Good progress on putting energy roadmap together but
                                                implementation has lagged. Efforts have yet to bear fruit to
                                                improve the cost effectiveness of energy use.


                                                                                                           23
APPENDIX B
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN TONGA

 4. Supporting Productive sectors                 NR

 Fisheries management                             NR       Mainly through regional programs
 Tourism development                              NR       IFC efforts are at an early stage
 Agriculture                                      NR
              OVERALL                              S
Note: H = high; HS = highly satisfactory; MS = moderately satisfactory; NR = nonrated.




24
Appendix C. World Bank Group Operational
Program in Tonga FY05–15
Over the FY05–15 period, the World Bank Group committed a total of $135 million of
mostly IDA credits to Tonga. Twenty eight new operations amounting to commitments
of about $135 million were approved during FY05–15, with IDA credits accounting for
77 percent of the total commitments (table C.1). IDA grants to the institutions
implementing World Bank regional projects, amounted to about $12 million (9 percent
of total commitments). IFC investments during the period totaled almost $7 million (5
percent) while trust fund grants commitments to Tonga totaled $9 million (7 percent).
During the period reviewed, 59 percent of the Bank administrative budget was spent on
project supervision, 35 percent on lending and 5 percent on the delivery of AAA (see
table C.8).

Table C.1. World Bank Group Financing Commitments to Tonga, FY05–15
                                                      Commitment
                                      Number of         Amount         Commitment Amount as % of
                                     Commitments     (US$, millions)      Total Commitments
    IDA credits for Tonga                12              104.2                    77
    operations
    IDA grants to regional                  4             11.7                    9
    institutions
    Trust fund grants to Tonga              6             9.4                     7
    IFC investments                         1             6.8                     5
    Trust fund grants to                    5             3.3                     2
    regional institutions
    Total                                  28            135.4                   100
Source: World Bank Business Intelligence database.

The IDA operations approved during the period were mostly investment operations
concentrated in the transport and information and communications technology (ICT)
sector. Overall, investment lending constituted 75 percent of the value and 58 percent of
the number of new IDA operations. Five DPLs amounting to about $25 million were
approved between FY11 and FY15 and were primarily focused on economic policy.1
The sectoral composition of IDA commitments was concentrated in the transport sector,


1The DPLs approved during the period included a $5 million energy development loan
approved in 2011, a series of two economic recovery operations approved in FY12 and FY13,
and another series of two economic DPLs totaling $20.8 million were approved between FY11
and FY15.


                                                                                                   25
APPENDIX C
WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN TONGA FY05–15
with commitments classified under the transport and ICT global practice accounting for
almost half of total lending (see figure C.1). Altogether, five key thematic areas
accounted for the total IDA commitments to Tonga—transport and ICT,
macroeconomics and fiscal management, social, urban, rural and resilience (under
which virtually all disaster risk management operations are classified), education, and
energy and extractives.

                   Figure C.1. IDA Commitments to Tonga by Global Practice,
                   FY05–15
                                5.0                         1.0
                                5%                          1%          Transport & ICT


                                      20.8                              Social, Urban, Rural and
                                      20%        49.9                   Resilience Global Practice
                                                 48%
                                                                        Macro Economics & Fiscal
                                                                        Management
                                        27.5
                                                                        Energy & Extractives
                                        26%

                                                                        Education



                   Source: World Bank Business Intelligence database.

Bank analytic and advisory activities (AAA) informed key areas of Bank Group
engagement in Tonga and also contributed to building client capacity. The Bank
delivered a total of 44 AAA products over the evaluation period at a total cost of $19.4
million including both Bank (administrative) budget and trust fund financing.2
Nonlending technical assistance constituted the main medium of delivery for AAA
support, accounting for 64 percent of the number and 74 percent of the total cost of
AAA products.3 Financial contributions from Bank administered trust funds were an
important factor in the delivery of AAA support, particularly NLTA for which they
financed about 77 percent of the cost of delivery (see table C.2).




2 The44 AAA activities delivered, included 6 products focused specifically on Tonga and 38
products covering the Pacific-region including Tonga. The total cost of delivery ($19.4 million)
included $868,000 for the Tonga specific activities and $18.5 million for the Pacific islands AAA
products.
3The World Bank proportion of NLTA during the same period was 55 percent in terms of
number and 57 percent in terms of value.


26
                                                                                             APPENDIX C
                                                 WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN TONGA FY05–15
Table C.2. World Bank Cost of AAA by Product Line and Funding Source, FY05–15
                                           Cost of AAA: Bank      Cost of AAA: Trust    Total
                                                Budget                  Funds           (US$,
 Product Line                                (US$, millions)        (US$, millions)    millions)    %
 Economic sector work                              2.3                    2.7             5.0      26
 Nonlending technical assistance                   2.2                   12.3            14.5      74
 Total                                             4.5                   15.0            19.5      100
 Percentage                                        23                     77             100
Source: World Bank Business Intelligence database.

Bank analytic products were instrumental in building the knowledge base in strategic
areas such as the transport, health financing, debt management, renewable energy
development and expenditure mapping. Of particular note is the Bank’s role in the
preparation of the Pacific 2020 and Pacific Futures reports which examined the long-
term prospects for the Pacific Islands and sought to identify feasible development paths
and opportunities for the Pacific Islands. Key analytic reports delivered during the
period included reports on; public expenditure management, parametric insurance,
migration and remittances, and on regional ports and shipping. The Bank also provided
hands-on capacity-building support in several areas, ranging from the articulation of a
debt management reform plan to providing guidance on the restructuring of the air
transport sub-sector. Towards the end of the evaluation period joint Bank, IFAD and
UNDP work supported the preparation of sector plans for agriculture and fisheries.

IFC support to Tonga during the period occurred mainly through the provision of
advisory service support, particularly in the area of investment climate reform.
Advisory service support to Tonga comprised four projects in the area of investment
climate reform and two in the area of Public Private Partnership transactions advisory.
Projects in the area of investment climate reform sought to promote private sector
activity by supporting activities aimed at identifying and removing administrative and
regulatory barriers to doing business. The specific activities undertaken included
among others, developing and strengthening alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms, implementing an electronic company registration system, and the removal
of generic business licensing requirements. As part of its public-private partnership
(PPP) advisory services, IFC acted as a transaction advisor to the government of Tonga
in trying to structure, competitively tender and award a PPP project for the
rehabilitation and operation of the International Dateline Hotel. However, the two
competitive tenders submitted for the PPP project were not successful. The
government’s approval of a third less competitive tender later forced IFC to disengage
from the process citing potential reputational risks associated with the project. IFC
investments in Tonga were limited to a single $6.8 million loan to Digicel Tonga which
helped finance the expansion of Digicel’s operations in Tonga.



                                                                                                         27
APPENDIX C
WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN TONGA FY05–15
The performance of completed projects in the Tonga was better than the World Bank
average, albeit with some risks to development outcomes. IEG assessments of 5 Bank-
supported operations that exit the portfolio during the evaluation period showed
slightly better development outcome ratings (80 percent rated as moderately
satisfactory) than the average for the East Asia and Pacific Region (76 percent), and the
Bank as a whole (73 percent). However, a significant risk to development outcome was
noted in one of the 5 instances where risk was assessed (see annex table 4). The
significant risk to development outcomes was assessed on a $1 million education
support project representing 3.4 percent of the value of all projects assessed for risk to
development outcome. The high risk was assessed on account of the high percentage of
recurrent education expenditures devoted to salaries (96 percent at the primary, and 94
percent at the secondary level). High expenditures on salaries ultimately resulted in a
severe squeeze on the resources available for operations and maintenance thereby
risking the development outcome of the project.

The riskiness of the Bank’s portfolio under implementation during the evaluation
period was on average higher than both the East Asia and Pacific Region and World
Bank averages (see table C.3). Over the FY05–15 period, 20 percent of the number of
projects and 3 percent of the commitments were considered at risk. This was in contrast
to an East Asia and Pacific Region average portfolio riskiness of 27 percent of the
number of projects and 16 percent of commitment volumes, and a world average of 33
percent of the number of projects and 28 percent of commitment volumes at risk over
the same period.

Table C.3. Tonga Portfolio Implementation
 Fiscal year     2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
 # Projects        3      3      2      2      3      2      2      3      4     4      6
 under
 supervision
 # Prob Proj      ..     ..     ..     ..     1      ..     1      1      ..     ..     ..
 # Projects At    ..     ..     1      1      2      ..     1      1      ..     ..     1
 Risk
 % of             ..     ..     50     50     67     ..     50     33     ..     ..    17
 projects At
 Risk
 Net Comm        17.8   17.8   11.9   11.9   17.4   6.4    10.4   37.7   54.9   61.9   77.4
 Amt (US$,
 millions)
 % Commit         ..     ..    8.4    8.4    37.1    ..    52.1   14.4    ..     ..    15.5
 at Risk




28
Table C.4. Number and Total Commitment Amount of Commitments to Tonga, FY05–15

                         2005             2009                2011                      2012            2013               2014               2015                Total
                            US$,             US$,                US$,                      US$,            US$,               US$,               US$,                US$,
 Sector Board        No. millions      No. millions        No. millions             No.   millions   No. millions       No. millions       No. millions        No. millions
 Education              1         1                                                                                                                            1          1.0
 Energy and                                                 1         5             1        2.9                                                               2          7.9
 Extractives
 Macro                                                                              1        9.0     1         1.8      1         5.0       1           5.0    4          20.8
 Economics
 and Fiscal
 Management
 Social,                                                    1         5                                                 1         12.0      2          15.1    4          32.1
 Urban, Rural
 and
 Resilience
 Global
 Practice
 Transport                               1       5.4        1        0.2            2        44.4                                                              4          50.1
 and ICT
 Total                  1         1      1       5.4        3       10.2            4        56.3    1         1.8      2         17.0      3          20.1    15        111.8
Source: World Bank Business Intelligence as of January, 2016.
Note: Data include supplements and trust fund grants but does not include Pacific Islands regional commitments.

Table C.5. IEG Project Ratings for Tonga, Exit FY05–15
                                                                                            Net
  Exit                  Project       Approval      Lend Instr       Sector             Commitment                          IEG Risk to   IEG Bank Qual at          IEG Bank
           Proj ID                                                                                    IEG Outcome
  FY                     Name           FY            Type           Board                Amount                             DO Rating         Entry               Supervision
                                                                                           ($M)
 2007     P075171     TO-               2002       INVESTMENT         Urban                6.1           Satisfactory        Moderate           Satisfactory        Satisfactory
                      CYCLONE                                      Development
                      ER & MGMT
 2010     P075230     TO-HEALTH         2004       INVESTMENT        Health,               12.0          Moderately          Moderate           Moderately          Satisfactory
                      SECTOR                                       Nutrition, and                        satisfactory                           satisfactory
                                                                    Population



                                                                                                                                                                                   29
APPENDIX C
WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN TONGA FY05–15
                     SUPPORT
                     PROJECT
 2011     P079657    TO-Tonga          2005      INVESTMENT      Education            1.0         Unsatisfactory           Significant    Unsatisfactory   Moderately
                     Education                                                                                                                             satisfactory
                     Support
                     Project
 2011     P121877    Tonga             2011      ADJUSTMENT      Energy and           5.2            Satisfactory         Negligible to    Moderately      Satisfactory
                     Energy                                        Mining                                                     low          satisfactory
                     Develop.
                     Policy
                     Operation
 2014     P120595    Tonga Post        2011      INVESTMENT        Urban              5.1            Moderately            Moderate        Moderately      Moderately
                     Tsunami                                      Develop-                           satisfactory                          satisfactory    satisfactory
                     Reconstructi                                  ment
                     on
Source: World Bank database as of September 14 2015. Risk to development objective is rated for projects from FY07 onward.
Note: FY = fiscal year; GICT = Global Information and Communications Technology; IEG = Independent Evaluation Group; MS =moderately satisfactory; MU = moderately
unsatisfactory; S = satisfactory; U = unsatisfactory.

Table C.6. Bank Budget by Cost Structure Category, FY05–15 (in US$, thousands and percent)
                                                                                                                               Analytic
                                                                                                                                             Country
                                                                                              Project                            and                        Client
                           Sector Board                                       Total                            Lending                       Program
                                                                                            Supervision                        Advisory                    Training
                                                                                                                                             Support
                                                                                                                               Support
 In US$ thousands
 Agriculture and Rural Development                                             10                                                   10
 Economic Policy                                                               164              2                   134             28
 Education                                                                     609             382                  227
 Energy and Mining                                                             234             35                   199
 Financial and Private Sector Development (I)                                   5                                                                             5
 Global Information and Communications Technology                              280             103                  178
 Health, Nutrition, and Population                                             561             500                   3              58
 Procurement                                                                    1                                                   1
 Transport                                                                    1,356            886                  369            101
 Urban Development                                                             702             483                  219


30
                                                                                                                             APPENDIX C
                                                                                 WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN TONGA FY05–15

                                                                                                       Analytic
                                                                                                                        Country
                                                                              Project                    and                           Client
                       Sector Board                          Total                        Lending                       Program
                                                                            Supervision                Advisory                       Training
                                                                                                                        Support
                                                                                                       Support
 Not assigned                                                106                             100                           5
 Total                                                      4,028              2,391        1,429          197             5              5
 Cost structure (percent)
 Agriculture and Rural Development                           100                0             0            100             0               0
 Economic Policy                                             100                1            82             17             0               0
 Education                                                   100                63           37             0              0               0
 Energy and Mining                                           100                15           85             0              0               0
 Financial and Private Sector Development (I)                100                0             0             0              0              100
 Global Information and Communications Technology            100                37           63             0              0               0
 Health, Nutrition, and Population                           100                89            1             10             0               0
 Procurement                                                 100                0             0            100             0               0
 Transport                                                   100                65           27             7              0               0
 Urban Development                                           100                69           31             0              0               0
 Not assigned                                                100                0            95             0              5               0
 Total                                                       100                59           35             5              0               0

Table C.7. Total Net Disbursements of Official Development Assistance to Tonga, 2005–2013 (US$, millions)
                                                                                                                                              % of
                                                                                                                                  Total       2005-
                                      2005   2006   2007    2008     2009       2010      2011      2012     2013        2014
                                                                                                                                  2005-       2014
                                                                                                                                  2014        Total
 DAC Countries
 Australia                             8.8    7.7   10.5    11.7     14.4        20.9     31.4      29.7         31.6    22.9     189.5         34.3
 Japan                                11.2    4.4    4.6     3.8     11.7        23.8     18.7      13.3          4.5    17.1     113.1         20.5
 New Zealand                           4.8    6.1   11.9     6.4      7.2        11.4     14.7      19.2         13.2    15.3     110.1         19.9
 United States                         0.7    0.9    0.8     0.8      1.2         1.2      1.2       1.0          1.3     1.1      10.2          1.9
 Korea                                 0.1    0.1    0.1     0.1      0.0         0.0      0.5       0.2          0.3     0.1       1.4          0.2



                                                                                                                                                       31
APPENDIX C
WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN TONGA FY05–15
                                                                                                                                                             % of
                                                                                                                                                   Total     2005-
                                         2005      2006       2007      2008       2009       2010      2011       2012       2013      2014
                                                                                                                                                   2005-     2014
                                                                                                                                                   2014      Total
  Canada                                     0.3       0.0         0.4       0.2        0.1        0.1        0.1    ..        ..         ..         1.1       0.2
  United Kingdom                              ..        ..          ..       0.5        0.0        0.2        0.0   0.0       0.0        0.0         0.8       0.1
  Denmark                                     ..       0.1         0.1        ..         ..         ..         ..    ..        ..         ..         0.2       0.0
  Spain                                       ..        ..          ..        ..        0.1         ..         ..    ..        ..         ..         0.1       0.0
  Italy                                       ..        ..          ..       0.1         ..         ..         ..    ..        ..         ..         0.1       0.0
  France                                    -0.1      -0.1        -0.1      -0.1       -0.1        0.1         ..    ..       0.1        0.2        -0.1       0.0
  Germany                                   -1.0      -0.5        -1.7       0.0         ..         ..         ..    ..       0.0         ..        -3.3      -0.6
  DAC Countries, Total                      24.8      18.7       26.6       23.4       34.6       57.6       66.7  63.4      51.0       56.7       423.3      76.6
  Multilateral Agencies
  IDA                                        4.5       2.7         4.4       0.6        1.7        7.3       12.3   6.4      15.2       16.0        71.0       12.8
  EU Institutions                            2.8       0.7         0.3       0.8        0.8        1.6        9.0   0.7       0.6        5.2        22.5        4.1
  ADB Special Funds                         -0.9      -1.0        -1.1       0.1        0.5        4.1        4.9   1.8      12.6        0.3        21.3        3.9
  UNTA                                       0.8       0.6         0.9       0.3         ..         ..         ..    ..        ..         ..          2.6       0.5
  GEF                                        0.2        ..          ..        ..        1.9         ..        0.1   0.1       0.1        0.2          2.5       0.5
  WHO                                         ..        ..          ..        ..         ..         ..        0.6   0.6       0.7        0.6          2.4       0.4
  Climate Investment Funds (CIF)              ..        ..          ..        ..         ..         ..         ..    ..       0.5        0.3          0.8       0.1
  UNDP                                        ..        ..          ..        ..         ..         ..        0.2   0.1       0.0        0.2          0.5       0.1
  IFAD                                      -0.2      -0.2        -0.2        ..       -0.2       -0.1       -0.2   0.2       0.1        0.5         -0.4      -0.1
  Multilateral Agencies, Total               7.2       2.8         4.2       1.7        4.6       12.8       26.9   9.9      29.7       23.2       123.1       22.3
  Non-DAC Countries
  United Arab Emirates                        ..        ..          ..        ..         ..         ..         ..   5.0       0.2        0.0          5.2       0.9
  Turkey                                      ..        ..         0.1       0.5         ..         ..        0.0    ..       0.0        0.0          0.7       0.1
  Non-DAC Countries, Total                   0.0       0.0         0.1       0.5        0.0        0.0        0.0   5.0       0.2        0.0          5.9       1.1
  All Donors, Total                         32.0      21.5       30.8       25.7       39.2       70.4       93.6  78.3      80.8       79.9       552.3      100.0
Source: Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Data extracted on January 14, 2016 from OECD. Stat.
Note: DAC = Development Assistance Committee; EU = European Union; GFATM = Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria; IAEA = International Atomic Energy
Agency; ADB = Asian Development Bank; GEF = Global Environment Facility; WHO = World Health Organization; UNDP = United Nations Development Programme; IFAD =
International Fund for Agriculture Development; UNTA = United Nations Regular Program for Technical Assistance.




32
                                                                                                                                              APPENDIX C
                                                                                                  WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN TONGA FY05–15
Table C.8. Tonga—List of World Bank AAA, FY05–15
                                                                                                                                  AAA Cost       AAA Cost           Total
                                                                                                                                     (BB)           (TF)            Cost
    Proj ID                                                                                                 Fiscal     Prod
                               Project Name                            Practice              Country                              Delivered      Delivered        Delivered
    (AAA)                                                                                                    year      Line
                                                                                                                                    (US$,          (US$,            (US$,
                                                                                                                                 thousands)     thousands)       thousands)
 P092610             TO-Transport Sector Review                  Transport and ICT            Tonga         FY05       ESW              9            86               95
 P095826            TO-TAL Preparatory Assistance                Transport and ICT            Tonga         FY06       NLTA            81           288              369
 P109085                 TO-Health Financing                           HNP                    Tonga         FY09       ESW             58             6               63
 P116305         Tonga Renewable Energy Development            Energy and Extractives         Tonga         FY11       NLTA             0           150              150
 P127973           Medium Term Expenditure Mapping                     MFM                    Tonga         FY12       NLTA             0           101              101
 P133609                 Tonga Reform Plan                             MFM                 Tonga region     FY14       NLTA            28            63               90
                                                                                                                                      175           693              868
Source: World Bank database as of January, 2016.
Note: AAA = analytic and advisory services; BB = Bank Budget; TF = trust fund; HNP = Health, Nutrition, and Population; ICT = Information and Communications Technology; IDA
= International Development Association; MFM = macroeconomics and fiscal management; NLTA = nonlending technical assistance.
Table C.9. Tonga Economic and Social Indicators, 2005–2014
 Series Name                                                         2005      2006       2007       2008      2009       2010      2011       2012      2013        2014
 Growth and inflation
 GDP growth (annual %)                                                1.6       -1.1       -4.6      2.5        1.1       4.2        2.0        0.5       -2.7        2.1
 GDP per capita growth (annual %)                                     0.9       -1.7       -5.2      1.8        0.5       3.6        1.6        0.2       -3.0        1.7
 GNI per capita, PPP (current international $)                       4,460     4,600      4,510     4,670      4,720     5,010      5,180      5,260     5,180       5,270
 GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$)                          2,500     2,720      2,810     3,170      3,300     3,550      3,830      4,210     4,300       4,260
 Inflation, consumer prices (annual %)                                8.3        6.4        5.9     10.4        1.4       3.6        6.3        1.2        0.7        2.5
 Composition of GDP
 Agriculture, value added (% of GDP)                                 21.0       18.9      20.3       17.8       17.9      18.8       19.7      19.5       20.7       20.5
 Industry, value added (% of GDP)                                    19.9       18.5      19.2       18.6       19.4      20.6       22.0      21.9       19.4       18.8
 Services, etc., value added (% of GDP)                              59.1       62.6      60.5       63.5       62.7      60.5       58.3      58.6       59.9       60.7
 External Accounts
 Exports of goods and services (% of GDP)                            18.0       14.7      12.4       13.7       14.3      12.7       16.8      19.5       21.2       17.8


                                                                                                                                                                            33
APPENDIX C
WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN TONGA FY05–15

 Imports of goods and services (% of GDP)                        58.9    52.1     52.4     52.8     54.7     48.3     49.2      56.1     56.9     53.5
 Current account balance (% of GDP)                              -8.2    -16.7    -13.5    -26.9    -30.7    -21.4    -18.4     -9.9       ..       ..
 External debt stocks (% of GNI)                                 34.4    31.3     31.6     28.5     35.0     41.1     42.3      41.9     44.7     44.2
 Present value of external debt (% of GNI)                         ..      ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..        ..       ..     32.1
 Total debt service (% of GNI)                                    2.0     1.5      1.6      1.6      1.2      1.3      1.3       1.4      1.5      1.5
 Other macroeconomic indicators
 Gross fixed capital formation, private sector (% of GDP)         ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..
 Gross savings (% of GDP)                                        11.3     14.6     20.3     13.3     15.5     20.8     31.6     27.5      ..       ..
 Fiscal accounts
 Cash surplus/deficit (% of GDP)                                  ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..
 General government final consumption expenditure (% of          15.8     21.3     18.5     18.5     20.1     18.2     17.6     19.2      ..       ..
 GDP)
 Gross national expenditure (% of GDP)                          140.9    137.5    140.1    139.1    140.5    135.5    132.3    136.6      ..       ..
 Revenue, excluding grants (% of GDP)                             ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..
 Social indicators
 Health expenditure, public (% of GDP)                            5.6      4.8     4.5      4.2       3.6      3.7      3.2      3.6      3.9      ..
 Out-of-pocket health expenditure (% of private expenditure      62.3     62.3     67.8     67.8     67.8     67.8     67.8     67.8     67.8      ..
 on health)
 Immunization, DPT (% of children ages 12-23 months)             89.0     88.0     87.0     86.0     84.0     82.0     82.0     77.0     82.0     82.0
 Improved sanitation facilities (% of population with access)    92.3     92.1     92.0     91.8     91.7     91.6     91.4     91.3     91.1     91.0
 Improved water source (% of population with access)             98.7     98.8     98.9     99.0     99.1     99.2     99.3     99.4     99.5     99.6
 Life expectancy at birth, total (years)                         71.5     71.6     71.7     71.9     72.0     72.2     72.3     72.5     72.6       ..
 Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births)                  14.3     14.4     14.5     14.6     14.8     15.0     15.0     15.0     14.9     14.7
 Population, total                                              100,85   101,50   102,16   102,81   103,41   103,94   104,39   104,76   105,13   105,58
                                                                   8        7       9        6         6        7        2        9        9        6
 Population growth (annual %)                                     0.6      0.6     0.7      0.6       0.6      0.5      0.4      0.4      0.4      0.4
 Urban population (% of total)                                   23.2     23.2     23.2     23.3     23.3     23.4     23.4     23.5     23.6     23.6
 Population, female (% of total)                                 49.9     49.9     50.0     50.0     49.9     49.9     49.9     49.9     49.9     49.9
 Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty lines (% of           ..       ..      ..       ..       23        ..       ..       ..       ..       ..
 population)



34
                                                                                                                                              APPENDIX C
                                                                                                  WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN TONGA FY05–15

 Fixed telephone subscriptions (per 100 people)                      13.6       18.2      20.6       24.8      29.9       29.8      28.7       28.6      29.4       11.3
 Unemployment, total (% of total labor force) (national               ..         1.1       ..         ..        ..         ..        ..         ..        ..         ..
 estimate)
 Gross enrolment ratio, pre-primary, both sexes (%)                   ..         ..         ..        ..         ..        ..         ..       35.4        ..         ..
 Gross enrolment ratio, primary, both sexes (%)                     111.8      111.1      110.4     108.2      107.8     108.0      108.4     110.1      108.3        ..
 Gross enrolment ratio, secondary, both sexes (%)                     ..       101.3      104.7     104.0      103.6     103.9      104.3      90.9      102.1        ..
 Gross enrolment ratio, tertiary, both sexes (%)                      ..         ..         ..        ..         ..        ..         ..        ..         ..         ..
Source: World Development Indicators database. Retrieved January 2016.
Note: DPT = diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus; GDP = gross domestic product; GNI = Gross National Income; ILO = International Labor Organization; PPP = purchasing power
parity.




                                                                                                                                                                            35
APPENDIX C
WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN TONGA FY05–15

World Bank Group Program in Tonga Organized Along the Evaluation Pillars

Pillar 1: Strengthening Resilience
STRENGTHENING FISCAL AND DEBT SUSTAINABILITY AND PUBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE

Under Pillar 1.1, the Bank Group sought to help make progress on the
objectives/outcomes detailed below.

 Objectives/Outcomes Sought                                                     Milestones
 Budget revenue estimates to be improved, including       Treasury Instructions to Line Ministries issued.
 through better data systems.
 Debt management system functioning with new              Strengthened dialogue between donors and
 external assistance on grant or concessional terms       government on economic and PFM reforms linked to
 only.                                                    budget support.
 Quality of PFM systems improved as reflected in          New procurement regulations consistent with World
 improved PEFA scores—particularly in audit—from          Bank/ADB advice to be gazetted and in force in 2010.
 2010 baseline.                                           Joint public expenditure review completed identifying
                                                          options for improved expenditure management.

Instruments used by the Bank Group to help make progress on the above
objectives/outcomes are detailed below.

 Lending Operations                               Analytic Work              Nonlending Technical Assistance
 TO-Economic Recovery Operation           PI-PFM Design under Capacity         TO-Medium Term Expenditure
 (P126453; 2012; $9M)                    Constraints (P131402; FY14; $M)         Mapping (P127973; FY12;
                                                                                        $4.579452M)
 TO-Economic Recovery Operation II       PI- Pacific 2020 (P098009; FY06;      Tonga Reform Plan (P133609;
 (P130824; 2013; $1.8M)                                 $M)                              FY14; $5M)
 TO-First Economic Reform Support        Program Development in Northern      Pacific Futures (P117120; FY14;
 Operation (P144601; 2014; $5M)            Pacific (P118674; FY10; $M)                       $M)
 TO-Second Economic Reform                   Monitoring and Evaluation          PRAXIS Discussion Series
 Support Operation (P149963; 2015;             (P109069; FY11; $M)                  (P126058; FY14; $M)
 $5M)
 IDF Pacific Regional Audit Initiative
 (PRIA) (P120343; FY10; $0.55M)

STRENGTHENING ENVIRONMENTAL AND DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE

Under Pillar 1.2, the Bank Group sought to make progress on the objectives/outcomes
detailed below.

 Objectives/Outcomes Sought                                                        Milestones
 Niuatoputapu reconstruction                                Construction of 85 cyclone resistant houses, and
                                                            rehabilitation of 60 houses


                                                                                                                  36
                                                                                           APPENDIX C
                                               WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN TONGA FY05–15

 Improved national disaster management and planning         Institutional strengthening of Ministry of Land Survey
 capacity                                                   and Natural Resources and preparation of community
                                                            disaster risk management plans
Instruments used by the Bank Group to make progress on the above
objectives/outcomes are detailed below.

                                                       Analytic
 Lending Operations                                     Work       Nonlending Technical Assistance
 Pacific Resilience Program - Tonga (P156334;                      PI- Pacific CAT Risk Financing TA - Phase II
 2015; $4.6M)                                                      (P122344; FY12)
 Tonga Post Tsunami Reconstruction (P120595;                       Pacific-Catastro Risk Assess. Geonode Innov
 2011; $5M)                                                        TA (P125720; FY12)

 Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113; 2014;                      Pacific M&E of Conserv. Action Strategy
 $12M)                                                             (P095031; FY08)
 Pacific Resilience Program - Tonga (P154840;                      Pacific Catastrophe Risk Pool Feasibility
 2015; $10.5M)                                                     Study (P110131; FY09)
 Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog                          Pacific Sustainable Mgt Thru Reduced
 (P153429; FY15; $2.191781M)                                       Disaster Risk (P112080; FY10)
 Pacific Island Regional Oceans Program
 (P131655; FY15; $3.97M)
 PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC
 (P147839; FY15; $3.68M)
 Pacific Cat Risk Insurance Pilot (P152570; FY15;
 $1M)
 PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS
 (P155542; FY15; $1.32M)
 PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS
 (P156335; FY15; $0.9M)

ENHANCING HUMAN CAPITAL AND SOCIAL RESILIENCE

Under Pillar 1.3, the Bank Group sought to make progress on the objectives/outcomes
detailed below.
 Objectives/Outcomes Sought                                 Milestones
 Net enrolment, dropout, retention rates and student test   School grants program operational, with all schools
 performance improved from 2005 baselines                   receiving grants on schedule
 Increase local participation and accountability through    School rehabilitation completed at 20 most needy
 introducing school based management, with schools          sites
 engaging communities in planning, budgeting, and
 results assessment



Instruments used by the Bank Group are detailed below.



                                                                                                                  37
APPENDIX C
WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN TONGA FY05–15

 Lending Operations                  Analytic Work                            Nonlending Technical Assistance
 TO-Tonga Education Support          Pacific Islands - HD SECTOR             Early Grade Reading Assess in Pacific
 Project (P079657; 2005; $1M)        REVIEW (P079666; FY06)                  Region (P118877; FY13)
                                     PI- Delivery strategies for youth       Pacific Early Education Advisory
                                     (P120712; FY12)                         Services (PEEAS) (P127936; FY15)
                                     PI -Pacific Hardship and                AusAID Education Partnership
                                     Vulnerability Study (P144446;           (P127935; FY15)
                                     FY14)
                                     PI - Social Protection in the Pacific   TO-Health Financing (P109085; FY09)
                                     (P133619; FY15)
                                     PI-Pacific Migration Study              Pacific—Gender and Disability in the
                                     (P092789; FY07)                         Pacific (P093733; FY06)


Pillar 2: Enhancing Competitiveness
STRENGTHENING THE FINANCIAL SECTOR

The Tonga CAS did not include any objectives under Pillar 2.1.

Instruments used by the Bank Group to make progress on the above
objectives/outcomes are detailed below.

 Lending Operations           Analytic Work                        Nonlending Technical Assistance
                                                      Pacific Islands - Financial Sector Dev’t (P092788; FY06; $M)

STRENGTHENING THE LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK, SECTOR LINKAGES, AND VALUE CHAINS FOR
PRIVATE BUSINESS

Under Pillar 2.2, the Bank Group sought to make progress on the objectives/outcomes
detailed below.

 Objectives/Outcomes Sought                        Milestones
 Improved business environment, as reflected in    Ability to use personal property as collateral for access to
 Doing Business indicators                         finance is improved.
 Reduced cost of connectivity translating into     Investment approvals process is simplified and made more
 reduced business transaction costs                transparent, including licensing systems for business
                                                   operations.
 Reduced number of procedures for obtaining a      Establishment of a credit bureau to improve access to finance.
 business license




Instruments used by the Bank Group to make progress on the above
objectives/outcomes are detailed below.


38
                                                                                           APPENDIX C
                                               WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN TONGA FY05–15

                                                                               Nonlending Technical
 Lending Operations                     Analytic Work                          Assistance
 PI - Inst. Cap. Build. for Labor       Remittance Costs (P109095; FY10)       Pacific Islands Regional Fisheries
 Export (P109457; FY08; $0.625M)                                               (P109101; FY11)
                                        Monitoring and Evaluation (P109069;    Regulatory and Inst. Reform for
                                        FY11; $M) -The development impact      PSD (P092034; FY05)
                                        of a best practice seasonal worker
                                        policy
                                                                               Regulatory and Inst. Reform for
                                                                               PSD (P098216; FY06)
                                                                               4P-Regulatory & Inst. Reform for
                                                                               PSDP II (P102963; FY09)
                                                                               PIC Regulatory Simplification and
                                                                               Reform (P104949; FY10)
                                                                               Inst. strengthening for Labor
                                                                               Migration (P130478; FY15)
                                                                               Trade Facilitation for Pacific
                                                                               Islands (P110501; FY08)
                                                                               Trade Facilitation Strategy Labor
                                                                               Exp. (P109094; FY12)

IMPROVING INFRASTRUCTURE SERVICE DELIVERY

Under Pillar 2.3, the Bank Group sought to make progress on the objectives/outcomes
detailed below.

 Objectives/Outcomes Sought                                                Milestones
 Internet use to increase from 15% to 40% of the population.                Fiber optic cable linking Tonga with
                                                                                   trans-Pacific cables.
 Wholesale Connectivity (bandwidth) costs to be reduced from $3,500
 megabits per second per month to $800 Mbps/month or lower, flowing
 through to reduced retail internet and telecoms costs.
 Regulatory environment that allows competition with equal access by all
 market players to buy international bandwidth on a fair and transparent
 basis at the cable landing station.
 Improve petroleum supply chain to reduce price and volatility of energy   Open electricity generation market to
 supply.                                                                   new private investment, with 4 new
                                                                           private investments by 2013.
 Increase efficiency of grid power system, including reducing technical
 and nontechnical losses from 17.5% on Tongatapu grid.
 Increase renewable energy for grid power to 20% by 2014.                  •1 MW on-grid solar PV generation
                                                                           capacity to be introduced.
                                                                           •Landfill gas IPP implemented.
                                                                           •Proof of concept coconut oil
                                                                           investment initiated.




                                                                                                                   39
APPENDIX C
WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN TONGA FY05–15

 Objectives/Outcomes Sought                                                    Milestones
 Consolidate MOT as unified transport sector policy, planning and
 regulatory ministry
 Improve civil aviation and maritime sector compliance with international      ICAO compliance levels to improve
 safety standards.                                                             from 48-56% to 80%.
 Strengthened domestic private sector road maintenance capacity.               75 km of roads designed, supervised
                                                                               and maintained by local Tongan
                                                                               companies.

Instruments used by the Bank Group to make progress under Pillar 2.3 are detailed
below.

                                                                                  Nonlending Technical
         Lending Operations               Analytic Work
                                                                                  Assistance
 PI-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance        4P-PI Infrastructure Strategy           Pacific Islands Offshore Mining
 (P098423; FY07; $9.48M)                  (P069677; FY06)                         (P112571; FY11)
 Pacific Aviation Safety Office Reform    PI-Pacific Risk Management and          Pacific Petroleum Supply TA
 (P145057; FY14; $2.15M)                  Adaptation (P089536; FY06)              (P117025; FY12)
 Pacific Reg ICT Regulatory Dev.          Pacific Infrastructure Diagnostics      P4: Options Assessment on ICT for
 Project (P148238; FY15; $4.5M)           AAA (P110315; FY10)                     Jobs (P146664; FY15)
 Tonga Energy Develop. Policy             Regional Ports and Shipping             TO-TAL Preparatory Assistance
 Operation (P121877; 2011; $5M)           (P143662; FY15)                         (P095826; FY06; $1.8M)
 Institutional and Regulatory             TO-Transport Sector Review              TONGA Renewable Energy
 Framework (P131250; 2012; $2.9M)         (P092610; FY05)                         Development (P116305; FY11;
                                                                                  $5M)
 TO-Transport Sector Consolidation
 (P096931; 2009; $5.44M)
 Pacific Regional Connectivity
 Program (P113184; 2012; $17.2M)
 Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga
 (P128939; 2012; $27.21M)
 IDF Grant-Proj Mgmt and Green PR-
 MOT-TO (P125086; 2011; $0.2M)




40
Appendix D: Assessment of the World Bank
Program in Samoa
This appendix is an adjunct to the main report. It is not intended as a free-standing CPE
on the World Bank in Samoa. It provides additional underpinning and evidence for the
overall story of the Bank’s relevance and effectiveness in the PICs provided in the main
report.

Samoa’s Development Challenges
Samoa is a lower middle-income country with relatively good development indicators.
In 2014, GDP per capita was $4,172 with a human development ranking of 105 out of
188 countries. Life expectancy is 73 and the literacy rate is 99 percent. Samoa has met
MDGs for improved infant, child and maternal mortality rates, and almost all births are
attended by skilled health physicians. The proportion of the population living in
‘extreme poverty’ is about 5 percent. Samoa also scores well on governance and doing
business indicators. In 2013 it had the highest CPIA rating of all IDA-only countries.
Although the Samoan parliament is democratically elected, only the ‘nobles’ (a class
that constitutes about 10 percent of the population) can run for office.

Until 2009 Samoa was the most rapidly growing of the PICs, but growth has been much
lower in the past five or six years as a consequence of the global crisis and natural
disasters. Growth averaged 4.3 percent annually between 1998 and 2008. The main
contributions to growth came from the commerce, transportation, and communication
sectors, driven by tourism and remittances. The contribution of agriculture and fisheries
to GDP declined consistently during the period going from 19 to 10 percent. Growth
was severely impacted however, first by the spike in international food and fuel prices,
then by the global financial crisis, and by the Tsunami of September 2009 and Tropical
Cyclone Evan in December 2012. GDP declined by 5 percent in 2009 and growth has
averaged less than 1 percent in the subsequent five years. The 2015 IMF Article IV noted
that these two natural disasters added 15 percent of GDP to Samoa’s external debt.1

The Bank’s Strategy in Samoa
In March 2012, the Bank issued its CPS for Samoa, covering the period from 2012 to
2016. In the Bank’s view Samoa illustrated the constraints “facing even well performing
small island states. Strong policy setting for almost two decades, have resulted in MDG


1   IMF 2015 Article IV, box 1.


                                                                                       41
APPENDIX D
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA
outcomes and economic performance well above the average of comparable island
countries. Yet Samoa’s small size, limited natural resources, narrowly based economy,
distance to markets, and vulnerability to exogenous shocks, impose speed limits on
growth and have led to a high degree of volatility in recent economic performance.“
The key themes here were to (i) rebuild macroeconomic resilience and encourage
inclusive growth; (ii) generate opportunities from global and regional integration, and
(iii) strengthen resilience against natural disasters and climate change. This was
essentially just a re-statement of the regional framework, with the resilience theme
separated between macroresilience and environmental resilience. The emphasis on the
macro reflected concerns about debt sustainability.

The Bank’s Operational Program in Samoa
Samoa had the largest program among the PICs. The Bank covered a broad range of
activities, including Economic Policy (mostly through the DPOs), transport and ICT,
Disaster Relief and Reconstruction, agriculture, and health. The Samoa program
included 18 commitments for a total of $185 million.2 The DPO instrument has been
especially important in Samoa. The Bank funded three DPOs during the evaluation
period; the first followed the 2009 Tsunami, and the second followed Tropical Cyclone
Evan in June 2013. The first DPO, amounting to $20 million sought to support the
government’s efforts to counter the impacts of the 2009 tsunami and the global
economic crisis and facilitate medium term recovery. The operation covered four policy
areas that included; economic recovery from the impacts of the tsunami and the global
economic crisis, protecting the vulnerable, public financial management reform, and
public enterprise reform to strengthen infrastructure service delivery. The second DPO,
amounting to $25 million, which tapped Crisis Response Window resources, had two
broad areas of focus: building disaster resilience and strengthening public expenditure
management. The prior actions were coordinated with the other donors providing
budget support, especially ANZ and the ADB. The third DPO in an amount of $7.5
million was designated as the First Fiscal and Economic Reform Operation, with the
objectives of first strengthening PFM in the areas of debt, procurement and revenue,
and second creating the foundations for more robust growth through strengthening the
payments system, tourism policy and private sector development opportunities.




2 The classification of projects by sector in the PICs is even more difficult than usual, since a
number of activities are listed as regional even though they involved activities in specific
islands, and also the pervasiveness of environmental issues and funding leads to activities being
classified under that heading. This includes for example sustainable fisheries development.


42
                                                                                  APPENDIX D
                                               ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA

Bank Support for Building Resilience in Samoa
ENHANCING FISCAL SUSTAINABILITY IN SAMOA

In Samoa, strengthening PFM was a particular focus of the policy matrix agreed upon in
2009 as a foundation for budget support. Over the period, Bank delivered substantial
capacity building efforts in PFM including updating and documenting basic processes,
training civil servants to adopt new systems and improve skills. Bank analytic work
provided useful inputs to feed into the government’s PFM plans. The 2006 PEFA
identified weaknesses that were addressed in the first stage (2008–10) of the Public
Financial Management Reform Program (PFMRP) which focused on strengthening
systems to achieve fiscal discipline. Some of these key concerns were the late
finalization of public accounts and the nondisclosure of much development spending
done through extra-budgetary funds. The second PEFA assessment carried out in 2010
found some improvement in policy based budgeting and medium term financial
forecasting but still weaknesses in procedures, with the potential to undermine
aggregate fiscal discipline. These were taken into consideration in the second phase of
the PFMRP (2011–13) which aimed at improving resource allocation and consolidating
systems to improve financial discipline. The 2012 progress report showed significant
improvement in most areas, including better revenue forecasting, and the development
of a national payment policy to ensure timely processing of payments.

Improving Revenue and Public Expenditure Efficiency

Recent improvement in revenue administration has led to increased revenue (net of
grants). (See figure D.1.) The government has also recently made efforts to contain
personnel expenditures within their medium term target of 45 percent of current
expenditure. Capital expenditures have remained above historical levels to support
growth. As noted in the main report, a significant component of these are investments
to rebuild the airport terminal financed by the Chinese Export-Import Bank (about 6
percent of GDP) expected to be disbursed evenly over three years.




                                                                                         43
APPENDIX D
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA

                Figure D.1. Fiscal Balance, Revenue and Current Expenditure in
                Samoa




                Source: IMF 2015 Article IV Report.

In 2013, the Samoan government requested a PER to get a better understanding of how
their budget was evolving and to strengthen the analytic basis for the management of
public expenditure. The PER focused in particular on the wage bill and the two largest
expenditure sectors health and education. The PER called for containing the growth of
public sector wage bill, curtailing transfers to SOEs, and improving value for money
across public sector expenditure including through improved procurement processes
and reduced non priority recurrent expenditure. Sector-level analyses have also been
helpful e.g., in Samoa the Bank looked at expenditures in the Health sector and found
that resources were not well targeted, e.g., too much spending on qualified nurses
taking on functions which could have been performed equally well by auxiliary health
workers.

Improving Debt Management

Public debt had increased as a result of the government’s response to the series of major
external shocks that struck the country over the evaluation period which led to a
revision of the overall debt sustainability rating with Samoa falling from a low to
moderate level of debt distress. Figure D.2 indicates that public debt became among the
highest in the pacific, in large part due to the response to the two natural disasters.




44
                                                                                           APPENDIX D
                                                        ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA

                         Figure D.2. Gross Public Debt in Samoa and other
                         PICs




                         Source: IMF 2015 Article IV.

The Bank has provided substantial technical assistance on debt management in Samoa.
A Debt Management Performance Assessment was carried out together with the IMF in
2010 with two follow up TA missions in October 2012 and March 2014. The 2010 DSA
started to note a shift from moderate to high risk of debt distress. The Bank, together
with PFTAC, provided help to the government of Samoa to prepare customized DSA
tools3 and put together a debt management reform plan proposal focusing on
institutional arrangements, debt policy, cash and operational risk management. The
2013 DPO included a prior action on the approval and publication of an updated
medium-term debt strategy4 and the publication of quarterly debt report and the
adoption of formal procedures for contracting loans and issuing government
guarantees.

Progress on debt sustainability was undercut by the decision to borrow for the
reconstruction of the Apia terminal building. Samoa revised its medium-term debt
management strategy in 2013 to provide a credible framework for returning external
debt to sustainable levels and took measures to make the procurement process more
transparent. As part of the agreement under the 2014 DPO the government undertook
to follow the proper process to consider and approve new loans, and to prepare the
relevant analysis as an input to that process. The government did not comply with these
commitments when in 2014 the Prime Minister decided to approve a sole source

3 The Bank has helped Samoa and Vanuatu prepare a simplified Debt Sustainability Analysis,
basically a sophisticated EXCEL sheet, which the small two or three person debt offices in their
Ministries of Finance can maintain and use to test the implications of proposals to take on new
debt for debt servicing requirements and sustainability.
4The debt management target included (i) only enter new foreign currency loans that are highly
concessional with a grant element of at least 35 percent and (ii) only consider projects which can
prove a positive economic return at least sufficient to meet the interest and repayment costs.


                                                                                                  45
APPENDIX D
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA
contract with a Chinese construction company for a new terminal building at the
airport. The funding from the Chinese Exim Bank was on concessional terms but these
fell short of the agreed results indicator for measuring compliance with the
commitments included in the DPO. As a consequence of this failure to meet its
commitments the Bank delayed the effectiveness of the DPO for six months until
evidence was provided that an economic evaluation of the project had been carried out,
and that the internal review had followed Samoa’s own procedures.

The most recent 2015 DSA indicates that Samoa has moved back from a high to a
moderate risk of debt distress (Source 2015 IMF article IV). However, the overall risk to
public debt sustainability is higher when including the contingent liabilities from Public
Financial Institutions (PFIs) and SOEs (of 24 percent of GDP). The IMF has
recommended that the government target a lower long term public debt target of 40
percent of GDP rather that the government stated goal of 50 percent by 2020 given the
vulnerabilities faced by the country. In pursuing their ongoing fiscal consolidation, the
government will need to better manage fiscal risk arising from SOE.

Improving PFM

With regard to PFM systems, the main focus of the Bank has been to support reforms
to improve procurement. In 2006, the Bank published an operational procurement
review report which highlighted the limited number of government officials with
procurement experience. Thereafter, the bank provided an IDF grant to support
procurement reforms and capacity building efforts. The 2013 DPO included the
adoption of measures to make procurement information publically available. In 2014, a
review of procurement spending undertaken in conjunction with the Methodology for
Assessing Procurement System (MAPS) report, found significant evidence of sequences
of multiple small value contracts for similar items within and across line ministries,
which undermined value for money. This reflected poor procurement planning and
coordination in the absence of guidelines for framework arrangements. The 2014 DPO
therefore included issuance of new treasury instructions on procurement, a new set of
procurement guidelines and templates for minor work and services to improve the
quality of expenditure. Other DPO recommendations to enhance PFM systems
included: the finalization of pending audits (DPO 2010) and the implementation of
national payment policy to speed-up payment processing and better track arrears (DPO
2013), the introduction of an electronics payment system (DPO 2014). Needless to say,
the procurement arrangements that were used for the Apia terminal were inconsistent
with the government’s own guidelines and the DPO agreements.




46
                                                                                           APPENDIX D
                                                        ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA

Overall Assessment
The outcomes of Bank support for Samoa’s efforts to strengthen macro resilience have
been mixed and are rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. On the positive side, PEFA
ratings have improved considerably between 2010 and the present. Comprehensive
revenue policy and administrative reforms over the evaluation period seem to have
paid dividends in terms of an increased tax to GDP share. Expenditure has been
relatively tightly prioritized around the social sectors and infrastructure. Cash
management system and the process for preparing public accounts have improved. On
the other hand, the government initially failed to comply with commitments that were
undertaken as part of the DPO for a First Fiscal and Economic Reform Operation
approved in mid-2014 to assess the economic viability of projects undertaken with
borrowing, and for a transparent procurement process.

The first DPOs supported the government in response to the Tsunami and cyclone. As a
consequence their credibility depended on delivering the resources quickly. And they
proved useful to help the government‘s efforts to counter the impact of these shocks,
notably to recover the infrastructure and housing after the tsunami. However, this
made it very difficult to include any conditionality that was likely to be difficult for the
government to reach agreement on or to deliver in a short period of time. Given the
need for a quick response and the priority of supporting economic recovery, it would
have been obviously difficult and not timely to use the DPO mechanism to tackle some
of the more difficult issues. In particular the rapid expansion of the recurrent budgets
for health and education, driven by higher salaries for health care workers and an
increase in the numbers employed in the education sector. High priority was attached
to getting these budgets under control, yet this would have required time to work
through and a crisis-response DPO was obviously not the appropriate instrument for
this.

Table D.1. Samoa: Achievement of CAS Outcomes for Fiscal Sustainability
 CAS Outcomes Expected (FY11–14)                                              Achievement
 Fiscal consolidation and rebuilding of reserves           Partially achieved. While there was a substantial
                                                     strengthening of the fiscal situation during the period, this
                                                              has been undercut by the recent borrowing.
 Strengthened public financial management           Partially achieved. While PFM has been strengthened from a
                                                       technical perspective it remains vulnerable to political
                                                                               interventions.
 Improved efficiency and effectiveness of service         Partially achieved. While the progress on health is
 delivery to strengthen health financing and         satisfactory, there is little evidence of enhanced education
 address education quality                                                         quality.




                                                                                                                 47
APPENDIX D
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA
BUILDING ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE IN SAMOA

In Samoa, the Bank’s interventions on disaster resilience have been carried out
primarily through the road sector. The focus on road transport makes sense: the road
network is the most substantial and costly public infrastructure in the country and
suffers major damage from disasters, and restoring connectivity is critical for reducing
the economic losses of disasters. The Bank became engaged in infrastructure projects in
the road sector in the late 1990s, and supported a range of investments and reforms
focused on adopting an outsourcing model of maintenance and construction, discussed
further under the infrastructure pillar below. Disaster risk management has been
mainstreamed into road and infrastructure operations, with many projects financing
road upgrades/maintenance activities and also post-disaster reconstruction works
(especially bridges), risk reduction works (primarily coastal protection), and
institutional support. But there have been other interventions outside of the road sector.
Some disaster response and resilience building has been carried out through the
agriculture sector (see box D.1). A recent environment project supports disaster
adaptation measures in coastal communities. And PPCR support aims to help
government to assess investment opportunities for climate resilience and prioritize
decisions.


 Box D.1. Not Very Cyclone Responsive
 In Samoa, Cyclone Evan hit the agriculture sector hard, with severe or moderate effects on 75
 percent of agricultural area on the main island, with losses estimated at 30 percent of
 agricultural GDP. The Bank aimed to help the government provide emergency support to
 affected farmers and fishermen, who typically did not receive direct government support
 after natural disasters. The project design used a voucher system facilitated through
 cellphones, whereby farmers would receive funds that could only be used to purchase goods
 on an approved list of farm inputs from approved stores. But payments to farmers were slow,
 in part because of the time needed to set up the technical system with the phone company.
 Few farmers received vouchers in the first year after the storm, and 40% of farmers still had
 not received vouchers 18 months after the storm. Government officials and Bank staff argue
 that some of these delays are due to one-off problems in setting up the system, and that if
 another disaster strikes soon that a similar system could be used more quickly. But this will
 require an institutional mechanism for maintaining technology, staffing, and databases. ICT-
 based disaster relief systems have been effective elsewhere (such as in Kenya and Pakistan)
 once established, but it is not yet clear if they can be maintained adequately in low capacity
 small state contexts.
 Should a voucher system be used in future? Farmers interviewed by IEG (in the presence of
 government officials) stated that they preferred the voucher system to direct provision of
 goods or to cash payments, arguing that in-kind support might not meet their needs, but cash
 payments might not be spent on productive investments. But questions can also be raised
 about the cost-effectiveness of the voucher. Many farmers were not directly replacing storm



48
                                                                                       APPENDIX D
                                                    ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA
    losses especially given delays but still faced strong incentives to spend the full voucher and
    so potentially to purchase items with modest economic returns. In future this type of pilot
    could benefit from an accompanying impact evaluation that included value for money
    elements, which could then inform the design of operations in many countries.


Disaster-related infrastructure investments in Samoa have generally performed well,
but there are gaps between the cost of financing infrastructure that has high climate
resilience and funding availability. Issues also present in other infrastructure projects
(delays, capacity limits, procurement challenges, and land issues) have been challenges.
Protective investments have likely reduced disaster vulnerability, especially through
improved drainage. Improved maintenance support has led to a more resilient road
network—government officials argue that post-disaster response and clearance has
improved. However, investment in resilience has been hampered by the availability of
funds. For example, available funds for upgrading the important West Coast road will
not cover the cost of a full road reconstruction; rather it can support basic measures
such as raising pavement and improving drainage in the highest priority areas. Truly
climate-proofing the road would require moving the route inland (see box D.2). An
important bridge was severely damaged in Cyclone Evan and needs to be replaced; a
single span bridge would be more resilient and government officials pushed for such a
design, but available project funds may not be enough to cover construction costs,
which would require international expertise and equipment. Projects are also not
always based on sophisticated analysis; the Bank has assisted in estimating costs of
climate proofing, but could do more to demonstrate and establish cost-effectiveness.

The design of coastal protection systems involves competing pressures of economic,
environmental and social values and cost. Most of the coastal protection supported by
the Bank and other donors has been seawalls, though soft protective measures have
been supported in some pilots. Seawalls provide effective coastal protection,5 but they
also destroy beaches, with loss of amenity value, ecological disruption, and arguably
impacts on long term tourism potential. There are other structural alternatives6 that
offer coastal protection with fewer side effects but that come at higher cost, require a
greater setback, or are only feasible in some areas. There are understandable reasons for
the focus on seawalls. Communities have decided that seawalls are what it means to


5 However, some experts suggest that works have not always well designed to meet the specific
local risk, which varies depending on coastal morphology.
6 Other hard structures include bulkheads, revetments and groins; hybrid approaches might mix
vegetative planting with rock sills or breakwaters, and soft approaches might concentrate on
vegetation and dunes. But technical investigation of options would be needed to assess
feasibility for local conditions.


                                                                                                     49
APPENDIX D
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA
have coastal protection, so political leaders focus on supporting this. Some experts
suggested that there had been the possibility in past to convince communities of other
options, but that so many seawalls had now been constructed that it would be difficult;
during the 2000s there was a tipping point that shifted norms. Government efforts to
encourage preventative resettlement have had little success. There is a high cultural
value on land, especially flat coastal land, so there are pressures to protect all land
rather than retreat. The Bank has a role to play in sharing successful experiences of
alternative measures from other countries to inform local decision-making.

The Bank’s policy engagement and support for institutional capacity building for DRM
in Samoa has had more impact than in other countries. Bank investment lending
operations have supported a wide range of capacity building measures. According to
government officials, the disaster management office is now a well-functioning
institution that plays a role in resilience initiatives at a national level, beyond its
previous functions of disaster preparedness and response coordination (which have
also been boosted by projects through communications equipment and emergency
planning). Coastal Infrastructure Maintenance plans supported under Bank
infrastructure projects are being implemented in most (but not all) districts and are seen
as a success story to be replicated elsewhere in the region and to have coverage
expanded to include upland areas. Hazard maps are being used in some government
planning. Warning systems are more robust than in other countries.


 Box D.2. Coastal versus Inland
 Development in Samoa is focused heavily on a narrow coastal strip, making it highly
 vulnerable to storms and tsunamis. In many places housing and the sole road link are only
 meters from the coast. Sea level rise and more intense cyclones from climate change mean
 that coastal areas will only become more vulnerable. This poses a dilemma to planners and
 project designers: should support continue in areas of high vulnerability but where the
 economic activity is, or should efforts be made to encourage movement inland, even at high
 cost? The Bank has confronted this challenge in two projects in particular: one that aims to
 upgrade the critical West Coast Road between the international airport and the main city, and
 another that supported post-tsunami reconstruction.
 In the case of the West Coast road, the road will remain highly vulnerable as long as it lies on
 the coastal route. But creating an inland highway might cost a quarter of GDP. Bank-
 sponsored studies in 2003 and 2010 favored the inland option, and a 2010 government study
 indicated a general level of support and commitment for the road project from villages along
 the proposed route, but highlighted concerns about social impacts and resettlement. But other
 assessments carried out under Bank infrastructure projects highlighted the high costs of the
 inland proposal, involving complex land and resettlement issues, time-consuming access
 negotiations and likely high compensation costs. In the end, Samoa decided to proceed with
 the coastal rehabilitation that would reduce road closures and flooding by improving



50
                                                                                              APPENDIX D
                                                           ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA
 drainage, and to commence studies that would allow them to revisit the inland route option
 in 20 years. An open, and difficult, question is whether an inland route would catalyze a new,
 alternative spatial pattern of development, reducing the economy’s exposure to hazards—but
 imposing differential costs and benefits on coastal and inland landholders.
 A devastating tsunami occurred in 2009, and the most seriously affected part of the country
 was an area on the south-east of the main island with significant coastal settlement. The Bank
 supported a reconstruction project that constructed at significant cost a high quality inland
 road roughly a kilometer inland, along with numerous access roads linking the inland road to
 the old coastal road. The idea was to shift settlement inland, and indeed in the years
 immediately after the tsunami, many households chose to re-locate to areas adjacent to the
 new road or access road. Efforts were made to move some services inland, such as a school,
 and bus provision. But within a few years, many people have returned to the coast. Fishing is
 a livelihood for many, and many community facilities such as churches and schools remained
 on the coast. As memory of the tsunami fades it is likely that this process will continue—
 though some extended families now have a home on the coast and a home inland, which
 serves as a form of risk hedging. The lesson is that preventative resettlement is extremely
 difficult, and communities have many economic and social priorities other than disaster
 vulnerability minimization. If the West Coast road reconstruction had spent the hundreds of
 millions of dollars needed on the inland route, would results have been any different?


The outcomes of Bank support for environmental resilience in Samoa are rated
moderately satisfactory (see table D.2). The CPS had two milestones. The first was
access to the regional risk pooling scheme. This was achieved: Samoa is one of the three
pilot members of the PCRAFI (along with Tonga and Vanuatu, who both have received
payouts while Samoa has not yet). The second was the preparation of an integrated
national climate change adaptation strategy. The evaluation was unable to find any
trace of this. If prepared it has not had any impact on subsequent programs. These
milestones bear almost no relation to the CPS outcomes defined below which relate
mainly to the completion of the West Coast road project. Mangrove planting has not
been a significant part of the approach adopted, which relies mainly on sea walls. The
road project is behind schedule and unlikely to be completed in the time-frame of the
CPS. This of course reflects the formulation of the CPS indicators and objectives.
Looked at over the period as a whole the outcomes are more encouraging with much
greater attention to the need for environmental resilience in Samoa’s infrastructure
program and enhanced capacity to plan for and manage disaster risk.

Table D.2. SAMOA: Achievement of CPS Outcomes for Environmental Resilience

 CPS Outcomes Expected (FY12–16)                           Achievement
 16 districts completed high priority coastal protection   Partially achieved. While substantial construction of sea
 initiatives (such as mangrove planting) by 2016.          walls has taken place, there has been little use of other
                                                           forms of coastal protection such as mangrove planting.




                                                                                                                  51
APPENDIX D
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA

                                                        Partially achieved. While the inland roads have been
 Completion of 5 km inland coastal road to provide      constructed, few villages have re-located. These roads
 access to villagers in tsunami areas that decided to   have opened some access to agri-cultural land, but
 relocate.                                              villagers still make their homes on the coast.

                                                        In progress. Project is behind schedule and completion
 Climate proofing and improved drainage for 30 km       by end-2016 is unlikely.
 West Coast road by end 2016.


IMPROVING SOCIAL RESILIENCE IN SAMOA

Health

The Bank’s Health Management Support Project which closed in 2005 was the
beginning of the government health reforms. The initial goal was to refurbish and
improve rural health facilities. But it also involved redefining the functions of those
facilities. In the words of the then CEO of the MoH: “For this we had to know what we
were working toward. The Bank supported the setting up of a policy unit and the
development of a strategic plan. At first this was very threatening. The reforms had the
ultimate aim of dividing the sector between the providers and the regulators. The Bank
provided the funding needed to implement the reforms. There was frustration on the
part of the Bank at the slow pace, but in 2006 the separation took place.” Between 2005
and 2007, work took place to prepare a Health SWAP supported by a number of
development partners. A strategic plan for the sector was prepared for 2008 to 2018 to
provide a framework for the support under the SWAP. The Bank had a major input into
the legislative reform which established the National Health Service to provide health
care. Another important contribution of the Bank was to help build procurement
capacity. The Bank also contributed to ensuring that new facilities that were built were
resilient to natural disasters. The program would have finished on time but has been
extended to allow for enhancing facilities such as the expansion of the pharmaceuticals
warehouse. Among the achievements of the SWAP have been the speeding up of
legislative reform and regulation. For example, an anti-smoking campaign had been
proposed in 1996, but was only approved in 2008 as a consequence of agreements under
the SWAP.

The Bank has focused its efforts on health in Samoa on institutional strengthening. Prior
to the Bank project, Samoa had no health procurement guidelines. The Bank helped put
them in place. There was some resistance on the part of the Ministry and a failure to
recognize the need to build up capacity to handle procurement. The Bank also
supported the split of the planning, management and operational functions of the sector
between the Ministry and the Health Services, as well as enhanced health sector
planning, financing, waste management, and some rehabilitation of hospital facilities.


52
                                                                                APPENDIX D
                                             ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA
The SWAP modality has played an important role in harmonizing DPs. An independent
review of the SWAP pointed to the lack of hand-over between the TTLs which resulted
in shifting goalposts and some confusion about procurement.

Samoa has a growing problem of NCDs which the Bank is helping the authorities to
address. The Bank’s role has brought much more focus on healthy lifestyles. The donors
have established a Health Promotion Fund to play a pro-active role on NCDs. Under
the SWAP, a particularly important and innovative program was initiated to diagnose
and treat diabetes at an early stage before it has inflicted major damage and costly
treatments including amputations are required. This consists of the recruitment and
training of auxiliary health workers who can test for and make a preliminary diagnosis
of diabetes, and prescribe medications. Doctors come once a week to follow up on this.
These auxiliary workers also have the opportunity to qualify as nurses through a
pathway developed by the Australian Pacific Training Center. The focus of the auxiliary
workers efforts is on education of individuals and communities and glucose tests. In
addition, Village Health Fairs have played a useful role and the formation of Diabetes
Associations.

The Bank is also playing a role in health financing in Samoa. The Bank helped build the
capacity for National Health Accounts prepared in conjunction with an MTEF for the
sector which provided the basis for donor support to cover out of pocket expenses for
health services. The Bank has worked very closely on this with donor other agencies in
the health sector in Samoa. The government has asked the Bank to provide additional
technical assistance in this area, including support for a study on NCDs.

Education

While education has not been a significant focus of Bank support for Samoa, there have
been selective interventions. The DPOs supported the waiver of education fees in
Samoa after the global crisis, to try to ensure that children were not taken out of school
as a result of the inability of their family to pay the fees. In addition the Bank has
provided technical assistance for early childhood education and supported the Early
Grade Reading Assessment program (EGRA) in Samoa. The Bank is now implementing
the early childhood education project in Samoa (see appendix G for more details).

Gender

Samoa has made substantial progress in expanding women’s access to economic
opportunity. The Bank and IFC have systematically included requirements in projects
concerning the proportion of female beneficiaries. An important continuing problem in
Samoa is that, while women are well represented among owners of micro-enterprises,
the evidence is that very few of them graduate into ownership of SMEs. The view is that


                                                                                        53
APPENDIX D
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA
this reflects lack of access to finance, but also the inadequacy of networks and support
systems for women entrepreneurs.

Important gender gaps relate to representation of women in Parliaments and civil
services and the pervasiveness of domestic violence. The problem is with Parliament
where the high representation of traditional leaders who are mostly men, brings down
the share of women overall. Only ‘nobles’ are eligible for election to the Samoan
parliament and 90 percent of these are men. In Samoa violence against women is seen as
the most significant gender issue. A 2004 study put the incidence at 30–40 percent of
women having been abused in the previous five years and this facilitated responses by
government and NGOs. Samoa was a signatory to the Convention on Elimination of all
forms of Discrimination against Women in 1992.

The Bank has attempted to ensure that infrastructure projects factor gender issues into
their design. In Samoa, the West Coast Road project is a good practice example of
gender mainstreaming. The Bank required consultations with women along the route of
the road and numerous change were made to the project including provision for
sidewalks and pedestrian crossings, locations of bus-stops and shelters.

Bank Support for Improving Competitiveness
THE FINANCIAL SECTOR

Access to finance is still very limited in the PICs. In 2013, only 19 percent of Samoans
had bank accounts. Micro-enterprises and SMEs identify access to finance and access to
markets as key constraints. For their part, financial institutions identify lack of collateral
and information asymmetry as key limitations they face in expanding lending to SMEs.
Getting credit remains difficult, with limited publicly available credit information, and
insolvency resolution can be time consuming and costly. Lack of legal title to customary
land, which accounts for about 80 percent of all land in Samoa, and an inability to
transfer ownership, also impedes access to finance.

In 2010, IFC and then AusAID developed the Pacific Microfinance Initiative (PMI) to
promote innovative ventures and to broaden access to basic financial services of
underserved people in the Pacific Region. The modality of the PMI was to provide
performance based grants (PBGs) through financial institutions to entrepreneurs on a
matching basis. The initial experience seems to have been mixed, with one or two
successful activities where PMI was working with a relatively robust institution, but
overall difficulty in building a pipeline of viable projects.

One of the successes of PMI has been a program to support women’s groups in Samoa
and Tonga. The South Pacific Business Development (SPBD) Foundation is a regional


54
                                                                                           APPENDIX D
                                                        ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA
microfinance network primarily focused on improved financial access for female micro-
entrepreneurs. SPBD has operations in Samoa, Tonga and Fiji. SPBD provides small
unsecured loans of up to $400 to groups of rural women. The women meet weekly and
are given training, ongoing guidance and motivation to help them start and grow small
income generating endeavors. SPBD also offers saving, credit insurance and life
insurance products. PMI provided just under $1 million in support of SPBD’s program
in Tonga and Samoa. By 2013 when the project was completed, SPBD had reached 6,482
borrowers in Samoa. The lesson derived from this success is the importance of a well-
functioning intermediary. It does not resolve the issue of how PMI should operate when
such an intermediary is not present.

IFC has been instrumental in supporting banking development and building the
capacity of the banks to lend. IFC has provided support to the Bank South Pacific (BSP),
the largest local bank in Papua New Guinea, with branches in the Solomon Islands, Fiji,
Tonga and Samoa. IFCs 2010 investment in the BSP has led to a major expansion. IFC
owns 9.5 percent of BSP. This is now the only bank able to compete with ANZ Bank in
the region. IFC has steered BSP toward an increased focus on small business. Partly as a
consequence of this, BSP has now reached 200,000 formerly unbanked people. IFC has
also helped to establish a new Credit Bureau in Samoa which will be operational in
early 2016. This should facilitate enhanced lending to the lower two thirds of the
population. In time, the credit bureau should reduce the cost of credit overall by
lowering risks.

The impact of Bank support in enhancing the payments system is reflected in the Bank
program in Samoa. Some early success of the Bank’s efforts in reducing the cost of
sending remittances was very timely in the context of the 2009 tsunami when
remittances to Samoa increased. In 2010, the Bank carried out analytic work to assess
Samoa’s payment remittance and securities settlement system and this provided the
basis for subsequent Bank support. The 2014 DPO supported enactment of a National
Payments System Act in order to facilitate and regulate electronic payments and
emerging innovative payment instruments.

The Samoan CPS targeted a reduction in the cost of remittances (see table D.3) which
was achieved over the CPS period.

Table D.3. Samoa: Achievement of CPS Outcomes for Enhancing Payments Systems

 CPS Outcomes Expected (FY12–16)                     Achievement
 Reduction in remittance costs from current          Achieved. The average cost of remittances in the PICs
 unweighted average of 16% for all schemes, with a   has been reduced from 16 percent in 2010 to 11.5
 policy and payments system in place to support      percent in 2014.
 greater use of mobile money.



                                                                                                             55
APPENDIX D
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA
PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS

An important part of the Bank/IFC program in Samoa has been support for a
framework for public-private partnerships (PPPs) and an attempt to get some initial
operations off the ground. Samoa has set up a PPP framework and a unit. A Bank DPO
in Samoa (the first Fiscal and Economic Reform Operation in August 2014) included as
a prior action approval by the Cabinet of a new PPP policy framework to facilitate
increased participation of the private sector in the state-owned enterprise sector, and
IFC has completed a scoping exercise with the government to identify potential PPP
transactions. A report on this was produced jointly by the Bank and IFC and submitted
to the government in early 2015. IFC is also currently implementing a solid waste
management PPP transaction and advising the government on the future of its joint
venture arrangement with Virgin Samoa.

The CPS outcome in this area has not yet been met however. (see table D.4).

Table D.4. Samoa: Achievement of CPS Outcomes for Enhancing PPPs

 CPS Outcomes Expected (FY12–16)                     Achievement
 Concessions tendered for new private investment     At the time of writing this has not been achieved.
 in energy generation following liberalization and   .
 framework for independent power producers.

INFRASTRUCTURE

Aviation

Air connectivity is essential both for tourism and for migrant labor. In 2011 when the
Bank began a major expansion of its program there was a real risk of suspension of jet
operations due to inadequate operating conditions in the region. This would have had
devastating consequences. Runways were deteriorating, navigational aids and air traffic
systems were not working adequately, and many of the fire trucks were not operational.
Some of the infrastructure date back to World War II.

Aviation has become an important part of the Bank program in the PICs. The Bank first
carried out an assessment of the needs. There were three conditions for countries to
receive support under the program. The first was agreement to meet obligations under
the regional safety oversight program7 (in accordance with international obligations);
second to separate operations from regulation; and third to implement a $5 safety and
security levy on all international departing passengers to fund membership of the
regional organization (PASO). The Bank is providing $180 million with cofinancing

7 This   refers to adequate regulatory audits and inspections.


56
                                                                                APPENDIX D
                                             ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA
from Australia, and parallel financing from New Zealand for Kiribati. The program
mainly finances infrastructure related to runway rehabilitation, terminals, and
equipment such as firefighting equipment and navigational aids. The Bank is also
supporting risk mitigation in the aviation sector with the development of an Insurance
Asset Reserve Fund and the designing of remedial actions in the event of a natural
disaster. The Bank Aviation project in Samoa was approved in March 2014. As
explained above, in November 2014 the Prime Minister indicated that he wanted to take
a $55 million loan from the Chinese EXIM bank for a new airport terminal. There was
no economic analysis of this, it did not meet Samoa’s own procurement requirements
and it contravened the agreed borrowing cost indicator included in the DPO. In the
Bank’s technical view the project is over-scaled and runs a high risk of being a white
elephant. The financial analysis carried out by the Samoa Air Authority indicates that
the terminal is not financially viable. The EXIM bank loan is 7.5 percent of GNP. The
Bank has re-designed the aprons from the runway and fuel hydrant infrastructure to
align with the proposed terminal and a joint integrated environmental and social
management plan has been developed. Another component of Bank support for the
aviation sector in Samoa is the role that IFC has played through evaluating a proposed
joint venture with Virgin in which the government of Samoa owns an equity stake.

Roads

The Bank’s road projects in Samoa were instrumental in downsizing the Public Works
Department (PWD) and making outsourcing the default mechanism for road
maintenance. In the words of one senior official: “SIAM I and SIAM II have changed the
country. There was a huge bureaucracy in the PWD which had 800 staff. 78 percent of
the PWD budget went on staff. The Bank came in and began a long process of helping
to restructure the PWD. Now Samoa has a PWD with 60 staff and only 15–16 percent of
the budget goes for staff.” The project also resulted in the complete separation of policy
and regulation from service provision in all transport modes, with the additional
outsourcing of services in order to develop the private sector as an engine of economic
growth.

The Bank’s major ongoing transport engagement is its support for the West Coast Road
Project financed through a $15 million grant from the Pilot Program for Climate
Resilience. The grant was intended to finance the rehabilitation and ‘climate proofing’
of the entire main West Coast road from the airport to the capital of Apia. The project
was slow to get off the ground however. Initially the project was supposed to fund the
full rehabilitation of the road, with EIB supporting the aviation component of the
project. When EIB funding did not come through, the Bank asked the Australian
government to fund the aviation component. The upshot of this is that there is now



                                                                                        57
APPENDIX D
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA
insufficient funding to do the full road and decisions are needed on what sections to
prioritize.

Telecoms

In Samoa, in the words of a former senior official: “We lagged both global and regional
reforms because of a lack of willingness to take the step of liberalizing the market.” The
2013 Post and Telecoms project in Samoa played an extremely important role. In the
words of a senior official in the government of Tonga at that time: “The project was at
our instigation but came at a time when the Bank was promoting technology across the
region. The relationship was good and we received a lot of TA from the Bank. At a Bank
Annual Meeting in Washington one of the Bank managers took the PM and the Finance
CEO to visit the Bank’s trading room. This helped provide the PM with a vision of what
can happen when technology and free markets were brought together. The Bank played
an important role in securing the cancellation of the exclusive mobile contract of the
state-owned Samoa Telecoms.”

As a result of Bank support, in 2006 Samoa was one of the first PICs to open its telecoms
market to encourage competition and allow new private sector operators. The result has
been to dramatically lower costs and improve coverage with mobile phone usage
increasing in a few years from 20 to close to 100 percent of the population. The Bank
group played a key role by providing extensive support to develop policy and
strengthen regulatory agencies, as well as transaction advisory services for the sale of
SamoaTel to a private investor in 2011. An IFC investment of $10.5 million in Samoa
encouraged total new investments of over $40 million. On June 19, 2015, the World
Bank approved a grant of $16 Million for the Samoa Connectivity Project. The Project
forms part of the World Bank’s Pacific Regional Connectivity Program and will connect
Samoa via a 1,300km cable that will link the country’s largest islands, Upolu and
Savai’i, to the Southern Cross Cable Network in Suva, Fiji.

The Samoa CPS included two milestones toward the outcomes for ICT (see table D.5).
As indicated this is on track for achievement however, probably not within the time-
frame envisaged in the CPS. The outcomes that were defined in the CPS required the
fiber optic cable to be in place for their achievement.




58
                                                                                         APPENDIX D
                                                      ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA
Table D.5. Samoa: Achievement of CPS Outcomes for ICT

 CPS Outcomes Expected (FY12–16)                                   Achievement
 Fiber optic cable linking Samoa with trans-Pacific               Not yet achieved.
 cables.

 Regulatory environment allows competition with
 equal access by all retail market players to buy                    Achieved
 international bandwidth on a fair and transparent
 basis

Energy

ADB has historically led on energy sector issues in Samoa and has helped the
government to develop a roadmap. While Bank engagement has been limited, IFC has
worked with the government and ADB to explore options to encourage new private
generation investment such as for proposed hydropower investments in Sava’ai Island.

SUPPORT FOR KEY SECTORS WITH GROWTH POTENTIAL: TOURISM AND AGRICULTURE

The Bank has used its DPOs in Samoa to provide support to the tourism sector. The first
DPO after the tsunami was helpful in contributing to an awareness of the need to
support the tourism sector in the aftermath of natural disasters. Under the DPO, an
agreement was reached that the Central Bank of Samoa would provide a credit line of
SAT 5 million, with a five year term, an interest rate of 3 percent, and grace period of
twelve months, to the Development Bank of Samoa for on-lending for tsunami
reconstruction projects in the tourism sector. Nineteen projects (of a total estimated 54
operators impacted by the tsunami) have been supported across eleven villages, with
loans being disbursed between April 2010 and March 2011. As most projects are still
within the grace period, information does not yet exist to assess the repayment
performance of individual projects. Neither the Development Bank of Samoa nor the
Samoan Tourism Authority foresee any problems in operators meeting repayments.
While some informal fale (open-sided beach accommodations for tourists) operators
have found interest rates and compliance requirements under the scheme prohibitive,
and reconstruction of small-scale fale operations has lagged in comparison to more
commercial operations, the authorities generally consider the scheme to have been a
success. The Samoan Tourism Authority currently estimates that 90 percent of tourism
infrastructure affected by the tsunami has now been reconstructed, and reports no
capacity constraints across the sector. In addition to the post-tsunami program, a prior
agreement for the first Fiscal and Economic Reform DPO in mid-2014 included a
modification by the government of its tourism policy to allow for enhanced tourism
promotion and market access arrangements.



                                                                                                59
APPENDIX D
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA
In 1990, IFC carried out a diagnostic of impediments to the development of the tourism
industry in five Pacific countries where tourism is an important economic activity. In
Samoa, several activities have been undertaken, based on the findings of the IFC
diagnostic and with the support of New Zealand AID. These include; establishing a
formal tourism sector Public-Private Dialogue (PPD) process via the Samoa Tourism
Forum, a new draft law completed by the Samoa Tourism Authority and Public Sector
Reform Facility to formalize its role in tourism promotion, and establishing workplace
training programs in the tourism sector.

More recently, IFC is playing an important role in exploring various options for
promoting tourism in the region as a whole. In 2012 IFC launched the Pacific Regional
Tourism Initiative (PRTI), with three focus countries—Samoa, Tonga, and Vanuatu. The
initiative aimed at mobilizing $15 million in new investments in tourism infrastructure
as well as $30 million in new tourism investment to support up to 4,000 new tourist
arrivals across the three pilot countries over three years.8

The related outcome targeted in the Samoa CPS has not yet been met (see table D.6).

Table D.6. Samoa: Achievement of CPS Outcomes for Supporting Tourism

    CPS Outcomes Expected (FY12–16)                              Achievement
    IFC tourism investments to support 4,000 new                Not yet achieved.
    arrivals across 3 pilot countries by 2016 [Samoa
    specific indicators will be developed as this initiative
    progresses and will be included in the CPS
    Progress Report.

Agriculture

The Bank has two projects in Samoa providing direct support for farmers and
fishermen. The first of these, the Samoa Agricultural Competitiveness Enhancement
Project (SACEP) was financed by a combination of IDA credits and grant resources
from the Global Food Crisis Response Program (GFRP) and was designed to support
greater livestock and fruit and vegetable production by subsistence and semi-
commercial farmers. Support is in the forms of matching grants, business development
planning and operation, and technical advice to help improve production and
marketing practices. In addition to the main focus on semi-commercial farmers, some
training is to be provided for subsistence farmers (but no direct inputs/grants). The
farmers apply for participation in a training program, and a group of them are selected
after the training to participate in the project. Some officials expressed concern about


8   Project Supervision Report for the Pacific Tourism Project FY15 Q4.


60
                                                                                    APPENDIX D
                                                 ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA
the focus on commercial farmers rather than a broader outreach to subsistence farmers.
The key is however, to develop viable models of commercial farming linked to value
chains that can be replicated in the future. The second project, the Samoa Agriculture
and Fisheries Cyclone Response Project was approved in FY14, in the wake of Tropical
Cyclone Evan. This project was discussed above in the environmental resilience section.
The project was financed by a grant of $5 million from the IDA Crisis Response
Window (CRW) and was designed to provide recovery assistance to cyclone affected
farmers and fishermen through vouchers and grants with the aim of restoring their lost
production capacity. The project also sought to enhance preparedness of the
agricultural sector to better respond to future disasters.

The SACEP project has a major focus on upgrading livestock and meat processing in
Samoa. There has been substantial destocking in Samoa and herds have declined from
50,000 down to 30,000. Many farmers seem to keep cattle mainly as a means of meeting
the social obligations linked to funerals in Samoa, when cattle are slaughtered and
given as gifts to church groups.9 The program is focused mainly on import of breeding
cattle and work with local institutions to propagate breeds. Farmers get grants for
pasturing and there is an assessment of the changes that are being made.10 Samoa did
not have any abattoirs. The project has provided funding and the mobile abattoirs will
arrive shortly. A major issue is the lack of middlemen. It will take time to develop the
links needed for value chains.

The project has also covered most vegetable varieties. The next task will be to validate
the trials and build supply chains. There are on-farm investments through matching
grants. Typically farmers invest in improved water harvesting and drip irrigation, in
shade and storage houses, and fencing. Rock removal is also an important feature of the
project in Samoa where rocks are a major issue for farm production. Lack of secure
tenure is an issue here as well. The key however, as with livestock and meat processing
is the need for linkages with the companies that currently import raw and processed
foods and to contract reliable supplies to the domestic and particularly the tourism




9A government official told the mission that they were trying to encourage farmers to give live
animals to the local pastors rather than slaughter them, in the hope that the pastors themselves
would become significant cattle farmers.
10 Theevaluation team was informed that 40 percent of matching grants under the project go to
women, but could not verify this and while a number of project beneficiaries were visited, none
were women. It is possible that in some cases wives are being put down as nominal
beneficiaries in order to secure access to funding, although, if this is the case, they would be
required to attend the training that is a pre-condition of support under the project.


                                                                                               61
APPENDIX D
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA
markets in Samoa. If this can be done, the project will provide an important model for
future development of the agriculture sector in the PICs.11

The Samoa CPS included a number of outcomes and milestones related to the project
(see table D.7). The outcomes, for example, major increases in agricultural output, were
extremely optimistic seem far out of reach for the end of FY16. The milestones however,
are a more useful set of measurable targets that seem within range at present.

Table D.7. Samoa: Achievement of CPS Outcomes (Milestones) for Supporting Agriculture

 CPS Outcomes Expected (FY12–16)                        Achievement
 Matching grant scheme to support up to 1,000 farmers   Matching grant support reached 290 farmers by March
 by 2016 to upgrade livestock and fruit and vegetable   2016.
 production.
 New breeding stock imported by end 2014 to             Achieved. Breeding stock has been imported
 strengthen nucleus breeding program
 Field slaughter service established by 2015            The field slaughter service is not yet operational, but is
                                                        being contracted for.
 Identification and introduction of new fruit and       The identification and introduction of new varieties is on
 vegetable varieties by end 2014.                       track. A number of new varieties have been identified
                                                        and are on sale in government nurseries.
 Strengthened agricultural extension services           It is difficult to assess whether the agricultural
                                                        extension services have been strengthened, but there
                                                        was evidence among the beneficiaries that the mission
                                                        met with, that the extension service is following up with
                                                        them on a fairly regular basis.

At the time of writing matching grant support has only reached 290 farmers. While the
milestone is unlikely to be reached in the time-frame, the project authorities are moving
to recruit farmers for the next round and to organize the training which is a key part of
the program. All the indicators in the results framework are project outputs12 rather
than outcomes and the key element needed to match those two—marketing
arrangements—have not as yet been put in place.



11 Current investment opportunities exist in the poultry sector, beef and mutton branding, fruits
and vegetable packaging, and a range of agro-processing ventures. There is room for IFC to tap
into these opportunities, particularly with the larger agro-entrepreneurs. The Bank and IFC
have agreed on the need for IFC technical assistance in quantifying the demand for food in the
retail outlets within the tourism linked hospitality industry.
12 Asper the March 2015 MTR, the new target for farmers benefiting from matching grant (as
per project restructuring currently underway to extend closing date to March 2019) has been
revised down substantially to 600 given the lower-than-expected engagement of smaller-scale
producers. Yet, the total value of matching grants will still meet the target.


62
                                                                                       APPENDIX D
                                                    ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA

Overall Assessment for Samoa Program
In Samoa the outcomes over the evaluation period as a whole are assessed as
satisfactory (see table D.8). If the assessment was limited to the years covered by the
CPS, the rating would only have been Moderately Satisfactory. However, in the earlier
years of the evaluation period when the Bank’s engagement was relatively high by
comparison to some other PICs, there were a number of signal achievements in areas
such as health, transport, and posts and telecoms. As shown in the table below, the
Bank Group’s engagement has been across a wide range of programs in Samoa, yet the
budget has allowed for sufficient depth and continuity of Bank involvement to generate
positive results in most of the areas covered. This broad coverage has not come at the
expense of strategic focus. There is a very clear difference between the core of the
Bank’s efforts and areas where the Bank provided support in response to government
or donor requests, or the availability of Bank trust fund resources. It is important also to
recall the context -these were difficult years for Samoa with the impact of the global
crisis and a series of natural disasters slowing the growth rate and increasing hardship
among the population. In the light of this, the positive results achieved are encouraging.

Table D.8. Achievement of Results in Samoa
 Objective                               Rating   Comments
 Pillar 1: Building Resilience
 1. Building. Economic Resilience         MS
 More efficient public expenditures       S       Outsourcing of health service delivery and road
                                                  maintenance
 Sustainable debt management.             MU      Samoa achievements undercut by decision to borrow for
                                                  air terminal
 Enhanced PFM                             MS      Limited goals and focus on simple approaches
 Selected revenue increases               S       Focused on tobacco and sugar
 2. Building Environmental Resilience     MS
 Disaster Risk Management and             MS
 Climate Change Adaptation
 3. Building Social Resilience             S
 Increased labor migration                HS      Major beneficiary of RSE scheme
 Better health outcomes                    S      Enhanced management and greater emphasis on NCDs
 Better education outcomes                NR      Contribution only to ‘niches’ such as EGRA and PEARL
 Gender Equality                           S      Gender effectively mainstreamed in Bank operations
 Pillar 2: Improving Competitiveness
 1. Building Stronger Financial Sector    NR      Not strategic but effective support for women’s groups,
                                                  payments etc.
 2. Enhancing legal and regulatory        NR      Not strategic but enhanced private involvement in
 frameworks                                       infrastructure
 3. Improving Infrastructure               S


                                                                                                            63
APPENDIX D
ASSESSMENT OF THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN SAMOA

 Objective                                        Rating     Comments
 Enhanced aviation                                  S        Effective Bank leadership, Satisfactory progress of
                                                             ongoing project (approved in 2014)
 Road rehab. and resilience                          S       Major contribution through outsourcing and resilience, but
                                                             slow progress on West Coast Road
 Telecoms connectivity                               S       Opening sector and investment in enhanced cable
                                                             connections
 Energy access and man.                             NR       Limited Bank role in Samoa where ADB was in the lead
 d. Supporting Productive sectors                   NR
 Fisheries management                               NR       Mainly through regional programs
 Tourism development                                NR       IFC efforts are at an early stage

 Agricultural productivity                          NR       Recent engagement. Bank project will take considerable
                                                             time to show results
 OVERALL                                             S

Note: H = high; HS = highly satisfactory; MS = moderately satisfactory; NR = nonrated.




64
Appendix E. World Bank Group Operational
Program in Samoa FY05–15
Detailed Portfolio Analysis
Over the FY05–15 period, the World Bank Group committed a total of $216 million of
mostly IDA credits to Samoa. Thirty two new operations amounting to commitments of
about $219 million were approved during FY05–15, with IDA credits accounting for 70
percent of total commitments (see table E.1). IFC investments during the period
amounted to about $19 million (8 percent) while trust fund grants to Samoa operations
totaled $31 million (14 percent). In addition to the national IDA allocation, Samoa also
benefited from the regional IDA allocation designated for regional projects as well as
from $12 million for four IDA grants to regional bodies acting as implementing agencies
for World Bank projects.1,2 During the period reviewed, 45 percent of the Bank
administrative budget was spent on project supervision, 21 percent on lending and 21
percent on the delivery of AAA (see table E.5).

Table E.1. World Bank Group Financing Commitments to Samoa, FY05–15
                                                     Commitment
                                        Number of      Amount      Commitment amount as % of total
                                       commitments      (USS,             commitments
                                                      $millions)
    IDA credits for Samoa                    13         154.6                    70
    operations
    Trust fund grants to Samoa                8         31.2                     14
    IFC investments                           3         18.6                      8
    IDA grants to regional                    4         11.7                      5
    projects
    Trust fund grants to regional             4          3.3                     2
    institutions
    Total                                    32         219.3                   100
Source: World Bank Business Intelligence database.


1
 The regional bodies and associated World Bank projects included the University of the South
Pacific (Pacific Regional ICT Regulatory Development Project), Pacific Aviation Safety Office
(Pacific Aviation Safety Office Reform project), and the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (Pacific
Resilience Program).
2
 The regional IDA allocation is used to finance two-thirds of a country’s share of the costs of a
regional project, with the remaining one-third contribution from the country’s IDA allocations.
There is however a 20 percent ceiling placed on country contributions to regional projects.


                                                                                                 65
APPENDIX E
WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY05–15
IDA commitments to Samoa fluctuated over the review period but have risen
dramatically in recent years. IDA lending to Samoa occurred in three distinct periods
between which were years of zero IDA commitments.3 During the first two years of the
evaluation period, there were no IDA commitments made to Samoa. Lending to Samoa
resumed in 2007 and averaged about $6 million over the FY07–08 period. Over the
FY10–12 period, the Bank approved a $20 million Economic Recovery support operation
and a $10 million Post Tsunami Reconstruction project to support the government of
Samoa’s efforts to counter the impacts of a series of crises (food and fuel crisis, global
economic crisis and a tsunami). Average annual IDA commitments during this period
amounted to about $14 million. The FY14–15 period was characterized by a sharp
increase in the average annual IDA commitments on account of the large number of
commitments approved in the two years4 (see figure E.1).


    Figure E.1. IDA Commitments and Disbursements to Samoa, FY05–15
                      80

                      60
            US$ millions




                      40

                      20

                           0
                               2005   2006   2007   2008   2009      2010      2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
                                                                 Fiscal Year
                                             Commitment amount                    Disbursement


    Source: World Bank Business Intelligence database.


The approved operations were largely investment projects and were concentrated in the
transport and ICT sector. The lending operations approved during the period occurred
primarily through investment loans which comprised 73 percent of the value and 77
percent of the number of IDA commitments.5 The sectoral composition of IDA lending
operations was concentrated in the transport sector, with commitments classified under
the transport and ICT global practice accounting for more than half of total lending (see
figure E.2). Overall, five key thematic areas accounted for the bulk of IDA commitments
to Samoa—transport and ICT, macroeconomics and fiscal management, social, urban,


3
    There were no IDA commitments approved in FY09 and FY13.
4
    Seven new commitments totaling $ 102 million were approved in FY14 and 15.
5
    Three DPLs totaling $42.5 million were approved in 2010, 2014, and 2015.


66
                                                                                         APPENDIX E
                                             WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY 05–15
rural and resilience (under which virtually all disaster risk management operations are
classified), agriculture, and health nutrition and population.


        Figure E.2. IDA Commitments to Samoa by Global Practice, FY05–15
                                   6.0
                              13.0
                                   4%                           Transport & ICT
                              8%

                          13.8                                  Macro Economics & Fiscal
                          9%                                    Management

                                                   79.3         Social, Urban, Rural and
                                                   51%          Resilience Global Practice
                                 42.5                           Agriculture
                                 28%

                                                                Health, Nutrition &
                                                                Population




        Source: World Bank Business Intelligence database.


Bank analytic and advisory activities (AAA) informed key areas of Bank Group support
and also contributed to building capacity. The Bank delivered a total of nine AAA
products focused specifically on Samoa and 38 products whose focus also spanned
other Pacific islands. The total cost of delivering these products amounted to about $20
million in Bank (administrative) budget and trust fund financing (see table E.7). The
bulk of AAA was delivered in the form of nonlending technical assistance (NLTA)
which accounted for 64 percent of the number and 73 percent of the total cost of AAA
delivery. The sectoral composition of the AAA delivered showed more variation than
the IDA lending although five sectors accounted for more than half of the number of
AAA products6 (see figure E.3). Financial resources from Bank administered trust funds
were vital to the delivery of AAA support, particularly NLTA for which trust funds
financed about 85 percent of the cost of delivery. Bank analytic products were
instrumental in building the knowledge base in strategic areas such as financial sector
development, debt, natural hazard risks, health, and infrastructure. Of particular note
were the Bank’s Pacific 2020 and Pacific futures reports which examined the long-term
prospects for the Pacific Islands and sought to identify feasible development paths and
opportunities for the Pacific Islands. Other key AAA delivered during the period
included reports on: public expenditure management, parametric insurance, migration
and remittances, and regional ports and shipping. The Bank also provided hands-on

6
 Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management, finance and markets, trade and competitiveness,
environment and transport and ICT global practices together accounted for 53 percent of the
number of AAA products.


                                                                                                67
APPENDIX E
WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY05–15
capacity-building support in several areas, ranging from the articulation of a debt
management reform plan to providing guidance on how to mainstream DRM into
recovery and development plans.


     Figure E.3. AAA activities to Samoa by Global Practice, FY05–15

                                       MFM
                          Finance & Markets
                                    Trade &…
                                        ENV
                            Transport & ICT
      Global Practice




                                 Agriculture
                                  Education
                                       SURR
                                        HNP
                         Poverty and Equity
                         Social Protection &…
                        Energy & Extractives
                                 Governance
                                       Other

                                            0   1          2           3          4   5   6
                                                               Number of Products
                                                    NLTA                  ESW


     Source: World Bank Business Intelligence database.
     Note: ESW = economic and sector work; NLTA = nonlending technical assistance.


Advisory services support was the predominant form of IFC support to Samoa during
the evaluation period. IFC investments in Samoa were sparse and limited to two
investments in the telecoms sector. The two investments, both in Digicel Samoa,
amounted to $18.5 million and enabled the operator to enter the liberalized Samoa
telecom sector and helped to increase the quality and availability of telecommunications
services in Samoa. Advisory services on the other hand, were more abundant, and were
broadly concentrated in the areas of improving access to finance, sustainable business
advisory, and Public Private Partnership (PPP) transactions advisory. In the area of
access to finance, IFC technical assistance activities sought to increase access to finance
for underserved populations and for tourism related activities. To this end, IFC
provided training to various stakeholders in the tourism sector and advisory service
support to a microfinance institution. As part of its PPP advisory services, IFC served as
the lead advisor for a public-private partnership, which established a new national
airline, Virgin Samoa (formerly Polynesian Blue), and restructured the existing flagship
carrier. By 2009, 243,000 people received improved airline service, and consumers saved
$57.7 million in reduced airfares between 2005 and 2009.7 Under the trade and

7
 IFC was mandated to conduct a review of Samoan aviation, analyze the performance of
Polynesian Airlines, review options available to the government, and recommend an approach


68
                                                                                  APPENDIX E
                                      WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY 05–15
competitiveness business line, IFC provided technical assistance to the Supreme Court
of Samoa and the Ministry of Justice and Courts Administration (MJCA) to help
establish a cost-effective and sustainable alternative for commercial dispute resolution
in Samoa, as a complement to the formal court system. There were no MIGA projects
during the evaluation period.

The performance of completed projects in the Samoa was higher than the World Bank
average, albeit with some risks to development outcomes. IEG assessments of the 5
Bank-supported operations that exit the portfolio during the evaluation period showed
better development outcome ratings (100 percent rated as moderately satisfactory) than
the average for the East Asia and Pacific Region Region (76 percent), and the Bank as a
whole (73 percent). However, a significant risk to development outcome was found one
of the 5 instances where risk was assessed. The $21 million net commitment for the
Second Infrastructure Asset management project represented 38 percent of the value of
all projects assessed for risk to development outcome. The significant risk to
development outcomes was assigned on the basis of two main factors; (i) Samoa’s
vulnerability to natural hazards was deemed as posing a high risk to the infrastructure
improved under the project, and (ii) the insufficient budget allocated for road network
maintenance rendered the sustainability of the transport and coastal infrastructure at
risk.

The riskiness of the Bank’s portfolio under implementation was effectively zero for all
but one year of the evaluation period. During the two periods FY05–12 and FY14–15,
none of the projects or commitments in the Samoa portfolio were deemed to be at risk.
This portfolio riskiness contrasted favorably with an average of 14 percent of the
number of projects and 10 percent of commitment volumes at risk in East Asia Pacific,
and a world average of 20 percent of the number of projects and 16 percent of
commitment volumes at risk over the same period. In FY13, one project, the Samoa
Health Sector management program support project was considered to be at risk. The
assessed risks to development outcome related mainly to the inadequacy of the results
framework to achieve the desired development outcomes and the high likelihood of
procurement delays given the significant number of activities to be undertaken.




that would achieve the government’s objectives. After recommending that the government
implement a public-private partnership with an international aviation investor, IFC was asked
to serve as lead advisor. IFC assisted in marketing the opportunity to potential investors,
structuring the joint-venture agreement, evaluating business plans, negotiating contracts, and
achieving financial closure.


                                                                                             69
Table E.2. Number and Total Commitment Amount (US$ millions) of commitments to Samoa, FY05–15
                                                 2005        2007          2008           2010        2011           2012        2013        2014         2015        Total
                                              No US$      No US$        No US$         No US$      No US$         No US$      No US$      No US$       No US$      No US$
                    Global                     .    Amt    .    Amt      .    Amt       .    Amt    .    Amt       .    Amt    .    Amt    .    Amt     .    Amt    .    Amt.
                   Practice                           .           .             .              .           .              .           .           .            .
 Agriculture                                                                                                       1    8.0                1    5.0                 2    13.0
 Energy and Extractives                                                                                                                                             0    0.0
 Environment and Natural Resources                                                                 1    0.5                               1    14.6                 2    15.1
 Governance                                   1     0.2                                                                                                             1    0.2
 Health, Nutrition, and Population                                      1     3.0      1    3.0                                                                     2    6.0
 Macro Economics and Fiscal Management                                                 1    20.0                                          1    15.0     1    7.5    3    42.5
 Poverty and Equity                                                                                                                                                 0    0.0
 Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global                                                                       1    0.2                              1   13.8    2    14.0
 Practice
 Transport and ICT                                         1     8.3                               1     10                   1    14.8   2    45.0     1   16.0   6     94.1
 Total                                        1     0.2    1     8.3    1     3.0      2    23.0   2    10.5      2    8.2    1    14.8   5    79.6     3   37.3   18    184.
                                                                                                                                                                          9
Source: Source: World Bank Business Intelligence as of January, 2016
Note: Data include supplements and trust fund grants but does not include Pacific Islands regional commitments.


Table E.3. Project Ratings for Samoa and Comparators Exit FY05–15
                                                                                           Risks To Development              Institutional
                                                           Outcome (Moderately                                                                        Sustainability (Likely
                                 Total Evaluated                                            Outcomes (Moderate           Development Impact
                                                           Satisfactory or Better)                                                                      or Highly Likely)
                                                                                                 or Lower)               (Substantial or High)
 Country/Region            (US$, millions)     Number       (US$, millions)       %         (US$, millions)  %           (US$, millions)     %        (US$, millions)     %
 Cabo Verde                     188              13              162             85              112        71                 20           69              —             —
 Tonga                           40               7               39             98               28        71                 —             —              —             —
 OECS states                    189              35              159             84               92        62                  9           23              42           100
 Mauritius                      348              11              348             100             299        86                  1           100              1           100
 Samoa                           55               5               55             100              34        62                 —             —              —             —
 Seychelles                      18               2               18             100              18        100                —             —              —             —
 EAP Region                   41,343            438            34,132            83            29,189       81               4,040          73            4,829           93



                                                                                                                                                                           70
                                                                                                                                                APPENDIX E
                                                                                                    WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY 05–15

                                                                                          Risks To Development            Institutional
                                                           Outcome (Moderately                                                                     Sustainability (Likely
                              Total Evaluated                                              Outcomes (Moderate         Development Impact
                                                           Satisfactory or Better)                                                                   or Highly Likely)
                                                                                                or Lower)             (Substantial or High)
 Country/Region          (US$, millions)      Number         (US$, millions)       %       (US$, millions)  %         (US$, millions)    %          (US$, millions)      %
 World Bank total           225,440            2826             185,484            83         132,418      65            12,688          61            17,214            88
Source: Source: World Bank Business Intelligence Database as of Jan 2016.
Note: US$, millions = net commitment amount; number = number of projects assigned IEG ratings; % = proportion of projects assigned the ratings indicated; For each category
and country, the denominator used to calculate the percentage is the total number of projects assigned an IEG rating for the category. EAP = East Asia and Pacific Region.


Table E.4. IEG Project Ratings for Samoa, Exit FY05–15
                                                                      Net                            IEG Risk to   IEG Bank
                                                                                          IEG                                                      IEG Overall
  Exit                         Project            Approval        Commitment                        Development    Quality At      IEG Bank                           Sector
            Proj ID                                                                     Outcome                                                       Bank
  FY                            Name                FY              Amount                            Objective      Entry        Supervision                         Board
                                                                                         rating                                                   Performance
                                                                 (US$, millions)                       Rating        rating
 2007      P064926       WS-Health Sector           2001              5.6                MS        MODERATE           MS              MS               MS            Health,
                        Management Project                                                                                                                         Nutrition, and
                                                                                                                                                                    Population
 2008      P088246         WS-CYCLONE ERP             2004           4.6             MS           MODERATE            MS           S                MS              Transport
 2010      P118636           Economic Crisis          2010          19.5             MS         NEGLIGIBLE TO          S           S                S               Economic
                            Recovery Support                                                           LOW                                                            Policy
                                   Credit
 2011       P075739               Samoa -             2003           4.0             MS           MODERATE            MU         MS                 MS             GICT
                           Telecommunications
                             and Post Reform
 2013       P075523         WS-INFRA ASSET            2004          21.1             MS          SIGNIFICANT          MS         MS                 MS          Transport
                               MGMT APL2
Source: World Bank database as of August, 2015. Risk to development objective is rated for projects from FY07 onward.
Note: FY = fiscal year; GICT = Global Information and Communications Technology; IEG = Independent Evaluation Group; MS = moderately satisfactory; MU = moderately
unsatisfactory; S = satisfactory; U = unsatisfactory.
Table E.5. Bank Budget by Cost Structure Category, FY05–15 (in US$ thousands and percent)
                                                                            Project                            Analytic and Advisory                Country Program
 Sector Board                                                Total        Supervision             Lending             Support                          Support
                   US$, thousands



                                                                                                                                                                              71
APPENDIX E
WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY05–15

                                                          Project               Analytic and Advisory   Country Program
 Sector Board                                   Total   Supervision   Lending          Support             Support
 Agriculture and Rural Development              1,392       868         520                5                   ..
 Capital Markets Practice                         47         ..          ..               47                   ..
 Competitive Industries Practice                 472         ..          ..              472                   ..
 Economic Policy                                 356        63          86               207                   ..
 Education                                      1,890      1,261        513              116                   ..
 Energy and Mining                              3,349      2,075       1,053             221                   ..
 Environment                                      39         ..          ..               39                   ..
 Financial and Private Sector Development (I)    452         ..          ..              452                   ..
 Financial Inclusion Practice                     23         ..          ..               23                   ..
 Global Information and Communications           437         ..         364               73                   ..
 Technology
 Health, Nutrition, and Population              2,156      1,572        532             52                     ..
 Investment Climate Practice                     421        100         322              ..                    ..
 Poverty Reduction                               227         ..          ..             227                    ..
 Procurement                                      4          ..          ..              4                     ..
 Public Sector Governance                        681         1           ..             680                    ..
 Social Development                              505        320          ..             184                    ..
 Social Protection                              1,306       778         231             297                    ..
 Transport                                       272        89          20              164                    ..
 Urban Development                              2,365      1,687        669              9                     ..
 Not assigned                                   5,158       783         221            1,250                 2,905
 Total                                          21,55      9,595       4,530           4,522                 2,905
                                                  2
 Cost structure (percent)
 Agriculture and Rural Development              100         62          37               0                    0
 Capital Markets Practice                       100         0            0              100                   0
 Competitive Industries Practice                100         0            0              100                   0
 Economic Policy                                100         18          24              58                    0



72
                                                                                                                              APPENDIX E
                                                                                  WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY 05–15

                                                             Project                           Analytic and Advisory        Country Program
 Sector Board                                    Total     Supervision       Lending                  Support                  Support
 Education                                        100          67              27                         6                        0
 Energy and Mining                                100          62              31                         7                        0
 Environment                                      100           0               0                       100                        0
 Financial and Private Sector Development (I)     100           0               0                       100                        0
 Financial Inclusion Practice                     100           0               0                       100                        0
 Global Information and Communications            100           0              83                        17                        0
 Technology
 Health, Nutrition, and Population               100             73               25                    2                          0
 Investment Climate Practice                     100             24               76                    0                          0
 Poverty Reduction                               100             0                 0                   100                         0
 Procurement                                     100             0                 0                   100                         0
 Public Sector Governance                        100             0                 0                   100                         0
 Social Development                              100             63                0                   37                          0
 Social Protection                               100             60               18                   23                          0
 Transport                                       100             33                7                   60                          0
 Urban Development                               100             71               28                    0                          0
 Not assigned                                    100             15                4                   24                         56
 Total                                           100             45               21                   21                         13

Table E.6. Samoa Economic and Social Indicators, 2005–2014

 Series Name                                             2005     2006    2007         2008     2009    2010     2011    2012    2013    2014
 Growth and inflation
 GDP growth (annual %)                                    4.2      2.0     6.3           1.0    -4.8      0.5     5.7      0.4    -1.9     1.2
 GDP per capita growth (annual %)                         3.5      1.3     5.6           0.3    -5.5     -0.2     4.9     -0.3    -2.7     0.4
 GNI per capita, PPP (current international $)           4,500    4,620   5,030        5,130   4,960    5,140    5,470   5,490   5,450   5,610
 GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$)              2,370    2,560   2,850        3,050   3,020    3,230    3,590   3,860   3,960   4,060
 Inflation, consumer prices (annual %)                    1.9      3.7     5.6          11.6     6.3      0.8     5.2      2.0     0.6    -0.4
 Composition of GDP



                                                                                                                                              73
APPENDIX E
WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY05–15
 Series Name                                                     2005    2006    2007    2008   2009    2010    2011    2012    2013   2014
 Agriculture, value added (% of GDP)                               ..      ..      ..      ..     ..      ..      ..      ..      ..     ..
 Industry, value added (% of GDP)                                  ..      ..      ..      ..     ..      ..      ..      ..      ..     ..
 Services, etc., value added (% of GDP)                            ..      ..      ..      ..     ..      ..      ..      ..      ..     ..
 External Accounts
 Exports of goods and services (% of GDP)                         28.4    28.9   29.7    28.9   30.2    29.2    28.7    27.7    30.3   28.2
 Imports of goods and services (% of GDP)                         49.4    52.6   54.9    48.0   51.8    53.1    48.7    51.7    50.5   52.5
 Current account balance (% of GDP)                              -10.2   -15.2   -8.0    -9.3   -2.2    -6.6    -8.6    -3.8    -5.8     ..
 External debt stocks (% of GNI)                                  38.3    35.1   35.3    35.8   45.6    51.1    50.1    55.1    58.6   58.1
 Present value of external debt (% of GNI)                          ..      ..     ..      ..     ..      ..      ..      ..      ..   40.9
 Total debt service (% of GNI)                                     1.3     1.5    1.3     1.4    1.5     1.7     1.6     1.7     2.0    2.5
 Other macroeconomic indicators
 Gross fixed capital formation, private sector (% of GDP)         ..      ..      ..      ..     ..      ..      ..      ..      ..     ..
 Gross savings (% of GDP)                                         ..      ..      ..      ..     ..      ..      ..      ..      ..     ..
 Fiscal accounts
 Cash surplus/deficit (% of GDP)                                  ..      ..      ..      ..     ..     -0.01   -0.01   -0.01    ..     ..
 General government final consumption expenditure (% of GDP)      ..      ..      ..      ..     ..       ..      ..      ..     ..     ..
 Gross national expenditure (% of GDP)                            ..      ..      ..      ..     ..       ..      ..      ..     ..     ..
 Revenue, excluding grants (% of GDP)                             ..      ..      ..      ..     ..      0.02    0.02    0.02    ..     ..
 Social indicators
 Health expenditure, public (% of GDP)                            4.0     4.4     5.1     4.3    4.9     5.6     6.0     5.9     6.7    ..
 Out-of-pocket health expenditure (% of private expenditure on   68.5    62.5    63.7    62.4   62.6    62.6    62.6    62.6    62.6    ..
 health)
 Immunization, DPT (% of children ages 12-23 months)              64.0    56.0    71.0   46.0    72.0    87.0    91.0    92.0   95.0   91.0
 Improved sanitation facilities (% of population with access)     92.0    91.9    91.8   91.8    91.7    91.7    91.6    91.6   91.5   91.5
 Improved water source (% of population with access)              95.5    95.9    96.3   96.8    97.2    97.6    98.1    98.5   99.0   99.0
 Life expectancy at birth, total (years)                          71.0    71.3    71.6   71.8    72.1    72.4    72.7    73.0   73.3    ..
 Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births)                   16.5    16.4    16.2   16.1    17.0    16.0    16.0    15.8   15.6   15.4
 Gross enrolment ratio, pre-primary, both sexes (%)                ..      ..     46.6   41.6    41.4    35.5    38.9    33.9    ..     ..
 Gross enrolment ratio, primary, both sexes (%)                  109.4   108.6   107.9    ..    106.4   110.8   106.5   105.2    ..     ..
 Gross enrolment ratio, secondary, both sexes (%)                 83.0    83.7    83.9    ..     86.1    87.7    86.4    85.7    ..     ..
 Gross enrolment ratio, tertiary, both sexes (%)                   ..      ..      ..     ..      ..      ..      ..      ..     ..     ..



74
                                                                                                                                               APPENDIX E
                                                                                                   WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY 05–15
 Series Name                                                            2005     2006      2007       2008     2009      2010       2011      2012       2013       2014
 Population, total                                                     179,92   181,07    182,23     183,44   184,70    186,02     187,43    188,90     190,39     191,84
                                                                          8        2         8          0        0         9          4         1          0          5
 Population growth (annual %)                                            0.6      0.6       0.6        0.7      0.7       0.7        0.8       0.8        0.8        0.8
 Urban population (% of total)                                          21.2     21.0      20.8       20.5     20.3      20.1       19.9      19.6       19.4       19.3
 Population, female (% of total)                                        48.2     48.3      48.3       48.4     48.4      48.4       48.4      48.4       48.4       48.4
 Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty lines (% of population)      ..       ..        ..       26.9       ..        ..         ..        ..         ..         ..
 Fixed telephone subscriptions (per 100 people)                         10.8       ..        ..         ..       ..       4.3         ..       4.4        4.4        6.1
 Unemployment, total (% of total labor force) (national estimate)         ..      1.3        ..         ..       ..        ..        5.7       8.7         ..         ..


Table E.7. Samoa—List of World Bank AAA, FY05–15
                                                                                                                            AAA Cost        AAA Cost
                                                                                                                                                           Total Cost
 Proj ID                                                                                    Fiscal year of      Product       (BB)            (TF)
                     Project Name          World Bank Global Practice           Country                                                                    Delivered
 (AAA)                                                                                         delivery          Line       Delivered       Delivered
                                                                                                                                                            (US$T)
                                                                                                                             (US$T)          (US$T)
 P079585         Samoa-Operational                   Governance                 Samoa              FY05           EW          52.6             0.0               52.6
                 Procurement Review
 P082197          WS-health review              Health, Nutrition, and          Samoa              FY05            TA             0.0         15.8               15.8
                                                     Population
 P116319        Parametric Insurance                 Agriculture                Samoa              FY11            TA             0.0         62.2               62.2
                      Study
 P120701         Samoa Agriculture                    Agriculture               Samoa              FY11            TA             0.0         322.1              322.1
                  Sector Strategy
 P144365            Samoa PER               Macro Economics and Fiscal          Samoa              FY14           EW              0.0         136.6              136.6
                                                    Management
 P144463        Samoa Post-Disaster           Social, Urban, Rural and          Samoa              FY14            TA             0.0         161.4              161.4
                 Needs Assessment            Resilience Global Practice
 P151168           Samoa FSAP                  Finance and Markets              Samoa              FY15           EW             231.1         0.0               231.1
 P133607        Reform Plan SAMOA           Macro Economics and Fiscal          Samoa              FY15           TA              0.0         82.2                82.2
                                                    Management
 P149869         Samoa DeM Reform           Macro Economics and Fiscal          Samoa              FY15            TA             0.0         58.7               58.7
                   Plan Follow-up                   Management



                                                                                                                                                                         75
APPENDIX E
WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY05–15

                                                                                                            AAA Cost    AAA Cost
                                                                                                                                    Total Cost
 Proj ID                                                                         Fiscal year of   Product     (BB)         (TF)
                  Project Name         World Bank Global Practice      Country                                                      Delivered
 (AAA)                                                                              delivery       Line     Delivered   Delivered
                                                                                                                                     (US$T)
                                                                                                             (US$T)      (US$T)
 Total cost of delivering Samoa specific activities                                                           283.6       838.9      1,122.5
 P092034        Regulatory and Inst.         Finance and Markets       Pacific       FY05           TA        111.5       139.2       250.6
                   Reform for PSD                                      Islands
 P069677         4P-PI Infrastructure      Social, Urban, Rural and    Pacific       FY06          EW         39.3         0.0         39.3
                       Strategy           Resilience Global Practice   Islands
 P079666          4P-RER 2004/HD             Health, Nutrition, and    Pacific       FY06          EW         494.9       599.2      1094.1
                 SECTOR REVIEW-                    Population          Islands
                      Pacific Isl
 P089536            PI-Pacific Risk        Social, Urban, Rural and    Pacific       FY06          EW         107.3       173.8       281.1
                  Management and          Resilience Global Practice   Islands
                      Adaptation
 P098009           PI- Pacific 2020     Macro Economics and Fiscal     Pacific       FY06          EW         88.1        50.8        138.9
                                                  Management           Islands
 P092788           Pacific Islands -         Finance and Markets       Pacific       FY06           TA         7.0         3.7         10.7
                Financial Sector Devt                                  Islands
 P093733           4P-GENDER &                Poverty and Equity       Pacific       FY06           TA         0.0        63.4         63.4
                    DISABILITY in                                      Islands
                       PACIFIC
 P098216        Regulatory and Inst.         Finance and Markets       Pacific       FY06           TA        63.0         0.0         63.0
                   Reform for PSD                                      Islands
 P092789         PI-Pacific Migration    Trade and Competitiveness     Pacific       FY07          EW         211.7       434.0       645.8
                        Study                                          Islands
 P095031           Pacific M&E of         Environment and Natural      Pacific       FY08           TA         0.0        35.0         35.0
                   Conserv. Action                 Resources           Islands
                       Strategy
 P110501        Trade Facilitation for   Trade and Competitiveness     Pacific       FY08           TA         0.4        89.8         90.2
                    Pacific Islands                                    Islands
 P102963        4P-Regulatory & Inst.        Finance and Markets       Pacific       FY09           TA         5.0        185.1       190.2
                 Reform for PSDP II                                    Islands



76
                                                                                                                           APPENDIX E
                                                                               WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY 05–15

                                                                                                      AAA Cost    AAA Cost
                                                                                                                              Total Cost
Proj ID                                                                    Fiscal year of   Product     (BB)         (TF)
             Project Name           World Bank Global Practice   Country                                                      Delivered
(AAA)                                                                         delivery       Line     Delivered   Delivered
                                                                                                                               (US$T)
                                                                                                       (US$T)      (US$T)
P110131        PACIFIC                Environment and Natural    Pacific       FY09           TA        238.1       780.2      1018.2
            CATASTROPHE                      Resources           Islands
           RISK POOL FEAS
               STUDY
P109095    Remittance Costs         Trade and Competitiveness    Pacific       FY10          EW         90.9        93.3        184.2
                                                                 Islands
P110315   Pacific Infrastructure         Transport and ICT       Pacific       FY10          EW          0.0        305.7       305.7
            Diagnostics AAA                                      Islands
P118674          Program            Macro Economics and Fiscal   Pacific       FY10          EW         65.8        24.4         90.2
             Development in                Management            Islands
             Northern Pacific
P104949      PIC Regulatory            Finance and Markets       Pacific       FY10           TA        17.9        161.4       179.3
           Simplification and                                    Islands
                 Reform
P112080   SUSTAINABLE MGT             Environment and Natural    Pacific       FY10           TA        27.7        502.6       530.3
               Thru RED.                     Resources           Islands
            DISASTER RISK
P109069      Monitoring and         Trade and Competitiveness    Pacific       FY11          EW         826.2       220.0      1046.2
                Evaluation                                       Islands
P109101       Pacific Islands               Agriculture          Pacific       FY11           TA        204.2       467.3       671.5
           Regional Fisheries                                    Islands
P112571       Pacific Islands         Energy and Extractives     Pacific       FY11           TA        93.9         0.0         93.9
             Offshore Mining                                     Islands
P120712   Delivery strategies for      Health, Nutrition, and    Pacific       FY12          EW          0.0        21.7         21.7
                  youth                     Population           Islands
P109094     Trade Facilitation      Trade and Competitiveness    Pacific       FY12           TA        691.2       158.7       849.8
          Strategy Labour Exp.                                   Islands
P117025    Pacific Petroleum          Energy and Extractives     Pacific       FY12           TA        34.6        742.4       777.0
                Supply TA                                        Islands



                                                                                                                                           77
APPENDIX E
WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY05–15

                                                                                                      AAA Cost    AAA Cost
                                                                                                                              Total Cost
 Proj ID                                                                   Fiscal year of   Product     (BB)        (TF)
              Project Name         World Bank Global Practice    Country                                                      Delivered
 (AAA)                                                                        delivery       Line     Delivered   Delivered
                                                                                                                               (US$T)
                                                                                                       (US$T)      (US$T)
 P122344   PACIFIC CAT RISK          Environment and Natural     Pacific       FY12           TA        28.2       1577.5      1605.7
             FINANCING TA -                 Resources            Islands
                 PHASE II
 P125720     4P-Catastro Risk              Agriculture           Pacific       FY12           TA        77.5         0.0         77.5
             Assess.Geonode                                      Islands
                 Innov TA
 P118877   Early Grade Reading             Education             Pacific       FY13           TA         8.2       1013.2      1021.4
              Assess in Pac                                      Islands
                  Region
 P131402    PFM Design under              Governance             Pacific       FY14          EW          0.0        102.9       102.9
           Capacity Constraints                                  Islands
 P144446   Pacific Hardship and        Poverty and Equity        Pacific       FY14          EW          0.0        220.3       220.3
            Vulnerability Study                                  Islands
 P117120      Pacific Futures      Macro Economics and Fiscal    Pacific       FY14           TA        128.3       106.0       234.2
                                          Management             Islands
 P122736      FSM and RMI              Transport and ICT         Pacific       FY14           TA        81.3        106.7       188.0
                Telecoms                                         Islands
               Assessment
 P126058    PRAXIS Discussion                Other               Pacific       FY14           TA        115.2        0.0        115.2
                  Series                                         Islands
 P133619    Social Protection in   Social Protection and Labor   Pacific       FY15          EW         127.1       321.7       448.8
                the Pacific                                      Islands
 P143662    Regional Ports and          Transport and ICT        Pacific       FY15          EW         171.9       27.4        199.4
                 Shipping                                        Islands
 P127935     NF-Educ Global                Education             Pacific       FY15           TA         0.0       1980.6      1980.6
             Practices (Fixed                                    Islands
                 1/Var 2)
 P127936    NF-EAP Education               Education             Pacific       FY15           TA        18.5       2225.9      2244.3
                    TA                                           Islands



78
                                                                                                                              APPENDIX E
                                                                                  WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY 05–15

                                                                                                         AAA Cost    AAA Cost
                                                                                                                                 Total Cost
Proj ID                                                                       Fiscal year of   Product     (BB)        (TF)
                Project Name         World Bank Global Practice     Country                                                      Delivered
(AAA)                                                                            delivery       Line     Delivered   Delivered
                                                                                                                                  (US$T)
                                                                                                          (US$T)      (US$T)
P130478       Inst. strengthening for Social Protection and Labor   Pacific       FY15           TA        95.4       1294.9      1390.4
                  Labor Migration                                   Islands
P146664             P4: Options               Transport and ICT     Pacific       FY15           TA        58.1         0.0         58.1
               Assessment on ICT                                    Islands
                      for Jobs
Total cost of delivering Pacific island-wide activities                                                   4,328.3    14,228.7     18,557.1
Overall Total cost                                                                                        4,895.6    15,906.5     20,802.2




                                                                                                                                              79
APPENDIX E
WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY05–15

World Bank Group Program in Samoa Organized Along the Evaluation Pillars

Pillar 1: Strengthening Resilience
STRENGTHENING FISCAL AND DEBT SUSTAINABILITY AND PUBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE

Under Pillar 1.1, the Bank Group sought to help make progress on the
objectives/outcomes detailed below.

 Objectives/Outcomes Sought                                 Milestones
 Fiscal consolidation and rebuilding of reserves            Detailed outcome indicators around the broad themes
                                                            listed as well as specific milestones will be developed as
                                                            part of a coordinated policy matrix underpinning a DPO
                                                            series starting in FY13, and will be included in the CPS
                                                            Progress Report
 Strengthened public financial management


Instruments used by the Bank Group to help make progress on the above
objectives/outcomes are detailed below.

 Lending Operations                   Analytic Work                       Nonlending Technical Assistance
 Samoa_Procurement Reforms            Samoa-Operational Procurement       Reform Plan Samoa (P133607; FY15;)
 and Capacity Development_IDF-        Review (P079585; FY05; $M)
 (P090086; FY05; $0.2M)
 Economic Crisis Recovery             PFM Design under Capacity           Samoa Debt Management Reform Plan
 Support Credit (P118636; FY10;       Constraints (P131402; FY14; $M)     Follow-up (P149869; FY15)
 $20M)
 First Fiscal and Economic Reform     Samoa PER (P144365; FY14;           Pacific Futures (P117120; FY14; $M)
 Operation(P149770; FY15;             $M)
 $7.5M)
 Samoa Development Policy             PI- Pacific 2020 (P098009; FY06;    PRAXIS Discussion Series (P126058;
 Operation (P144377; FY14;            $M)                                 FY14; $M)
 $15M)
 IDF Pacific Regl Audit Initiative    Program Development in
 (PRIA) (P120343; FY10;               Northern Pacific (P118674; FY10;
 $0.5497M)                            $M)
                                      Monitoring and Evaluation
                                      (P109069; FY11; $M)




                                                                                                                 80
                                                                                            APPENDIX E
                                                WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY 05–15
STRENGTHENING ENVIRONMENTAL AND DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE

 Under Pillar 1.2, the Bank Group sought to make
 progress on the objectives/outcomes detailed
 below. Objectives/Outcomes sought                         Milestones
 16 districts completed high priority coastal protection   •Integrated National Climate Change Adaptation
 initiatives (such as mangrove planting) by 2016.          Strategy developed by end 2014.
                                                           •Samoa able to access regional risk pooling and
                                                           catastrophe insurance schemes, to be introduce by
                                                           end 2014.
 Climate proofing and improved drainage for 30 km
 West Coast road by end 2016

Instruments used by the Bank Group to make progress on the above
objectives/outcomes are detailed below.

 Lending Operations                                  Analytic Work     Nonlending Technical Assistance
 Agriculture and Fisheries Cyclone Response                            Samoa Parametric Insurance Study
 (P145938; FY14; $5M)                                                  (P116319; FY11)
 Samoa - PPCR (P124807; FY11; $0.5M)                                   Pacific-Catastro Risk Assess. Geonode Innov
                                                                       TA (P125720; FY12)
 Enhancing Climate Resilience of Coastal                               Pacific M&E of Conserv. Action Strategy
 (P126596; FY14; $14.6M)                                               (P095031; FY08)
 Pacific Island Regional Oceans Program                                Pacific Catastrophe Risk Pool Feasibility
 (P131655; FY15; $3.97M)                                               Study (P110131; FY09)
 Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Prog                              Pacific Sustainable Mgt Thru Reduced
 (P153429; FY15; $2.191781M)                                           Disaster Risk (P112080; FY10)
 Pacific Resilience Program - Samoa                                    PI- Pacific CAT Risk Financing TA - Phase II
 (P154839; FY15; $13.793M)                                             (P122344; FY12)
 PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC                                      Samoa Post-Disaster Needs Assessment
 (P147839; FY15; $3.68M)                                               (P144463; FY14)
 Pacific Cat Risk Insurance Pilot (P152570;
 FY15; $1M)
 PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS
 (P155542; FY15; $1.32M)
 PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - PIFS
 (P156335; FY15; $0.9M)
 Agriculture and Fisheries Cyclone Response
 (P145938; FY14; $5M)

ENHANCING HUMAN CAPITAL AND SOCIAL RESILIENCE

Under Pillar 1.3, the Bank Group sought to make progress on the objectives/outcomes
detailed below.




                                                                                                               81
APPENDIX E
WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY05–15

 Objectives/Outcomes Sought                                 Milestones
 Improved efficiency and effectiveness of service           Detailed outcome indicators around the broad
 delivery to strengthen health financing and address        themes listed as well as specific milestones will be
 education quality.                                         developed as part of a coordinated policy matrix
                                                            underpinning a DPO series starting in FY13, and
                                                            will be included in the CPS Progress Report
Instruments used by the Bank Group to make progress on the above
objectives/outcomes are detailed below.

 Lending Operations                Analytic Work                             Nonlending Technical Assistance
 Samoa-2ND Health Sector           Pacific Islands - HD SECTOR               Early Grade Reading Assess in Pacific
 MGMT Program Support              REVIEW (P079666; FY06)                    Region (P118877; FY13)
 Project (P086313; FY08; $3M)
 Samoa- Health Sector MGMT         PI- Delivery strategies for youth         Pacific Early Education Advisory
 Program Support Project AF II     (P120712; FY12)                           Services (PEEAS) (P127936; FY15)
 (P120832; FY10; $3M)
                                   PI -Pacific Hardship and Vulnerability    Aus-AID Education Partnership
                                   Study (P144446; FY14)                     (P127935; FY15)
                                   PI - Social Protection in the Pacific     Samoa -Health review (P082197;
                                   (P133619; FY15)                           FY05)
                                   PI-Pacific Migration Study (P092789;      Pacific—Gender and Disability in the
                                   FY07)                                     Pacific (P093733; FY06)


Pillar 2: Enhancing Competitiveness
STRENGTHENING THE DOMESTIC FINANCIAL SECTOR

There were no CPS objectives articulated under Pillar 2.1.

Instruments used by the Bank Group under Pillar 2.1 are detailed below.

 Lending
 Operations           Analytic Work                        Nonlending Technical Assistance
                      Samoa FSAP (P151168;                 Pacific Islands - Financial Sector Devt (P092788;
                      FY15; $M)                            FY06; $M)


STRENGTHENING THE LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK, SECTOR LINKAGES, AND VALUE CHAINS FOR
PRIVATE BUSINESS

Under Pillar 2.2, the Bank Group sought to make progress on the objectives/outcomes,
detailed below.




82
                                                                                            APPENDIX E
                                                WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY 05–15

 Objectives/Outcomes Sought                                 Milestones
 Improved competitiveness, including improvements           Detailed outcome indicators around the broad
 on Doing Business indicators.                              themes listed as well as specific milestones will be
                                                            developed as part of a coordinated policy matrix
                                                            underpinning a DPO series starting in FY13, and will
                                                            be included in the CPS Progress Report
 IFC tourism investments to support 4,000 new               Samoa to gain share of IFC’s Pacific Tourism
 arrivals across 3 pilot countries by 2016 [Samoa           Initiative
 specific indicators will be developed as this initiative   which aims to encourage $30m in new private sector
 progresses and will be included in the CPS Progress        tourism investments and $15m in new tourism
 Report]                                                    infrastructure investments across 3 pilot countries.
 Doubling of average yields by 2017 for carrots             Identification and introduction of new fruit and
 (baseline 1,250 kg/acre), tomatoes (baseline 2,000         vegetable varieties by end 2014
 kg/acre), bok choy (baseline 3,850 kg/acre), eggplant
 (baseline 5,850 kg/acre), bell peppers (baseline
 1,250 kg/acre)
 Share of locally produced fruit and vegetables sold by
 domestic channels increased from 5% to 25%
 Increase in share of locally produced beef sold by          New breeding stock imported by end 2014 to
 domestic channels from 40% to 55%                          strengthen nucleus breeding program

 Measure the participation of women in the SACEP, in
 both the matching grants program and activities            farmers by 2016 to upgrade livestock and fruit and
 targeting subsistence farmers                              vegetable production.

 Increase in Samoan workers participating in                 World Bank to support government oversight and
 temporary labor migration schemes in Australia and         management of Samoan workers in RSE scheme
 New Zealand, with higher returns per worker as             and new Australian SWP.
 efficiency increases.
 Reduction in remittance costs from current
 unweighted average of 16% for all schemes, with a          Payments
 policy and payments system in place to support             System and investments to increase efficiency of
 greater use of mobile money                                retail payment systems infrastructure.
                                                                                           au

Instruments used by the Bank Group to make progress on the above
objectives/outcomes are detailed below.

 Lending Operations                 Analytic Work                             Nonlending Technical Assistance
 Samoa Agriculture                  Remittance Costs (P109095; FY10)          Samoa Agriculture Sector Strategy
 Competitiveness                                                              (P120701; FY11)
 Enhancement (P115351;
 FY12; $13M)
 PI - Inst. Cap. Build. for Labor   Monitoring and Evaluation (P109069;       Pacific Islands Regional Fisheries
 Export (P109457; FY08;             FY11; $M) -The development impact         (P109101; FY11)
 $0.625M)                           of a best practice seasonal worker
                                    policy



                                                                                                                   83
APPENDIX E
WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY05–15

                                                                            Regulatory and Inst. Reform for PSD
                                                                            (P092034; FY05)
                                                                            Regulatory and Inst. Reform for PSD
                                                                            (P098216; FY06)
                                                                            4P-Regulatory & Inst. Reform for
                                                                            PSDP II (P102963; FY09)
                                                                            PIC Regulatory Simplification and
                                                                            Reform (P104949; FY10)
                                                                            Inst. strengthening for Labor Migration
                                                                            (P130478; FY15)
                                                                            Trade Facilitation for Pacific Islands
                                                                            (P110501; FY08)
                                                                            Trade Facilitation Strategy Labor Exp.
                                                                            (P109094; FY12)

IMPROVING INFRASTRUCTURE SERVICE DELIVERY

Under Pillar 2.3, the Bank Group sought to make progress on the objectives/outcomes
detailed below.

 Objectives/Outcomes Sought                               Milestones
 Concessions tendered for new private investment in
 energy generation following liberalization and
 framework for independent power producers.
 Infrastructure to enable anticipated increase in         Fiber optic cable linking Samoa with trans-Pacific
 demand from 30 megabits per second per month in          cables
 to projected 400 Mbps/month in 2015, with wholesale      Regulatory environment allows competition with
 bandwidth costs to be reduced from over $1,000           equal access by all retail market players to buy
 Mbps/month to $500 Mbps/month or lower, flowing          international bandwidth on a fair and transparent
 through to reduced retail internet and telecoms costs.   basis.
 Completion of 5 km inland coastal road to provide        •Integrated National Climate Change Adaptation
 access to villagers in tsunami areas that decided to     Strategy developed by end 2014.
 relocate                                                 •Samoa able to access regional risk pooling and
 Climate proofing and improved drainage for 30 km         catastrophe insurance schemes, to be introduce by
 West Coast road by end 2016                              end 2014.

Instruments used by the Bank Group to make progress under Pillar 2.3 are detailed
below.

 Lending Operations                   Analytic Work                          Nonlending Technical Assistance
 PI-GEF-Sustainable Energy            4P-PI Infrastructure Strategy          Pacific Islands Offshore Mining
 Finance (P098423; FY07;              (P069677; FY06)                        (P112571; FY11)
 $9.48M)
 Samoa City Develop. Strategy         PI-Pacific Risk Management and         Pacific Petroleum Supply TA
 Progr. (P128756; FY12; $0.237M)      Adaptatio (P089536; FY06)              (P117025; FY12)



84
                                                                                      APPENDIX E
                                          WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONAL PROGRAM IN SAMOA FY 05–15

Samoa-Suppl. Infra Asset Mgmt     Pacific Infrastructure Diagnostics   P4: Options Assessment on ICT for
Additional Fi (P091025; FY07;     AAA (P110315; FY10)                  Jobs (P146664; FY15)
$8.27M)
Samoa Post Tsunami                Regional Ports and Shipping
Reconstruction (P120594; FY11;    (P143662; FY15)
$10M)
Samoa Pac Reg Connect Phase
III: Samoa (P128904; FY15;
$16M)
Samoa Aviation Investment
Project (P143408; FY14; $25M)
Enhanced Road Access Project
(P145545; FY14; $20M)

Pacific Aviation Safety Office
Reform (P145057; FY14; $2.15M)
Pacific Reg ICT Regulatory Dev.
Project (P148238; FY15; $4.5M)




                                                                                                           85
Appendix F. Pacific Islands Tables
Table F.1. Pacific Islands—List of World Bank Approved Projects, FY05–15
                                                                                      IDA/IBRD        Trust Fund
                                                                   Total Project                                      Revised
                                Approval     Agreement   Project                    Commitment       Commitment                     Global                 Len Instr
 Proj ID   Project Name                                            Commitment                                         Closing                   Country
                               Fiscal year     Type      Status                        Amount          Amount                      Practice                  Type
                                                                   (US$ millions)                                      Date
                                                                                    (US$ millions)   (US$ millions)
 P11584        FJ: Institut       2009          IDF      Closed         0.4              0.0              0.4         02/25/2014   Transport      Fiji         #
 4          Monitoring Tele                                                                                                         and ICT
                Reforms
 P12184    Integrated Flood       2011         RETF      Closed         0.8              0.0              0.8         06/30/2015     ENR          Fiji     Investment
 3         Mgt - Nadi Basin
                   Pilot
 P15002         Transport         2015         IBRD      Active         50.0             50.0             0.0         06/30/2020   Transport      Fiji     Investment
 8           Infrastructure                                                                                                         and ICT
            Investment Proj
 P08932         KI-GEF-           2006         GEF       Closed         1.8              0.0              1.8         06/30/2011    SURR        Kiribati   Investment
 6         Adaptation Prog.
             Ph II-Pilot Imp
 P11855       Kiribati Food       2011         RETF      Closed         2.0              0.0              2.0         12/31/2012   Agricultur   Kiribati   Investment
 2         Crisis Response                                                                                                             e
               Operation
 P12215       Kiribati Road       2011          IDA      Active         20.0             20.0             0.0         06/30/2018   Transport    Kiribati   Investment
 1           Rehabilitation                                                                                                         and ICT
                 Project
 P11261       Kiribati:GEF        2012         GEF       Active         3.0              0.0              3.0         02/28/2018    SURR        Kiribati   Investment
 5             Adaptation
           Phase III (LDCF)
 P12893     Pacific Aviation      2012          IDA      Active         22.9             22.9             0.0         12/31/2016   Transport    Kiribati   Investment
 8            Investment -                                                                                                          and ICT
                  Kiribati
 P12187       KI-GEF-Grid         2013         GEFM      Active         1.0              0.0              1.0         12/31/2016    Energy      Kiribati   Investment
 8         Connected Solar                                                                                                            and
             PV Pwr Plant                                                                                                          Extractive
                                                                                                                                       s




                                                                                                                                                                   86
                                                                                                                                                          APPENDIX F
                                                                                                                                              PACIFIC ISLANDS TABLES
                                                                                    IDA/IBRD        Trust Fund
                                                                 Total Project                                      Revised
                              Approval     Agreement   Project                    Commitment       Commitment                     Global                      Len Instr
Proj ID   Project Name                                           Commitment                                         Closing                     Country
                             Fiscal year     Type      Status                        Amount          Amount                      Practice                       Type
                                                                 (US$ millions)                                      Date
                                                                                  (US$ millions)   (US$ millions)
P12632    KI: Telecomms         2013          IDA      Active         1.0              1.0              0.0         06/30/2017   Transport        Kiribati    Investment
4             and ICT                                                                                                             and ICT
           Development
P14377       Improving          2013          IDF      Active         0.4              0.0              0.4         05/29/2016    SURR            Kiribati        #
3           services for
          victims of GBV
P14460         Kiribati         2014          IDA      Closed         5.2              5.2              0.0         06/30/2014     MFM            Kiribati    Adjustment
2            Economic
               Reform
             Operation
P14988        Second            2015          IDA      Closed         3.0              3.0              0.0         06/30/2015     MFM            Kiribati    Adjustment
8            Economic
           Reform DPO
P15401     Kiribati Road        2015          IDA      Active         6.0              6.0              0.0             #        Transport        Kiribati    Investment
2          Rehabilitation                                                                                                         and ICT
             Project AF
P12801    First ICT Sector      2013          IDA      Closed         3.0              3.0              0.0         12/31/2013   Transport       Marshall     Adjustment
3          Development                                                                                                            and ICT        Islands
             Operation
P13211      MH: ICT TA          2014         RETF      Active         1.4              0.0              1.4         08/31/2016   Transport       Marshall     Investment
9              Project                                                                                                            and ICT        Islands
P15176       PROP for           2015          IDA      Active         6.8              6.8              0.0         09/30/2020     ENR           Marshall     Investment
0         Marshall Islands                                                                                                                       Islands
P15293       PROP for           2015         GEFM      Active         1.8              0.0              1.8         09/30/2020     ENR           Marshall     Investment
4         Marshall Islands                                                                                                                       Islands
P15525         Pacific          2015          IDA      Active         1.5              1.5              0.0         11/30/2020    SURR           Marshall     Investment
7            Resilience                                                                                                                          Islands
          Program - RMI
P14856     Energy Sector        2014          IDA      Active         14.4             14.4             0.0         07/31/2018    Energy        Micronesia,   Investment
0          Development                                                                                                              and         Federated
                                                                                                                                 Extractive      States of
                                                                                                                                     s
P13059     Palau-FSM            2015          IDA      Active         47.5             47.5             0.0         01/31/2020   Transport      Micronesia,   Investment
2          Connectivity                                                                                                           and ICT       Federated
             Project                                                                                                                             States of




                                                                                                                                                                      87
APPENDIX F
PACIFIC ISLANDS TABLES
                                                                                       IDA/IBRD        Trust Fund
                                                                    Total Project                                      Revised
                                 Approval     Agreement   Project                    Commitment       Commitment                     Global                    Len Instr
 Proj ID   Project Name                                             Commitment                                         Closing                   Country
                                Fiscal year     Type      Status                        Amount          Amount                      Practice                     Type
                                                                    (US$ millions)                                      Date
                                                                                     (US$ millions)   (US$ millions)
 P15175      PROP for              2015          IDA      Active         5.5              5.5              0.0         09/30/2020     ENR        Micronesia,   Investment
 4           Federated                                                                                                                           Federated
              States of                                                                                                                           States of
             Micronesia
 P09842     Pac Isl-GEF-           2007         GEF       Active         9.5              0.0              9.5         12/31/2017    Energy        Pacific     Investment
 3          Sustainable                                                                                                                and         Islands
           Energy Finance                                                                                                           Extractive
                                                                                                                                        s
 P10945      PI - Inst. Cap.       2008          IDF      Closed         0.6              0.0              0.6         11/08/2010    Poverty       Pacific         #
 7          Build. for Labor                                                                                                           and         Islands
                 Export                                                                                                              Equity
 P11664     Pacific Survey         2010         RETF      Closed         0.4              0.0              0.4         10/31/2012     MFM          Pacific     Investment
 3              Program                                                                                                                            Islands
 P12034    IDF Pacific Regl        2010          IDF      Closed         0.5              0.0              0.5         07/05/2013   Governan       Pacific         #
 3           Audit Initiative                                                                                                          ce          Islands
                 (PRIA)
 P12872       CA - Pacific         2012         RETF      Closed         0.3              0.0              0.3         06/30/2015    SURR          Pacific     Investment
 5                Urban                                                                                                                            Islands
              Knowledge
             Management
 P13325          Pacific           2013         RETF      Closed         3.0              0.0              3.0         01/31/2016    SURR          Pacific     Investment
 5            Catastrophe                                                                                                                          Islands
            Risk Insurance
                   Pilot
 P13244          Pacific           2014         RETF      Active         1.2              0.0              1.2         08/31/2016    SURR          Pacific     Investment
 9            Catastrophe                                                                                                                          Islands
            Risk - Phase 3
                SOPAC
 P13268      FSM and PW            2014         RETF      Active         0.5              0.0              0.5         08/31/2016   Transport      Pacific     Investment
 6           Telecoms and                                                                                                            and ICT       Islands
            ICT TA Project
 P14421        Economic            2014         RETF      Active         0.6              0.0              0.6             #         SURR          Pacific     Investment
 0          Assessment of                                                                                                                          Islands
               Disasters
 P14505     Pacific Aviation       2014          IDA      Active         2.2              2.2              0.0         12/31/2018   Transport      Pacific     Investment
 7           Safety Office                                                                                                           and ICT       Islands
                 Reform



88
                                                                                                                                                          APPENDIX F
                                                                                                                                              PACIFIC ISLANDS TABLES
                                                                                    IDA/IBRD        Trust Fund
                                                                 Total Project                                      Revised
                              Approval     Agreement   Project                    Commitment       Commitment                     Global                   Len Instr
Proj ID   Project Name                                           Commitment                                         Closing                     Country
                             Fiscal year     Type      Status                        Amount          Amount                      Practice                    Type
                                                                 (US$ millions)                                      Date
                                                                                  (US$ millions)   (US$ millions)
P13165      Pacific Island      2015          IDA      Active         4.0              4.0              0.0         09/30/2020     ENR           Pacific   Investment
5             Regional                                                                                                                           Islands
          Oceans Program
P14783        PACIFIC           2015          IDA      Active         3.7              3.7              0.0         11/30/2020    SURR           Pacific   Investment
9           RESILIENCE                                                                                                                           Islands
            PROGRAM -
                SPC
P14823    Pacific Reg ICT       2015          IDA      Active         4.5              4.5              0.0         07/31/2019   Transport       Pacific   Investment
8         Regulatory Dev.                                                                                                         and ICT        Islands
               Project
P15257    Pacific Cat Risk      2015         RETF      Active         1.0              0.0              1.0             #         SURR           Pacific   Investment
0          Insurance Pilot                                                                                                                       Islands
P15342     Pacific Islands      2015         GEF       Active         2.2              0.0              2.2         09/30/2020     ENR           Pacific   Investment
9             Regional                                                                                                                           Islands
            Oceanscape
                Prog
P15554        PACIFIC           2015          IDA      Active         1.3              1.3              0.0         11/30/2020    SURR           Pacific   Investment
2           RESILIENCE                                                                                                                           Islands
            PROGRAM -
                PIFS
P15633        PACIFIC           2015         GEFM      Active         0.9              0.0              0.9             #         SURR           Pacific   Investment
5           RESILIENCE                                                                                                                           Islands
            PROGRAM -
                PIFS
P10303      Palau Oil and       2007         RETF      Closed         0.2              0.0              0.2         09/30/2010    Energy          Palau    Investment
4               Gas                                                                                                                 and
                                                                                                                                 Extractive
                                                                                                                                      s
P09008     Samoa- IDF-          2005          IDF      Closed         0.2              0.0              0.2         10/05/2008   Governan        Samoa         #
6          Reforms and                                                                                                               ce
          Capacity Devt.
P09102    WS-Suppl Infra        2007          IDA      Closed         8.3              8.3              0.0             #        Transport       Samoa     Investment
5          Asset Mgmt                                                                                                             and ICT
           Additional Fi
P08631      WS-2ND              2008          IDA      Closed         3.0              3.0              0.0         12/18/2015    Health,        Samoa     Investment
3           HEALTH                                                                                                               Nutrition,
                                                                                                                                   and



                                                                                                                                                                   89
APPENDIX F
PACIFIC ISLANDS TABLES
                                                                                     IDA/IBRD        Trust Fund
                                                                  Total Project                                      Revised
                               Approval     Agreement   Project                    Commitment       Commitment                     Global                Len Instr
 Proj ID   Project Name                                           Commitment                                         Closing                   Country
                              Fiscal year     Type      Status                        Amount          Amount                      Practice                 Type
                                                                  (US$ millions)                                      Date
                                                                                   (US$ millions)   (US$ millions)
           SECTOR MGMT                                                                                                            Populatio
           PROG SPT PRJ                                                                                                              n
 P11863    Economic Crisis       2010          IDA      Closed         20.0             20.0             0.0         12/31/2010    MFM         Samoa     Adjustment
 6            Recovery
            Support Credit
 P12083    WS-2ND Health         2010          IDA      Closed         3.0              3.0              0.0             #         Health,     Samoa     Investment
 2          Add'l Financing                                                                                                       Nutrition,
                                                                                                                                     and
                                                                                                                                  Populatio
                                                                                                                                      n
 P12059     Samoa Post           2011          IDA      Closed         10.0             10.0             0.0         08/31/2015   Transport    Samoa     Investment
 4           Tsunami                                                                                                               and ICT
           Reconstruction
 P12480    Samoa - PPCR          2011         RETF      Active         0.5              0.0              0.5             #          ENR        Samoa     Investment
 7
 P11535         Samoa            2012          IDA      Active         13.0             8.0              5.0         03/28/2017   Agricultur   Samoa     Investment
 1           Agriculture                                                                                                              e
           Competitiveness
                Enhanc
 P12875    CA -Samoa City        2012         RETF      Closed         0.2              0.0              0.2         06/30/2015    SURR        Samoa     Investment
 6             Develop.
           Strategy Progr.
 P12650      Enhancing           2013         RETF      Active         14.8             0.0              14.8        08/31/2018   Transport    Samoa     Investment
 4              Climate                                                                                                            and ICT
           Resilience-West
                Cst Rd
 P12659      Enhancing           2014         RETF      Active         14.6             0.0              14.6        12/31/2018     ENR        Samoa     Investment
 6              Climate
            Resilience of
                Coastal
 P14340    Samoa Aviation        2014          IDA      Active         25.0             25.0             0.0         06/30/2019   Transport    Samoa     Investment
 8           Investment                                                                                                            and ICT
                Project
 P14437         Samoa            2014          IDA      Closed         15.0             15.0             0.0         03/31/2015     MFM        Samoa     Adjustment
 7          Development
           Policy Operation




90
                                                                                                                                                          APPENDIX F
                                                                                                                                              PACIFIC ISLANDS TABLES
                                                                                    IDA/IBRD        Trust Fund
                                                                 Total Project                                      Revised
                              Approval     Agreement   Project                    Commitment       Commitment                     Global                   Len Instr
Proj ID   Project Name                                           Commitment                                         Closing                     Country
                             Fiscal year     Type      Status                        Amount          Amount                      Practice                    Type
                                                                 (US$ millions)                                      Date
                                                                                  (US$ millions)   (US$ millions)
P14554    Enhanced Road         2014          IDA      Active         20.0             20.0             0.0         04/30/2019   Transport       Samoa    Investment
5         Access Project                                                                                                          and ICT
P14593    Agriculture and       2014          IDA      Active         5.0              5.0              0.0         06/30/2016   Agricultur      Samoa    Investment
8             Fisheries                                                                                                              e
               Cyclone
             Response
P12890     WS: Pac Reg          2015          IDA      Active         16.0             16.0             0.0         07/31/2020   Transport       Samoa    Investment
4         Connect Phase                                                                                                           and ICT
             III: Samoa
P14977    First Fiscal and      2015          IDA      Closed         7.5              7.5              0.0         09/30/2015     MFM           Samoa    Adjustment
0            Economic
               Reform
             Operation
P15483          Pacific         2015          IDA      Active         13.8             13.8             0.0         11/30/2020    SURR           Samoa    Investment
9            Resilience
             Program -
               Samoa
P07965       TO-Tonga           2005          IDA      Closed         1.0              1.0              0.0         06/30/2011   Education        Tonga   Investment
7            Education
          Support Project
P09693     TO-Transport         2009          IDA      Active         5.4              5.4              0.0         06/30/2018   Transport        Tonga   Investment
1               Sector                                                                                                            and ICT
           Consolidation
P12059      Tonga Post          2011          IDA      Closed         5.0              5.0              0.0         12/31/2013    SURR            Tonga   Investment
5             Tsunami
          Reconstruction
P12187     Tonga Energy         2011          IDA      Closed         5.0              5.0              0.0         06/30/2011    Energy          Tonga   Adjustment
7         Develop. Policy                                                                                                           and
             Operation                                                                                                           Extractive
                                                                                                                                     s
P12508     IDF Grant-Proj       2011          IDF      Closed         0.2              0.0              0.2         07/27/2014   Transport        Tonga       #
6         Mgmt and Green                                                                                                          and ICT
            PR-MOT-TO
P11318    Pacific Regional      2012          IDA      Active         17.2             17.2             0.0         08/23/2016   Transport        Tonga   Investment
4           Connectivity                                                                                                          and ICT
              Program




                                                                                                                                                                   91
APPENDIX F
PACIFIC ISLANDS TABLES
                                                                                      IDA/IBRD        Trust Fund
                                                                   Total Project                                      Revised
                                Approval     Agreement   Project                    Commitment       Commitment                     Global                Len Instr
 Proj ID   Project Name                                            Commitment                                         Closing                   Country
                               Fiscal year     Type      Status                        Amount          Amount                      Practice                 Type
                                                                   (US$ millions)                                      Date
                                                                                    (US$ millions)   (US$ millions)
 P12645        Economic           2012          IDA      Closed         9.0              9.0              0.0         06/30/2012     MFM         Tonga    Adjustment
 3             Recovery
               Operation
 P12893    Pacific Aviation       2012          IDA      Active         27.2             27.2             0.0         12/31/2016   Transport     Tonga    Investment
 9           Investment -                                                                                                           and ICT
                 Tonga
 P13125    Institutional and      2012         RETF      Active         2.9              0.0              2.9         12/31/2016    Energy       Tonga    Investment
 0            Regulatory                                                                                                              and
              Framework                                                                                                            Extractive
                                                                                                                                       s
 P13082        Economic           2013          IDA      Closed         1.8              1.8              0.0         06/30/2013     MFM         Tonga    Adjustment
 4             Recovery
             Operation II
 P14460     First Economic        2014          IDA      Closed         5.0              5.0              0.0         06/30/2014     MFM         Tonga    Adjustment
 1         Reform Support
               Operation
 P15011     Tonga Cyclone         2014          IDA      Active         12.0             12.0             0.0         06/30/2018    SURR         Tonga    Investment
 3          Reconstruction
 P14996         Second            2015          IDA      Closed         5.0              5.0              0.0         12/31/2015     MFM         Tonga    Adjustment
 3             Economic
           Reform Support
               Operation
 P15484          Pacific          2015          IDA      Active         10.5             10.5             0.0         11/30/2020    SURR         Tonga    Investment
 0             Resilience
           Program - Tonga
 P15633          Pacific          2015         GEF       Active         4.6              0.0              4.6         11/30/2020    SURR         Tonga    Investment
 4             Resilience
           Program - Tonga
 P12894     Pacific Aviation      2012          IDA      Active         11.9             11.9             0.0         12/31/2016   Transport     Tuvalu   Investment
 0           Investment -                                                                                                           and ICT
                Tuvalu
 P14531     Tuvalu Aviation       2014          IDA      Active         6.1              6.1              0.0             #        Transport     Tuvalu   Investment
 0            Investment                                                                                                            and ICT
             Project - AF




92
                                                                                                                                                            APPENDIX F
                                                                                                                                                PACIFIC ISLANDS TABLES
                                                                                      IDA/IBRD        Trust Fund
                                                                   Total Project                                      Revised
                                Approval     Agreement   Project                    Commitment       Commitment                     Global                   Len Instr
Proj ID   Project Name                                             Commitment                                         Closing                     Country
                               Fiscal year     Type      Status                        Amount          Amount                      Practice                    Type
                                                                   (US$ millions)                                      Date
                                                                                    (US$ millions)   (US$ millions)
P14548         Tuvalu             2014          IDA      Closed         3.0              3.0              0.0         06/30/2014     MFM           Tuvalu    Adjustment
8          Development
          Policy Operation
P14457     Energy Sector          2015          IDA      Active         7.0              7.0              0.0         03/31/2019    Energy         Tuvalu    Investment
3          Development                                                                                                                and
               Project                                                                                                             Extractive
                                                                                                                                       s
P15019         Second             2015          IDA      Active         1.5              1.5              0.0         12/31/2016     MFM           Tuvalu    Adjustment
4          Development
          Policy Operation
P15178    PROP for Tuvalu         2015          IDA      Active         7.0              7.0              0.0         09/30/2020     ENR           Tuvalu    Investment
0
P15292        PROP For            2015         GEFM      Active         1.8              0.0              1.8         09/30/2020     ENR           Tuvalu    Investment
5                Tuvalu
P10387    Utility Regulatory      2007         RETF      Closed         0.9              0.0              0.9         10/31/2013    Finance        Vanuatu   Investment
3              Authority                                                                                                              and
                                                                                                                                    Markets
P11889          VU:               2010         RETF      Active         2.8              0.0              2.8         06/30/2016   Transport       Vanuatu   Investment
5         Telecommunicati                                                                                                           and ICT
          ons and ICT TA
P11261       Increasing           2013         GEF       Active         5.6              0.0              5.6         12/31/2018     ENR           Vanuatu   Investment
1           Resilience to
          Climate Change
P12937     Mainstreaming          2013         RETF      Active         2.7              0.0              2.7         12/31/2016    SURR           Vanuatu   Investment
6          Disaster Risk
             Reduction
P14346          VU:               2013         RETF      Active         2.7              0.0              2.7             #        Transport       Vanuatu   Investment
5         Telecommunicati                                                                                                           and ICT
          ons and ICT TA
P14531     Energy Sector          2013         RETF      Active         2.5              0.0              2.5         06/30/2016    Energy         Vanuatu   Investment
1          Development                                                                                                                and
               Project                                                                                                             Extractive
                                                                                                                                       s
P13370         GPOBA              2014         RETF      Active         4.0              0.0              4.0         06/30/2018    Energy         Vanuatu   Investment
1             Improved                                                                                                                and




                                                                                                                                                                     93
APPENDIX F
PACIFIC ISLANDS TABLES
                                                                                            IDA/IBRD           Trust Fund
                                                                         Total Project                                         Revised
                                Approval     Agreement       Project                      Commitment          Commitment                     Global                 Len Instr
 Proj ID    Project Name                                                 Commitment                                            Closing                   Country
                               Fiscal year     Type          Status                          Amount             Amount                      Practice                  Type
                                                                         (US$ millions)                                         Date
                                                                                          (US$ millions)      (US$ millions)
               Electricity                                                                                                                  Extractive
                Access                                                                                                                          s
 P15090          Rural            2015          RETF          Active           4.7                0.0              4.7         12/31/2019    Energy      Vanuatu    Investment
 8           Electrification                                                                                                                   and
                Project                                                                                                                     Extractive
                                                                                                                                                s
 P15414     Vanuatu Aviation      2015           IDA          Active          59.5               59.5              0.0         12/31/2019   Transport    Vanuatu    Investment
 9            Investment                                                                                                                     and ICT
                Project
 P15525         Pacific           2015           IDA          Active           1.5                1.5              0.0         11/30/2020    SURR        Vanuatu    Investment
 6            Resilience
               Program
 Total                                                                        663.0              558.5            104.5
Source: World Bank database as of March, 2016 (includes supplements).
Note: IDA = International Development Association; IEG = Independent Evaluation Group; RETF = recipient-executed trust fund; S = satisfactory; SURR = Social, Urban, Rural,
and Resilience Global Practice; MFM = Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management; ENR = Environment and Natural Resources.


Table F.2. Number and Total Commitment Amount of IDA/IBRD Commitments, FY05–15, (US$, millions)
                                                                2011                 2012                    2013             2014                2015              Total
 World Bank Global Practice                                 No.    Amt.          No.    Amt.             No.    Amt.      No.    Amt.       No.      Amt.     No.      Amt.
 Energy and Extractives                                                                                                    1     14.4        1        7.0      2        21.4
 Environment and Natural Resources                                                                                                           4        23.2     4        23.2
 Macro Economics and Fiscal Management                                                                                     2       8.2       2        4.5      4        12.7
 Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice                                                                                         4        8.0      4        8.0
 Transport and ICT                                           1         20.0          2    34.8           2      4.0        2      8.2        5       167.5    12       234.5
 Total                                                       1         20.0          2    34.8           2      4.0        5      30.8      16       210.2    26       299.8
Source: World Bank database as of January 06, 2016 (includes supplements).
Note: Does not include commitments for Samoa and Tonga. IBRD = International Bank for Reconstruction and Development; IDA = International Development Association.


Table F.3. IEG Project Ratings for Pacific Islands, Exit FY06–15


94
                                                                                                                                                              APPENDIX F
                                                                                                                                                  PACIFIC ISLANDS TABLES

                                                           Net
                                                       Commitment                                                                               IEG Bank
 Exit     Project                                                                      Approval         IEG                IEG Risk                             IEG Bank
                             Project name                Amount         Country                                                                 Quality at
 FY         ID                                                                           FY           Outcome            to DO Rating                          Supervision
                                                          (US$,                                                                                   Entry
                                                         millions)
 2007     P064926            WS-Health Sector              5.6            Samoa           2001            MS                 Moderate               MS              MS
                            Management Project
 2007     P075171      Cyclone Emergency Recovery          6.1            Tonga           2002             S                 Moderate                S               S
                             and Management
 2008     P088246      Cyclone Emergency Recovery          4.6            Samoa           2004            MS                 Moderate               MS               S
                                   Project
 2010     P075230      Health Sector Support Project       12.0           Tonga           2004            MS                Moderate                MS               S
 2010     P118636        Economic Crisis Recovery          19.5           Samoa           2010            MS              Negligible to low         S                S
                              Support Credit
 2011     P075739      Samoa - Telecommunications          4.0            Samoa           2003            MS                 Moderate               MU              MS
                             and Post Reform
 2011     P079657      TO-Tonga Education Support          1.0            Tonga           2005             U                 Significant             U              MS
                                   Project
 2011     P089326       KI-GEF-Adaptation Prog. Ph         0.0            Kiribati        2006            MU                 Moderate               MU              MU
                                II-Pilot Imp
 2011     P121877      Tonga Energy Develop. Policy        5.2            Tonga           2011             S              Negligible to low         MS               S
                                 Operation
 2012     P126453      Economic Recovery Operation         8.9            Tonga           2012            MS                 Significant            MS              MS
 2013     P075523        WS-INFRA ASSET MGMT               21.1           Samoa           2004            MS                 Significant            MS              MS
                                   APL2
 2013     P130824      Economic Recovery Operation         1.8            Tonga           2013            MS                 Significant            MS              MS
                                      II
 2014     P120595           Tonga Post Tsunami             5.1            Tonga           2011            MS                 Moderate               MS              MS
                              Reconstruction
Source: World Bank database as of July 15, 2015.
Note: Risk to development objective is rated for projects from FY07 onward. Note: FY = fiscal year; IEG = Independent Evaluation Group; MS = moderately satisfactory; MU =
moderately unsatisfactory; S = satisfactory; U = unsatisfactory.




                                                                                                                                                                             95
APPENDIX F
PACIFIC ISLANDS TABLES
Table F.4. Bank Budget by Cost Structure Category, FY05–15 (in US$ thousands and percent)
                                                                                                                Country
                                                                   Project               Programmatic                      Client
 World Bank Global Practice                             Total                  Lending                  AAA     Program
                                                                 Supervision               Approach                       Training
                                                                                                                Support
 Agriculture                                             448        23           12           87         326
 Education                                               469        382          60            0         27
 Energy and Extractives                                   99                     60            0         39
 Environment and Natural Resources                      2,494       775         1,574                    145
 Finance and Markets                                     899        124          448                     327
 Governance                                              851                     38                      813
 Health, Nutrition, and Population                       848        462                       35         301                50
 Macro Economics and Fiscal Management                   391                                             391
 Not assigned                                           2,246         4          110                    2,132
 Other                                                  5,503       2,225        821                    1,433    1,025
 Poverty and Equity                                      748                                             267      482
 Social Protection and Labor                              3                                               3
 Social, Urban, Rural, and Resilience Global Practice   1,013                    19                      994
 Trade and Competitiveness                              2,266       584          967          15         354      346
 Transport and ICT                                      1,962                    26                     1,936
 Total                                                  20,240      4,579       4,134        136        9,489    1,852      50
 Agriculture                                             100          5           3          19          73        0        0
 Education                                               100         82          13           0           6        0        0
 Energy and Extractives                                  100          0          61           0          40        0        0
 Environment and Natural Resources                       100         31          63           0           6        0        0
 Finance and Markets                                     100         14          50           0          36        0        0
 Governance                                              100          0           4           0          96        0        0
 Health, Nutrition, and Population                       100         54           0           4          36        0        6
 Macro Economics and Fiscal Management                   100          0           0           0          100       0        0
 Not assigned                                            100          0           5           0          95        0        0
 Other                                                   100         40          15           0          26       19        0


96
                                                                                                                                                            APPENDIX F
                                                                                                                                                PACIFIC ISLANDS TABLES

                                                                                                                                                Country
                                                                            Project                         Programmatic                                     Client
 World Bank Global Practice                                   Total                         Lending                               AAA           Program
                                                                          Supervision                         Approach                                      Training
                                                                                                                                                Support
 Poverty and Equity                                           100               0              0                 0                36               64          0
 Social Protection and Labor                                  100               0              0                 0                100               0          0
 Social, Urban, Rural, and Resilience Global Practice         100               0              2                 0                98                0          0
 Trade and Competitiveness                                    100              26              43                1                16               15          0
 Transport and ICT                                            100               0              1                 0                99                0          0
 Total                                                            100            23             20               1               47             9               0
Source: World Bank Business Intelligence database as of January 08, 2016
Note: Does not include amounts for Tonga and Samoa. Includes financing from both Bank Budget and other World Bank managed financing programs. AAA = analytic and
advisory activities; ICT = information and communication technology.


Table F.5. Total Net Disbursements of Official Development Assistance and Official Aid, 2005–2014 (US$, millions)
                                                                                                                                                 Pacific   Percentage
                                                            Marshall                                                                             Islands    of Total
 Donor                                  Fiji     Kiribati   Islands     Micronesia     Palau     Samoa        Tonga     Tuvalu      Vanuatu       Total    Disbursed
 DAC countries
 United States                          16.0       2.8       510.4        967.9        170.7        10.4        10.2        0.1          85.8    1774.2       31.4
 Australia                             323.6      177.6       24.7         26.6        19.8         254.7      189.5       65.1         422.0    1503.6       26.6
 Japan                                 126.3      95.4        72.3        118.7        88.4         141.0      113.1       63.6          99.0     917.8       16.3
 New Zealand                            47.5      66.1        0.7          1.4          0.2         126.3      110.1       34.7         127.3     514.3        9.1
 France                                 8.0        0.0        0.0          0.0          0.0          0.3        -0.1        0.1          52.8      61.1        1.1
 Korea                                  11.2       2.6        0.8          0.5          0.5          1.8        1.4         1.0          0.4       20.1        0.4
 Canada                                 1.8        1.2        0.5          0.6          0.6          1.7        1.1         1.2          5.2       13.9        0.2
 United Kingdom                         7.6        0.4        0.0          0.0          0.1          1.3        0.8         0.1          0.6       10.9        0.2
 Germany                                7.7        0.3        0.1          0.2          1.0          0.9        -3.3        0.0          0.5       7.5         0.1
 Italy                                  0.1        0.3        0.1          0.0          0.0          0.1        0.1         0.0          0.1       0.7         0.0
 Spain                                  0.0        0.0        0.0          0.0          0.3          0.1        0.1         0.0          0.2       0.7         0.0
 Luxembourg                             0.0        0.0        0.0          0.3          0.0          0.1        0.0         0.0          0.1       0.6         0.0



                                                                                                                                                                       97
APPENDIX F
PACIFIC ISLANDS TABLES
                                                                                                                        Pacific   Percentage
                                                     Marshall                                                           Islands    of Total
 Donor                             Fiji   Kiribati   Islands    Micronesia   Palau   Samoa   Tonga   Tuvalu   Vanuatu    Total    Disbursed
 Greece                            0.1     0.1         0.1        0.1         0.1     0.1     0.0     0.1       0.1      0.5          0.0
 Sweden                            0.1     0.0         0.0        0.0         0.0     0.1     0.0     0.0       0.2      0.4          0.0
 Switzerland                       0.0     0.0         0.0        0.2         0.0     0.1     0.0     0.1       0.0      0.4          0.0
 Norway                            0.2     0.0         0.2        0.0         0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0       0.0      0.3          0.0
 Ireland                           0.1     0.0         0.0        0.0         0.0     0.2     0.0     0.0       0.0      0.3          0.0
 Denmark                           0.0     0.0         0.0        0.0         0.0     0.0     0.2     0.0       0.0      0.2          0.0
 Finland                           0.1     0.0         0.0        0.0         0.0     0.0     0.0     0.1       0.0      0.2          0.0
 Iceland                           0.0     0.0         0.1        0.0         0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0       0.0      0.1          0.0
 Czech Republic                    0.0     0.0         0.0        0.0         0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0       0.0      0.1          0.0
 Austria                           0.0     0.0         0.0        0.0         0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0       0.0      0.0          0.0
 Slovenia                          0.0     0.0         0.0        0.0         0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0       0.0      0.0          0.0
 Portugal                          0.0     0.0         0.0        0.0         0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0       0.0      0.0          0.0
 Slovak Republic                   0.0     0.0         0.0        0.0         0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0       0.0      0.0          0.0
 Belgium                           0.0     0.0         0.0        0.0         0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0       0.0      0.0          0.0
 Poland                            0.0     0.0         0.0        0.0         0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0       0.0      0.0          0.0
 Netherlands                       -0.8    0.0         0.0        0.0         0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0       0.0      -0.8         0.0
 DAC countries, total             549.4   346.9       609.9      1116.5      281.8   538.9   423.3   166.1     794.2    4827.0       85.5
 Multilateral agencies
 EU institutions                  101.6    37.5        6.4        10.4        3.0    79.0    22.5     15.9      37.0    313.1        5.5
 IDA                               0.0     22.7        3.0        0.0         0.0    65.7    71.0      6.2      -4.8    163.7        2.9
 ADB special funds                 3.0     11.1        0.4        14.2        5.5    71.1    21.3      7.8     -11.2    123.1        2.2
 GEF                               13.2    7.0         2.4        0.8         1.3    28.6    2.5       4.7      5.5      65.9        1.2
 UNDP                              16.2    0.5         0.1        0.1         0.0    6.0     0.5       0.4      0.5      24.5        0.4
 UNICEF                            19.4    0.0         0.0        0.0         0.0    0.0     0.0       0.0      0.0      19.4        0.3
 WHO                               3.8     1.8         0.5        1.6         0.2    3.7     2.4       0.3      3.9      18.2        0.3
 IMF (concessional trust funds)    0.0     0.0         0.0        0.0         0.0    17.8    0.0       0.0      0.0      17.8        0.3
 UNTA                              2.7     1.9         0.8        0.8         0.2    3.7     2.6       0.5      3.3      16.4        0.3



98
                                                                                                                                                    APPENDIX F
                                                                                                                                        PACIFIC ISLANDS TABLES
                                                                                                                                          Pacific    Percentage
                                                          Marshall                                                                        Islands     of Total
 Donor                                 Fiji    Kiribati   Islands    Micronesia     Palau     Samoa      Tonga      Tuvalu    Vanuatu      Total     Disbursed
 Global Fund                          8.6        0.0        0.0         0.0          0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0       0.0         8.6           0.2
 UNFPA                                8.0        0.0        0.0         0.0          0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0       0.0         8.0           0.1
 UNAIDS                               5.8        0.0        0.0         0.0          0.0        0.3        0.0        0.0       0.0         6.1           0.1
 Adaptation Fund                      0.0        0.0        0.0         0.0          0.0        4.5        0.0        0.0       0.0         4.5           0.1
 OFID                                 0.0        0.0        0.0         0.0          0.0        2.9        0.0        0.0       0.0         2.9           0.1
 Climate Investment Funds (CIF)       0.0        0.0        0.0         0.0          0.0        0.0        0.8        0.0       0.0         0.8          0.01
 GAVI                                 0.0        0.6        0.0         0.0          0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0       0.0         0.6          0.01
 IAEA                                 0.0        0.0        0.0         0.0          0.1        0.0        0.0        0.0       0.0         0.1         0.002
 IFAD                                 0.0        0.0        0.0         0.0          0.0        -0.7       -0.4       0.0       0.0         -1.1        -0.02
 Multilateral agencies, total        182.6       83.1       13.8        27.9         10.4      282.6      123.4      35.9       34.5       794.2         14.1
 Non-DAC countries
 United Arab Emirates                 1.1        0.9        0.0         0.0          0.0        4.9        5.2        1.9        0.9       14.9          0.3
 Turkey                               1.0        0.3        0.7         0.3          0.6        0.4        0.7        0.8        0.4       5.1           0.1
 Russian Federation                   0.1        0.0        0.0         0.0          0.0        0.0        0.0        3.0        0.0       3.2           0.1
 Thailand                             0.3        0.0        0.0         0.0          0.0        0.1        0.0        0.0        0.0       0.6          0.010
 Israel                               0.1        0.0        0.0         0.1          0.1        0.0        0.0        0.0        0.1       0.5          0.008
 Romania                              0.0        0.0        0.0         0.0          0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0       0.0          0.000
 Non-DAC countries, total             2.7        1.2        0.7         0.4          0.6        5.4        5.9        5.8        1.4       24.2          0.4
 All donors, total                   734.7      431.2      624.5       1144.8       292.9      827.0      552.6      207.8      830.1     5645.4        100.0
Source: Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Data extracted on January 07, 2016 from OECD Stat.
Note: ADB = Asian Development Bank; DAC = Development Assistance Committee; EU = European Union; IDA = International Development Association; GFATM = Global Fund
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria; IAEA = International Atomic Energy Agency; UNAIDS = Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS; UNFPA = United Nations
Population Fund.




                                                                                                                                                                99
APPENDIX F
PACIFIC ISLANDS TABLES
Table F.6. Analytical and Advisory Services (AAA) Support to Pacific Islands, FY05–15
                                                                                                                               AAA         AAA         Total
  Proj ID                                                                                                    Fiscal   Prod   Cost (BB)   Cost (TF)     Cost
                            Project Name                              Practice                Country
  (AAA)                                                                                                       year    Line   Delivered   Delivered   Delivered
                                                                                                                              (US$T)      (US$T)      (US$T)
 P092932                 Fiji Public Sector Reform TA                Governance                  Fiji        FY05     NLTA       55          74         129
 P099914                AML/CFT ASSESSMENT FIJI                 Finance and Markets              Fiji        FY06     ESW       109           0         109
 P101503           Masterplan for Biomass Utilization Fiji     Energy and Extractives            Fiji        FY07     ESW         0         181         181
 P097041                             FSAP Fiji                  Finance and Markets              Fiji        FY07     ESW       292           0         292
 P111281                  Fiji Pension reform (FNPF)            Finance and Markets              Fiji        FY10     NLTA       96          75         171
 P110175                FIJI - Economic Assessment                      MFM                      Fiji        FY10     ESW         8          46          54
 P117578                 FJ: Telecomms and ICT TA                Transport and ICT               Fiji        FY11     NLTA       59           0          59
 P115779                Fiji - Social Protection CT TA       Social Protection and Labor         Fiji        FY12     NLTA      730         172         902
 P122737                     FJ ICT Policy Dialogue              Transport and ICT               Fiji        FY12     NLTA       25           0          25
 P145192           Fiji Post Disaster Needs Assessment                  SURR                     Fiji        FY14     NLTA        0         114         114
 P131403                Support to Economic Reform                      MFM                   Kiribati       FY13     NLTA        3          89          92
 P127619          Kiribati Review of the Import Levy Fund            Agriculture              Kiribati       FY14     NLTA       45         247         292
 P118200        KI: Telecommunications/ICT Development           Transport and ICT            Kiribati       FY14     NLTA       48         170         218
 P122888               KIRIBATI Telecoms Reform TA               Transport and ICT            Kiribati       FY14     NLTA        1         490         491
 P092034           Regulatory and Inst. Reform for PSD          Finance and Markets        Pacific Islands   FY05     NLTA      111         139         251
 P092788          Pacific Islands - Financial Sector Devt       Finance and Markets        Pacific Islands   FY06     NLTA        7           4          11
 P098216           Regulatory and Inst. Reform for PSD          Finance and Markets        Pacific Islands   FY06     NLTA       63           0          63
 P079666      4P-RER 2004/HD SECTOR REVIEW-Pacific Isl                   HNP               Pacific Islands   FY06     ESW       495         599        1,094
 P098009                         PI- Pacific 2020                       MFM                Pacific Islands   FY06     ESW        88          51         139
 P093733        4P-GENDER and DISABILITY in PACIFIC              Poverty and Equity        Pacific Islands   FY06     NLTA        0          63          63
 P069677                4P-PI Infrastructure Strategy                   SURR               Pacific Islands   FY06     ESW        39           0          39
 P089536        PI-Pacific Risk Management and Adaptatio                SURR               Pacific Islands   FY06     ESW       107         174         281
 P092789                  PI-Pacific Migration Study         Trade and Competitiveness     Pacific Islands   FY07     ESW       212         434         646
 P095031         Pacific M&E of Conserv. Action Strategy                 ENR               Pacific Islands   FY08     NLTA        0          35          35
 P110501            Trade Facilitation for Pacific Islands   Trade and Competitiveness     Pacific Islands   FY08     NLTA        0          90          90
 P110131    PACIFIC CATASTROPHE RISK POOL FEAS STUDY                     ENR               Pacific Islands   FY09     NLTA      238         780        1,018
 P102963         4P-Regulatory & Inst. Reform for PSDP II       Finance and Markets        Pacific Islands   FY09     NLTA        5         185         190



100
                                                                                                                                                  APPENDIX F
                                                                                                                                      PACIFIC ISLANDS TABLES
                                                                                                                            AAA           AAA         Total
Proj ID                                                                                                   Fiscal   Prod   Cost (BB)     Cost (TF)     Cost
                          Project Name                             Practice                Country
(AAA)                                                                                                      year    Line   Delivered     Delivered   Delivered
                                                                                                                           (US$T)        (US$T)      (US$T)
P112080   SUSTAINABLE MGT Thru RED. DISASTER RISK                    ENR                Pacific Islands   FY10     NLTA       28           503         530
P104949       PIC Regulatory Simplification and Reform       Finance and Markets        Pacific Islands   FY10     NLTA       18           161         179
P118674       Program Development in Northern Pacific                MFM                Pacific Islands   FY10     ESW        66            24          90
P109095                     Remittance Costs              Trade and Competitiveness     Pacific Islands   FY10     ESW        91            93         184
P110315         Pacific Infrastructure Diagnostics AAA        Transport and ICT         Pacific Islands   FY10     ESW         0           306         306
P109101           Pacific Islands Regional Fisheries              Agriculture           Pacific Islands   FY11     NLTA      204           467         671
P112571             Pacific Islands Offshore Mining         Energy and Extractives      Pacific Islands   FY11     NLTA       94             0          94
P109069                Monitoring and Evaluation          Trade and Competitiveness     Pacific Islands   FY11     ESW       826           220        1,046
P125720     4P-Catastro Risk Assess. Geonode Innov TA             Agriculture           Pacific Islands   FY12     NLTA       77             0          77
P117025               Pacific Petroleum Supply TA           Energy and Extractives      Pacific Islands   FY12     NLTA       35           742         777
P122344    PACIFIC CAT RISK FINANCING TA - PHASE II                  ENR                Pacific Islands   FY12     NLTA       28          1,577       1,606
P120712               Delivery strategies for youth                  HNP                Pacific Islands   FY12     ESW         0            22          22
P109094        Trade Facilitation Strategy Labour Exp.    Trade and Competitiveness     Pacific Islands   FY12     NLTA      691           159         850
P118877      Early Grade Reading Assess in Pac Region              Education            Pacific Islands   FY13     NLTA        8          1,013       1,021
P131402       PFM Design under Capacity Constraints               Governance            Pacific Islands   FY14     ESW         0           103         103
P117120                      Pacific Futures                         MFM                Pacific Islands   FY14     NLTA      128           106         234
P126058                PRAXIS Discussion Series                      Other              Pacific Islands   FY14     NLTA      115             0         115
P144446        Pacific Hardship and Vulnerability Study       Poverty and Equity        Pacific Islands   FY14     ESW         0           220         220
P122736          FSM and RMI Telecoms Assessment              Transport and ICT         Pacific Islands   FY14     NLTA       81           107         188
P127936                  NF-EAP Education TA                       Education            Pacific Islands   FY15     NLTA       18          2,301       2,319
P127935       NF-Educ Global Practices (Fixed 1/Var 2)             Education            Pacific Islands   FY15     NLTA        0          1,981       1,981
P133619             Social Protection in the Pacific      Social Protection and Labor   Pacific Islands   FY15     ESW       127           322         449
P130478         Inst. strengthening for Labor Migration   Social Protection and Labor   Pacific Islands   FY15     NLTA       95          1,295       1,390
P143662               Regional Ports and Shipping             Transport and ICT         Pacific Islands   FY15     ESW       172            27         200
P146664       P4: Options Assessment on ICT for Jobs          Transport and ICT         Pacific Islands   FY15     NLTA       58             0          58
P084771                PW-Palau Oil and Gas TA              Energy and Extractives          Palau         FY07     NLTA       50             0          50
P089868           Economic Valuation TA - Phase II                   ENR                    Palau         FY09     NLTA        7             0           7
P146205          TV: Telecommunications and ICT TA            Transport and ICT            Tuvalu         FY15     NLTA       37             0          37




                                                                                                                                                          101
APPENDIX F
PACIFIC ISLANDS TABLES
                                                                                                                                     AAA          AAA          Total
  Proj ID                                                                                                        Fiscal    Prod    Cost (BB)    Cost (TF)      Cost
                               Project Name                                 Practice               Country
  (AAA)                                                                                                           year     Line    Delivered    Delivered    Delivered
                                                                                                                                    (US$T)       (US$T)       (US$T)
 P087875           PPIAF: VANUATU: Regulatory Frmwk.                  Finance and Markets          Vanuatu        FY06    NLTA          0          297          297
 P105501          FIRST #467: Strength regulation & superv            Finance and Markets          Vanuatu        FY08    NLTA          0           21           21
 P112804          VU: Telecomm Regulatory Capacity Bldg                Transport and ICT           Vanuatu        FY09    NLTA         31            0           31
 P111359                   VU Justice for the Poor                        Governance               Vanuatu        FY10    NLTA        176            0          176
 P108873             Support and Establishment of URA                 Finance and Markets          Vanuatu        FY11    NLTA         78          789          866
 P129824            Vanuatu - Petroleum supply and risk              Energy and Extractives        Vanuatu        FY13    NLTA          0          207          207
 P122938               Vanuatu Energy Roadmap TA                     Energy and Extractives        Vanuatu        FY13    NLTA          0          532          532
 P108569              Vanuatu Rural Services Delivery                        SURR                  Vanuatu        FY13    ESW         125          152          277
 P117734              Vanuatu Land Sector Framework                       Governance               Vanuatu        FY14    NLTA          0          930          930
 P117738          Vanuatu Law and Justice Sector Strategy                 Governance               Vanuatu        FY14    NLTA          0          689          689
 P126047          GPOBA (W1): Improved Electricity Access            Energy and Extractives        Vanuatu        FY15    NLTA          0          259          259
 P126572             Port Vila International Port Reform               Transport and ICT           Vanuatu        FY15    NLTA        455            0          455
 Total                                                                                                                               6,757       19,837       26,595
Source: World Bank database as of January, 2016.
Note: Does not include information for Tonga and Samoa. AAA = analytic and advisory services; BB = Bank Budget; ENR = Environment and Natural Resources; HNP = Health,
Nutrition, and Population; IDA = International Development Association; MFM = Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management; NLTA = nonlending technical assistance; RETF =
recipient-executed trust fund; S = satisfactory; SURR = Social, Urban, Rural, and Resilience Global Practice; TF = trust fund.




102
Appendix G. Evaluation of World Bank Group
Assistance in Building Resilience in the PICs
Strengthening Economic Resilience
An important part of the Bank’s focus in the PICs has been support for enhanced public
financial management. Donors, especially ANZ, had indicated their willingness to
support the delivery of key public services, but there was a need to ensure that
governance that was sufficiently good to avoid major diversion or misuse of funds. The
role that the Bank could play in promoting effective PFM was thus an important
motivation for the setting up of the PF. The strategy documents and Bank programs
indicate four broad objectives or focal areas of Bank engagement with PFM (i) raising
revenues, (ii) improving public expenditure efficiency, (iii) encouraging sustainable
fiscal management, and (iv) strengthening public financial management systems for
enhanced transparency and accountability.

The Bank is supporting countries to increase their revenues from the sale of fisheries
licenses, on which some of the islands heavily depend. Fishing license fees are a major
source of revenue in several Pacific island countries (Kiribati, the Marshall Islands,
Micronesia, and Tuvalu). In 2013 fee earnings ranged from 15 percent of total revenues
in the Marshall Islands to 65 percent in Kiribati (see figure G.1). The key to this has been
the adoption by eight PICS of the vessel day scheme (VDS) in 2007. Nauru Agreement
members1 jointly agreed to allocate a fixed number of transferable fishing days to each
member according to the size of its Exclusive Economic Zones and historical catch. The
fishing companies pay a flat fee per vessel per day. As a consequence fishing license fee
revenue almost rose from about $60 million in 2010 to $280 million in 2014. The Bank
began a more intensive dialogue on approaches to the sector and analytic work in 2009
and supported a multi-country fisheries program in 2014. The Bank sees scope for
further enhancing the competitiveness of fishing arrangements and consistency through
regional agreements beyond the Nauru Agreement and is providing assistance in this
regard. Bank support for the fisheries sector is discussed in appendix H.




1 The 1982 Nauru Agreement signed by eight Pacific island countries sought to strengthen
the bargaining power of license-issuing countries and regional control to stop illegal
fishing. The original agreement regulated only the maximum number of vessels eligible for
access rights in the region.


                                                                                        103
APPENDIX G
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS

                Figure G.1. Fishing License Fees Revenues




                Source: IMF. Asia and Pacific Small States Monitor, April 2014.

The Bank has also encouraged improvements in revenue management and supported
the increase in taxes on tobacco and sugar, with a view to the potential health benefits.
The Bank’s emphasis on the need to raise tobacco and sugar taxes, sometimes included
in DPOs, has been appreciated by Ministries of Finance and recognized as a win-win for
its positive health impacts.

The second objective of the Bank has been to support more efficient public
expenditures. A major thrust of the Bank has been to persuade governments to separate
the public policy, management and regulatory functions from the actual service
delivery, through either outsourcing functions to the private sector (e.g., in road
maintenance and telecommunications) or through the creation of separate national
services in health and highways. In addition Bank analytic work on expenditure
through PERs, PEMFAs or sector MTEFs contributed to better allocation of
expenditures. The Bank has also provided just in time advice and analytic work in areas
such as public sector pay policies and the allocation of public expenditure both across
and within sectors using instruments such as the Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability (PEFA) reviews, selective Public Expenditure Reviews, and support for
MTEFs at the sectoral level. Just in time support related both to requests from
governments and from other donors. As an example of the latter, one donor cited the
Bank’s role in Kiribati, where the government was providing an expensive subsidy to
copra producers. The Bank agreed to donor requests to source and to obtain a
consultant to review the program. “This has led to unprecedented reforms and has had
a major impact on the way the government looks at this issue. This would have been
very difficult for a bilateral donor to do.” The Bank has also been active in providing
just in time support in Tonga and Samoa in response to requests from the Ministries of
Finance (see appendix B and D on Tonga and Samoa for more details).




104
                                                                                    APPENDIX G
                    EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS
The third objective of the Bank was to promote sustainable fiscal management. The PICs
are extremely vulnerable to external shocks, both from natural disasters and the global
economic trends. The first has both a direct impact through the costs of relief and
rehabilitation and an indirect impact through the decline in tourist arrivals. To help
address the problems which arose from natural disasters, the Bank supported the
Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative (PCRAFI) which
undertook a major risk analysis across the region. Following on this a pilot insurance
scheme has been established with support from the government of Japan, which allows
for risk pooling to provide highly liquid funds to governments in the immediate
aftermath of a disaster. This is discussed further in the next section. The vicissitudes of
the global economy have impacted the PICs in two ways. First, soaring food and fuel
prices in 2007–08 imposed a sizeable economic burden given that these are the bulk of
the PICs imports. Second, the global financial crisis led to lower demand for PIC
migrant labor in ANZ and a consequent reduction in the flow of remittances, as well as
a decline in tourist traffic. Another important source of fiscal instability is the lumpiness
of capital investment in the PICs. Given their small size, key public investments such as
those needed for major roads, airports, or hospitals, represent a very large share of GDP
by comparison with larger countries. Loans to support such projects, taken out when
economic conditions are favorable, must continue to be repaid when the shocks occur.
The difficulties that can result from governments electing to go ahead with large
politically attractive infrastructure projects that raise serious issues of long-term fiscal
sustainability are illustrated by the Apia terminal in box G.1. The Bank has helped
countries set-up debt units and debt monitoring systems and provided training in this
area, as well as making it a feature of its dialogue e.g., in Samoa and Vanuatu.




                                                                                            105
APPENDIX G
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS

 Box G.1.The Matter of the Apia Terminal

 There is little question of the need for major reconstruction and renovation of Apia’s
 international airport. The Bank is currently supporting a project to reconstruct the runway
 and the aprons linked to the terminal facilities as well as to enhance safety and firefighting
 equipment. A Chinese contractor proposed to the Prime Minister to construct a large and
 expensive new terminal building with funding from the Chinese Exim bank. Without any
 analysis of the project, or cabinet consultation, the decision to proceed with this project was
 announced publicly. Under the DPO Samoa had agreed not to borrow loans with a grant
 element of less than 35 percent. The loan from China’s Exim bank had a grant element of 28
 percent. This would have mattered less if the project had been smaller, but the proposed
 project cost roughly three times what Bank technical staff judged to be needed at this point in
 time. Further the DPO included agreement that all borrowing would be subject to an
 economic appraisal of the proposed project and the calculation of a rate of return. In addition
 procurement on this large contract was to be sole sourced without the transparency agreed
 under the DPO. The proposed loan and contracting did not follow Samoa’s own internal
 procedures.
 The Bank was placed in a difficult position since the PM was not going to go back on his
 publicly announced support of the project. The Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs was
 sympathetic to the concerns expressed by both the Bank and senior Samoan officials, but the
 decision on terms was one for the Ministry of Commerce to take and they were unwilling to
 offer more concessional terms. Since Samoa was technically in default of the agreements of
 the DPO, the Bank held up declaring the DPO effective, which also held up ANZ co-
 financing. The Bank decided to ask the government to carry out an economic evaluation of
 the terminal and also insisted that an environmental impact assessment cover both the
 runway reconstruction and the terminal building. The economic analysis was of good quality
 and demonstrated that on the basis of ambitious but not totally implausible traffic projections
 the rate of return was marginally acceptable. Once the economic analysis had been done and
 the EIA agreed to, after a delay of around six months, the Bank decided to declare the First
 Fiscal and Economic Operation effective and other donors went along with this.
 Source: Evaluation interviews with government officials and World Bank staff.


Fourth, the Bank has worked closely with other donors to help strengthen public
financial management systems for enhanced transparency and accountability. The Bank
worked with then AusAID to develop a guidance note on PFM reforms in 2012 –13.
Australia has been supporting the preparation of Medium-Term Expenditure
Frameworks. The Bank’s view is that the transaction costs involved in preparing these
for the public sector as a whole may outweigh the advantages. In key sectors however,
such as health and education in Samoa, they have proven useful instruments. ADB has
supported Government Financial Management Information Systems (GFMIS) and these
are working, but need to be upgraded. External auditing has been supported by donors
through provision of technical assistance and has been an important feature of the



106
                                                                                    APPENDIX G
                    EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS
DPOs.2 While the Bank has addressed issues of Public Procurement at the general level
in most countries, it has played a more important role through strengthening capacity
in the key sectors, particularly Infrastructure and Health as an adjunct to its lending in
these areas. Until recently the Bank has not had a major involvement on civil service
reform. The contribution has mainly been though knowledge sharing, to expose senior
officials to other systems. The Bank is currently engaged however in providing
technical assistance to the Public Sector Reform Commission of the government of Fiji
on a number of aspects of the ongoing civil service reform that is taking place.

One area where the Bank has not been much engaged has been that of local
governments and decentralized structures. This is likely to be an important issue for the
PICs going forward. Even with small economies, there is a case for a second level of
government that is able to take a view of the needs of a separate island or town. This
should be studied to assess whether the benefits of creating some structures of this kind
would outweigh their costs. The Bank should undertake analytic work on this topic or
support some of the regional academic institutions to do so.

Building Environmental Resilience
Disaster risk management (DRM) and climate change adaptation (CCA) have played an
important role in the Bank’s strategies over the last decade. DRM did not feature in the
Bank’s 2000–04 Regional Strategy, though the overall portfolio was small. But it formed
a core part of the FY06–09 Regional Engagement Framework, which had sub-pillars on
improving resilience to natural hazards, and on improving maintenance of
infrastructure assets (and so aiming to reduce the need for costly reconstruction). DRM
or CCA also play an important role in the Bank’s country strategies for Kiribati FY11–14
CPS, the Federated States of Micronesia FY14–17, Samoa FY12–16, Tonga FY11–14, and
Tuvalu FY12–15. It does not feature in the FY15–17 Fiji Country Engagement note.

The Bank’s strategy over the last decade has been anchored by two key pieces of
analytic work—Not If But When—Adapting to natural hazards in the Pacific Islands
region in 2006 and Acting Today For Tomorrow in 2012. The 2006 study argued for a
shift from disaster response toward proactive risk reduction and climate-proofing,
noting as constraints a range of perverse incentives in donors and client countries, poor
institutional arrangements in countries that relegated DRM to weak ministries, and an
overemphasis on physical investments as compared to behavioral change and
knowledge work. The 2012 study noted that fragmented project-based disaster risk
reduction and climate change adaptation initiatives had not reduced underlying

2
 Interlocutors noted however that even when audit reports are prepared in a timely manner
there is an issue of the capacity of the Public Accounts Committees to review them


                                                                                            107
APPENDIX G
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS
vulnerability in a lasting way. It noted weak coordination between and within donor
and country institutions and the need for improved access to climate and disaster data,
and argued for mainstreaming of disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation
considerations in broader development planning. And it echoed again the need for
DRM coordination to be housed in high level institutional bodies. In addition, the Bank
has carried out post-disaster needs assessments in Samoa and Fiji after Cyclone Evan in
2012 and in Vanuatu after Cyclone Pam in 2015. These have helped countries to bring
credible damage assessments to donors and so encourage support, and have helped
governments and donors prioritize the most significant sectors.

The Bank has engaged in DRM using a range of instruments. The Bank has a history of
engagement in disaster response reconstruction, and risk reduction in Samoa and
Tonga, primarily through investment lending operations but also through Development
Policy Lending in Samoa.3 These operations have supported a mix of post-disaster
reconstruction (aiming to build structures that will be more resilient), specific risk
reduction investments, and capacity building for disaster preparedness and response
capacity. The Bank has had a long running program on climate change adaptation in
Kiribati, one of the first explicit climate change adaptation efforts in the Bank. But
otherwise the Bank’s engagements on DRM have been more recent. The Bank has
played a key role in the development of the ongoing Pacific Catastrophe Risk
Assessment and Financing Initiative (PCRAFI), which supported a large amount of
technical preparatory work and has initiated a catastrophe insurance pilot in Samoa,
Tonga, Vanuatu, Marshall Islands and the Cook Islands. The Bank has established a
new multi-country platform for engaging on disaster resilience, the Pacific Resilience
Program (PREP), with disaster risk reduction operations in Samoa and Tonga, disaster
risk financing in the Marshall Islands and Vanuatu, and well as regional components
through the Pacific Island Forum Secretariat (PIFS) and SPC. The Bank hopes to extend
this platform to other countries in future. Much of the portfolio is still active, and so has
not yet been evaluated.

The Bank has not always had high leverage when financing risk reduction. In Tonga,
the Bank financed three disaster response projects which focused on reconstruction
of housing (see Appendix B). While the newly reconstructed houses are more
resilient to future cyclones, the model of financing the full cost of private housing
has meant that available funds cover only a small portion of the country’s at-risk
assets, and so the cumulative impact of Bank financing for risk reduction has been
modest relative to total climate vulnerability. The most recent project finances


3
 The Bank has engaged in DRM in Samoa in 2004, 2007, 2011, 2013, 2014, and 2015 and Tonga in
2002, 2011, 2014, and 2015.


108
                                                                                    APPENDIX G
                    EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS
housing reconstruction in remote outer islands, and has faced considerable
implementation problems in part because expectations from communities exceed
what can be supported with available funding. The project has also struggled with
social and political challenges based on eligibility criteria for larger houses to be
provided to more vulnerable households, and based on disputes over the division
of benefits between house owners versus occupants. Moreover, project beneficiaries
face uncertainty over future occupancy rights in newly constructed homes.

The Bank has supported financial disaster risk management through the PCRAFI. The
PCRAFI is inspired by the successful Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility,
a multi-country risk pool offering disaster insurance products to governments in the
Caribbean. Pacific Island countries asked for support from the Bank to replicate the
scheme in the Pacific, but it became apparent that there was no data available on
which to build an insurance product. The Bank thus began with a series of
investments supporting development of databases for hazard and vulnerability
information. The database has helped to develop country risk profiles which inform
finance ministries of their risk exposure, it has helped to inform some investment
design decisions by donors, and it has allowed for the creation of insurance
products. As in the Caribbean facility, the goal of insurance is not to cover a
substantial portion of losses, but rather to help provide the government with
urgently needed liquidity in the wake of a disaster, which they can then use to make
urgently needed purchases (such as for fuel, overtime, equipment hire, and critical
supplies) to facilitate the disaster response effort. Insurance products have been
functioning in a pilot stage for three years. Two payouts have been made to date, to
Tonga and Vanuatu, each of roughly $2 million, and both very rapidly after the
disaster. Government officials in Samoa and Tonga interviewed by IEG were
enthusiastic about the system, and understood the benefits and limitations. Policy
engagement and dialog with finance ministries through the PCRAFI has helped the
Bank increase awareness of the need for improved DRM.

But as of September 2015 the future of the initiative remains unclear. Premiums
have so far been paid by the Japan International Cooperation Agency and will be
paid by IDA in future. It is not yet clear if countries would value coverage highly
enough to pay their own premium.4 The transaction costs of running the system are
high relative to premium volume, and the limited overall ability of countries to pay
means that there are upper bounds on the feasible market size. Thus it is not yet

4
 Countries face two issues: the budgetary issue of finding space for premium payments, and
country concerns that insurance payments may reduce the amount of disaster relief that they
receive. Samoan officials suggest that Samoa would be willing to pay premiums, but this may
not be representative.


                                                                                            109
APPENDIX G
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS
clear if a standalone self-funding sustainable facility will be feasible in the Pacific.
(However, Bank staff report that a multi donor trust fund is being established with
funds committed after the 2015 Paris COP 21, which would make medium term
funding and expansion more stable.) Some donors are underwhelmed by the
insurance products, arguing that the costs of developing the databases have been
high relative to the small payout size and relative to the large donor relief and
reconstruction operations. They also argue that the focus on financial risk
management will detract from a risk management agenda. But Bank staff
convincingly argue that the two are complementary, and that the engagement
through the PCRAFI with finance ministries has been key to convincing
governments to support resilience initiatives as in the large-scale PREP.

The recently approved PREP establishes a regional platform for the Bank’s engagement
on DRM in the Pacific. The PREP is in the early stages and so it is too soon to assess
results, but the overall approach appears sound. The design and selection of
components appears reasonable: the $32 million program aims focuses primarily on
strengthening early warning systems and preparedness, including support for hydro-
meteorological and seismological systems and warning communication systems, along
with risk reduction activities in investment planning, retrofits of public buildings, and
for extended support for the PCRAFI including payment of premiums. Prioritizing
warning systems may be a cost-effective means of risk reduction. Meteorological
agencies are starting from a low base; in many countries these agencies have received
no significant support in over two decades. The program tries to work both nationally
and regionally, with national level IDA-financed investment operations in the four
covered countries combined with regional activities implemented through regional
institutions to be financed by the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) and the
Special Climate Change Fund. The idea of the PREP was that by acting at scale it would
act as a flagship intervention in the sector and help to consolidate resilience initiatives
across the Pacific. But since its conception, increased attention to and financing for DRM
by other donors, means that the PREP is one of several major initiatives and is no longer
the only major platform for others to harmonize around, so coordination will remain an
ongoing challenge.

The Bank could focus more on its areas of comparative advantage. The Bank
engagement has been at its strongest in its efforts to help governments to adopt a
framework of disaster risk reduction and resilience in broad government planning. It
has less of a comparative advantage in emergency response and reconstruction
operations, where many bilateral and other donors are also capable and active. While
emergency response operations have played an important role in past in establishing
DRM engagement and dialog, many countries have become highly sensitive to climate



110
                                                                                     APPENDIX G
                     EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS
change and disaster risks, and the Bank may be able to move directly to disaster
resilience activities.

Countries face difficult tradeoffs in deciding how and when to relocate from
vulnerable coastal areas. Economic activity, population, and transport links are
concentrated on coasts, and face substantial and increasing risks from disasters.
Relocating activity inland would reduce disaster risks and could shift future
development toward locations that are less vulnerable, but this comes at high
economic cost and may not be effective. Operations in Samoa (see Appendix E)
demonstrate this dilemma, with questions over whether a critical road should be
moved inland, and with a tsunami response operation that financed construction of
a new inland road but found that many people who initially relocated inland have
since returned to the coast.

Throughout the Pacific, Bank interventions labeled as climate change have focused on
current climate risks rather than future climate change. Disaster risk management
experts in the Bank argue that there is no significant difference between disaster risk
management and climate change adaptation. This is an understandable position, as
distinctions made between the two are often unhelpful. Governments face headaches
trying to access climate finance funds that have narrow funding windows that specify
that they must be used for climate change adaption and not disaster risk management
or reconstruction. And countries face substantial adaptation deficits, so emphasis on
improving resilience to current climate variability addresses a major near- term
development threat and driver of economic risk. Yet small island countries especially
low-lying atolls face strategic questions from future climate change more than almost
anywhere else in the world, and need to be considering anticipatory adaptation to long
run threats. The Bank has an almost unique ability to help countries think about long-
term planning on these issues, as regional donors face complex sensitivities in these
types of discussions especially given political sensitivities over migration access. The
Bank could encourage internal debate on long-term migration options and on whether
it makes sense to finance development in places that may become untenable.5
Seemingly fantastic proposals about atoll raising or floating settlements are being made.
The Bank is in a position to provide credible advice on whether these have any
feasibility. But there can be a disconnect between the level of threat identified in the
Bank’s country strategies and analytic work with the level of engagement. In Tuvalu,
the Bank’s strategy notes the existential threat from climate change, but discusses
support for water tanks and rainwater harvesting. In Kiribati, the country strategy notes


5
 One barrier to this is the level of anxiety provoked by anything involving resettlement, given
safeguard issues.


                                                                                             111
APPENDIX G
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS
“Kiribati’s vulnerability to the existential threat of climate change” and states that the
core of the Bank’s strategy will be to help with climate change adaptation, but the recent
major interventions are on fixing the road and improving efficiency in water supply.
They are worthy and important goals that address critical current development
challenges and current adaptation deficits but do little to address long run threats. The
Bank could foster debate about a range of adaptive strategies and questions; can the
Bank help countries to adopt land use strategies that discourage development in high
vulnerability zones; is there a role for the Bank in discussions on long-term migration
strategies; is there scope for ensuring that resources such as fishing revenues can benefit
people even if displaced?

The Bank could play more of a role in addressing fragmentation of the climate change
space. An important motivation of governments in the region for adopting a climate
change lens is the hope of attracting climate finance on grant or concessional terms. But
the climate change space is crowded and difficult to navigate. There are literally dozens
of donors and different funding windows, and this puts a heavy coordination burden
on governments that have severe capacity limits. There are often many parallel
operations in a single country with little coordination, and potential risk of duplication
and overlap. The Bank and other donors would provide better service if they could
coordinate better, with fewer interventions, more cofinancing, and less burden on
governments. The Bank is sometimes seen by other donors and regional institutions as
often acting on its own in the climate change space. There are regional climate change
groups the Bank is not part of—partly because these often act out of Suva where the
Bank has limited presence and Bank operational staff are kept busy focused on country
engagements and project preparation and supervision, so regional coordination
becomes a lower priority. The Bank is not as engaged with regional organizations as it
could be. Its approach has tended to be to work with individual institutions when there
is a specific technical need. This works in terms of improving project operational
performance, but regional institutions have important political functions, and the Bank
could reach out to them more in the design of major operations even if without using
them as implementing agencies. As climate adaptation will require infrastructure
investments and is likely to grow in importance and scale, as considered in past it could
be useful for the Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility (PRIF) to take on a coordination
function in this space.

The Bank’s climate change adaptation projects in Kiribati have faced a number of
challenges caused in part by program design. The Bank supported a series of adaptation
projects6 based on the United Nations phased approach of planning, enabling, and

6
 Phase 1 in 2003 was devoted to consultations and planning; phase 2 in 2006 was intended to
build capacity and public awareness, support diagnosis of climate-related problems,


112
                                                                                     APPENDIX G
                     EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS
implementing pilot demonstration measures. But project experience demonstrated
potential flaws in this model and the need to customize to country conditions. The
phase 1 project failed to have full buy-in from government, in part because it was
difficult to engage government in planning work given the lack of accompanying
investments and associated economic activity. The phase 2 project design was
unrealistically complex, especially given low levels of technical and managerial
capacity. Project expectations that communities would readily prioritize
investments were foreign to a culture built on making decisions by consensus. The
third phase has learned from this experience and is more narrowly focused, but
implementation progress has been slow. Despite these challenges, the projects have
made important contributions on water and sanitation policies and plans.

Strengthening Social Resilience
This section examines five dimensions of social resilience in the PICs: (i) labor mobility,
(ii) health, (iii) education, (iv) gender equality, and (v) social protection. Social resilience
only features very modestly in the Country Strategy documents for the PICs. The Tonga
CAS has two outcomes related to education reflecting the project that was ongoing at
the time of the CAS, and the Samoa, Kiribati and Tuvalu CPS have an outcome on
increased temporary migration. There are no outcomes on health, gender equality or
social protection in the results frameworks. This said the Bank did of course have some
coverage in all these areas. Labor mobility was a major thrust of the Bank’s work and
policy dialogue with governments. The health program was quite significant in the
earlier years of the period but was scaled back later partly due to less demand from
governments. Since the education project in Tonga, the Bank has seen itself as a niche
player, focusing mainly on EGRA. Gender equality is supported through
mainstreaming it in the Bank’s investment operations and there has been analytic work
on social protection. These five topics are briefly discussed below.

Fostering Migration
The most important contribution of the Bank to social resilience has been its
involvement in the migration issue since 2008. From the ANZ perspective Home and
Away was the reference manual. The Bank provided knowledge of other temporary
migration schemes worldwide (e.g., the Canadian scheme with Jamaica) and credibility,
and this was instrumental in particular in giving the New Zealand authorities the


mainstream adaptation into government policies, programs, and plans, and undertake pilot
measures in coastal protection and freshwater management. Phase 3 approved in 2011 is
focused on the water sector, with support for groundwater and rainwater harvesting and leak
reduction in distribution systems, along with some coastal protection.


                                                                                             113
APPENDIX G
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS
confidence to go forward. There were issues of how to prepare workers for the scheme.
The Bank learned from piloting the scheme.7 It was able to help the Employment
Services Units with the kinds of information they needed to gather and the systems they
needed to have in place. In some countries the selection of migrants was pro-poor,
particularly Vanuatu and Tonga, while in others it was a more average cross-section of
the population. There were issues of alcoholism and the behavior of migrants. The Bank
lent support for the development of a two day pre-departure orientation course—
covering issues as basic as occupational health and safety as well as how to turn on an
oven, how to set up a bank account, and what the work involves. PIC governments
have also responded by trying to maximize the advantages from migration. For
example, the government of Samoa has put in place training schemes for potential
migrant workers. Currently Samoa is exploring options such as a special marine
training program. In FY15 the Bank responded to a request from the government of
Samoa to help in the preparation of a labor migration policy.

The Bank has also supported the monitoring and evaluation of the program. A very
rigorous evaluation framework was put in place which covered both workers who were
not selected and workers who were, and for the latter group, the evaluation looked at
them both before they left and after they returned. Overall the benefits were substantial
and a particularly encouraging finding was that a significant share of remittances went
for children’s education (see box G.2). The Bank continues to work in this area
supported by DFAT funding. While overall the scheme has been successful it is
important to recognize its limitations. The migrants are employed in activities that do
little to build their capacity to undertake skilled employment or set up enterprises when
they return home. In recognition of this, both the Seasonal Worker Program in Australia
and the Recognized Seasonal Employment scheme in New Zealand have established
add-on skills training that allows workers to receive formal qualifications under ANZ
quality training frameworks. Returning seasonal workers have the opportunity to
complete a Recognition of Prior Learning assessment against competencies at a
Certificate I or II level in the sector that they have been working in. An important issue
for the Bank to consider is whether there is scope for leveraging the experience of the
migrants to broaden the development impact, through for example, extension services
that could support MSME development or through offering technical and vocation
training to returning migrants. The Bank is supporting a conference in March 2016 for
representatives from the labor sending countries to compare their experience.




7
 At present the RSE only covers temporary migrants from Kiribati, Samoa, the Solomon
Islands, Tonga, Papua New Guinea, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.


114
                                                                                         APPENDIX G
                         EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS

 Box G.2. Evidence of the Impact of the New Zealand Seasonal Worker Program
 An Impact Evaluation of the scheme undertaken in 2014 yielded the following conclusion:
 “Using analysis based on detailed surveys fielded before, during, and after participation in
 the RSE, we find that the RSE has indeed had large positive effects on sending households in
 Tonga and Vanuatu. We find per capita incomes of households participating in the RSE to
 have increased by over 30 percent relative to the comparison groups in both countries, with
 per- capita expenditure also increasing, although by less than income. Subjective economic
 welfare is estimated to have increased by almost half a standard deviation in both countries,
 and households have purchased more durable assets such as DVD players, radios, ovens, and
 in Vanuatu, boats. In Tonga RSE households also doubled the rate of home improvement,
 and in both countries, households became more likely to have a bank account, likely
 reflecting more formal savings. School attendance rates increased by 20 percentage points for
 16 to 18 year olds in Tonga, and community-level effects were generally modest, but positive.
 Overall these results show that the seasonal worker program has been a powerful
 development intervention for the participating households, and that the RSE policy appears
 to have succeeded in its development objectives in the short run.”
 Source: The development impact of New Zealand’ RSE seasonal worker policy, John Gibson and David McKenzie.



Strengthening Human Development—Health and Education
The Bank has had relatively limited engagement in the health and education sectors in
these countries. While strategy documents have boiler-plate references to Bank support
for health and education outcomes, in practice this has not been the focus of support.
Particularly in the health sector the Bank’s work needs to be seen as part of its general
effort to promote more efficient public expenditures. The Samoa Health Systems
Strengthening project is the only ongoing operation. In addition the Bank is involved in
the PEARL (Pacific Early Age Readiness and Learning) which is a Bank executed
program with Ministries of Education, mainly active in Tonga. The Bank has obtained
$9 million from the Global Partnership in support of the project. In the view of a Bank
staff member, there are two reasons for this limited engagement: “First, Australia and
New Zealand provide substantial grant funding for health and education and
governments are reluctant to borrow, even on IDA terms for what they regard as
‘welfare’ sectors. Second, the Bank’s projects have been poorly designed. They are
small, costly to prepare and supervise, and have disbursed very slowly, so it is difficult
to make a case for an expanded program.”

Improving Health in the PICs
The Bank’s focus in the PICs over the period has been on efficient delivery of health
services. The development partners want the Bank to stay involved in the health sector
and have been willing to provide trust fund resources for this purpose. Outside of



                                                                                                              115
APPENDIX G
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS
Samoa, the Bank’s focus is to provide AAA to Melanesia where the indicators are
poorest. The role of the Bank has been to identify the gaps. These are particularly
around health financing and PFM—and provide substantial analytic work on these
issues. In the words of a Bank staff member “This is the core of the World Bank’s focus,
helping the government manage the whole of their resources for the health sector, not
just the Bank’s own small investment projects.” Indeed, the health sector model in the
PICs is predominantly that of government finance (with roughly one fourth coming
from partners) and out of pocket expenditure is low (around 15 percent).

In some countries the Bank helped Health Ministries prepare their budgets and get
development partner financing. In the view of Bank staff there has been some
improvement in the management of the health sector, but it is slow and fluctuates. The
Solomon Islands now have good management in the health sector, but at the other
extreme the Bank has been contemplating pulling out of the sector in Vanuatu given the
lack of senior management focus and capacity. In some islands, the Bank has made a
considerable effort to ensure that money reaches the front line services. For example,
the Bank conducted a house facilities costing survey (instead of conducting the
standard PETS) to understand where efficiency gains could be made.

The Bank has also selectively used DPOs to support enhanced medical services. For
example, the Tuvalu Medical Treatment Scheme (TMTS) which provides overseas
medical treatment to patients in need of tertiary level care, is one of the most important
healthcare programs in Tuvalu. The increasing cost of the program spent on a relatively
small number of patients has made it difficult for the government of Tonga to achieve
key healthcare policy objectives. The Bank has helped the government to institute
measures to improve the quality of care provided through the TMTS and to reduce the
cost of the program. Measures were implemented on a pilot basis and
recommendations from the pilot submitted to the parliament (2013 DPO). As a result,
TMTS savings have contributed to an increase in budget allocations to primary and
preventative healthcare. Under the second DPO, the government has endorsed a
revision of the TMTS policy to institute the piloted efficiency measures and to
strengthen the patient referral process (2015 DPO).

In Samoa and Tonga, the health sector program supported successful efforts to
strengthen key institutions (see more details in appendix B and D). In Tonga, Bank
support for strengthening core tertiary care has provided a foundation to underpin
continuing improvements in health service delivery. Tonga’s key health indicators—
already among the best in the Pacific—have continued to improve during this period. In
Samoa an important contribution of the Bank has been to help put health procurement
guidelines in place. There was some resistance on the part of the Ministry and a failure
to recognize the need to build up capacity to handle procurement. The Bank also


116
                                                                                     APPENDIX G
                     EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS
supported the split of the planning, management and operational functions of the sector
between the Ministry and the Health Services, as well as enhanced health sector
planning, financing, waste management, and some rehabilitation of hospital facilities.

The growing problem of noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) in the PICs suggests that
this is likely to be an important area of focus for the Bank going forward. The Bank is
undertaking analytic work on this in Tonga, Samoa and Vanuatu on this topic. In 2013
this work was presented to a joint MOF/MOH session at a conference at the regional
level and ministers endorsed this. The Bank is working jointly with WHO and ANZ to
support the implementation of a road map. In Vanuatu and Samoa the Bank is working
to help governments understand the impact of NCDs. Some of the main
recommendations lie outside the health sector e.g., (i) in education, anti-smoking
campaigns and targeted school programs for healthy lifestyle,(ii) in fiscal policy,
increased taxation of tobacco, sugar drinks and high fat foods; (iii) in transport, walking
and cycling paths, (iv) in agriculture, support for locally grown fruits and vegetables.
Others relate more directly to the health sector e.g., provision of a package of basic
services at clinics designed to promote early detection of diabetes, and monitoring and
evaluation of the impact of policies. The DPOs are an important potential tool for
supporting movement in this area.

Improving Education in PICs
Despite improvements in education across the islands, many challenges still remain.
Most of the Pacific islands have achieved universal primary education, and primary
completion rates across all islands are close to 100. Critical to the success of countries
that achieved MDG 2 was the provision of free and compulsory primary education.8
Despite the progress made in increasing overall school access, improving the quality of
education and access to the rural/outer island areas, remain a challenge for most PICs.
In addition, teacher quality is a major concern for most countries, with high levels of
teacher absenteeism in some countries. As a result, many students finish school without
basic literacy, numeracy and life skills based on tests administered in a number of
countries in primary schools.9

The Bank has supported a range of interventions in the education sector. The initial
focus was on the introduction of school grant mechanisms in which decisions on the use
of funding are made at the level of each school. These are designed to provide

8
 2015 Pacific regional MDGs tracking report/ prepared by the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat.
Suva, Fiji, Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat, 2015.
9
 2013 Pacific regional MDGs tracking report / prepared by the Pacific Islands Forum
Secretariat.-- Suva, Fiji: Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat, 2013.


                                                                                             117
APPENDIX G
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS
principals, teachers, and parents with greater input into decisions at the school level,
increasing local level oversight and accountability in an effort to improve education
outcomes given already very high primary enrolment rates. Through the Education for
All Fast Track Initiative (EFA FTI) and in conjunction with AusAID and New Zealand,
the Bank has also supported assessments of reading ability in the early grades of
primary education. The Bank is now implementing the Pacific Early Age Readiness and
Learning project (PEARL), which is funded by the Global Partnership for Education and
AusAID program. PEARL aims to support children to develop key skills that will be
useful at school, and to help more children learn to read and write well in their first
years of primary school, which has knock-on effects throughout their education. This
program is being implemented in Samoa and Tonga and should help move focus from
enrolment to improved learning outcomes.

A Bank-supported education project in Tonga appears to have had mixed results. A $1
million IDA credit was provided for a $5 million Education Support Project in 2005,
with co-financing from New Zealand. The core of the project was a school grant
program with funds provided directly to schools for nonsalary expenditures to be
selected from an approved list by principals and parents. The project completion report
was reviewed by IEG in 2013.10 The IEG review found that the project objective, of
improving the quality of both primary and secondary education, while highly relevant,
was unrealistically broad and there was no clear results chain linking the project
investments to the outcome. Achievement of the outcomes was rated as unsatisfactory.
In addition the IEG review points to serious implementation issues particularly in weak
monitoring and evaluation and the lack of any audit of the project on completion. The
project also failed in achieving a better budgetary balance between salaries and key
nonsalary expenditures for teaching materials. At the end of the project, salaries
continued to account for 95 percent of the Ministry’s budget. As far as greater
involvement by the local communities in decisions on use of funds for nonsalary
expenditures, initially the project appears to have had some effect, but the IEG review
reports that by the end of project decisions were being made by the administrators.

As in the health sector, the Bank has also selectively used its DPOs to provide support
for education policy reforms. In Tuvalu, based on the finding of the MTEF report for
education, the Bank supported through its DPO series measures to enhance the
performance of the scholarship program (in particular to tighten the criteria for
extension of scholarships) and the revision of pre-service and in service training. As
efficiency gains achieved through reforms to the tertiary scholarship scheme are
gradually realized, the government of Tonga is also trying to rebalance the focus across


10
     IEG Review of the Tonga Education Support Project: ICRR13813; 02/08/2013.


118
                                                                                    APPENDIX G
                    EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS
the education sector in particular toward improving post-primary level access to
Tertiary Vocational Education and Training (TVET) programs. The second Bank DPO
supported measures to broaden vocational training programs to increase post-primary
education opportunities particularly for Tuvaluan women. The curriculum, developed
by the SPC, includes new training for employment of female students.

The view among the major donors is that the Bank could and should have done more to
support education policy reform in the PICs. Education is obviously a key to progress
and to ‘bending the growth curve upwards.’ It can lead to better prepared and higher
earning migration from the PICs. It can support the development of a domestic private
sector and commercial agriculture, and it can fill capacity gaps and deepen the current
thin capacity. Donors expressed some concern about the state of education in the PICs.
By and large it is oriented toward public sector jobs in the urban areas. The poverty and
hardship11 issues in many PICs, relate in part to rural agriculturalists, yet the education
system does little to meet their needs. The weaknesses in the education sector have not
had the weight in government agendas that donors think is needed and in their view,
the Bank could now take a much more active role in promoting a dialogue on the future
of education. The Bank could build on the analytic work done (notably on teaching,
learning, school readiness including in remote areas) through the READ project and
PEARL interventions to look at the long term prospects of education and provide
guidance in this area. The DPOs, for example could be used for this through asking
governments to prepare policy statements as part of the agreement framework to build
a consensus around the needed reforms. It would be worth also exploring Bank IFC
engagement to provide the skills needed12 for the development of tourism, agriculture,
and fisheries as well as providing better preparation for temporary and permanent
migrants.




11Poverty in the Pacific is obviously more complex and diversely felt than by just rural
agriculturalists” alone. Poverty in the Pacific is a poverty of opportunity and characterized
both by low incomes and reliance on subsistence and informal livelihoods, as well as
inadequate access to quality services in both rural and urban areas, where there can be
greater risk of absolute poverty due to lack of land/food security.
12Education in the Pacific does not only become relevant when it’s linked to skills and the
labor force. A significant portion of the skill deficit comes from poor cognitive and
noncognitive skills that were not developed in the early years, from poor quality of
education and inefficient system management – that translates into poor learning
outcomes, repetition, drop outs--, and from weak coordination and connections between
the education system and the labor market.


                                                                                            119
APPENDIX G
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS

Improving Social Protection
Pacific island countries rely mainly on informal social protection systems to ensure that
citizens receive support in times of need.13 The weakening of informal safety nets and
increased hardship among vulnerable groups have placed more pressure on
governments of Pacific island countries to introduce formal social protection systems.
Yet in almost all PICs the provision of formal social protection is limited and excludes
the vast majority of the population. Social insurance programs are the main social
protection instruments in PICs but they only cover the formal sector and suffer from a
range of weaknesses including gender imbalance and poor governance. In addition, in
many PICs social insurance schemes do not provide anyone with regular pensions or
disability benefits. Although in some PICs, those citizens above a certain age are
provided access to noncontributory pensions, these do not cover other vulnerable
groups. There are a range of other social assistance programs e.g., cash for work
programs, school feeding, scholarships and copra subsidies though the impact of these
has not been rigorously assessed.

The Bank has not provided any direct lending for Social Protection in the PICs, but has
carried out some key pieces of analytic work and provided support for good policies
through its DPOs. Bank analytic work included a study at the regional level, and a
country study on Fiji. The Fiji Social Protection Technical Assistance improved the
targeting and efficiency of the country’s social protection programs. The Samoa 2010
DPO supported a government decision to cushion vulnerable households from the
combined impacts of the food and fuel crisis, the Global Economic Crisis, and the 2009
tsunami. This was done through accelerating progress with existing plans for
improving access to education by implementing a waiver of primary school fees at all
public, special, and missionary schools. The adoption of a community public works
program targeted to poor and vulnerable communities was a prior action of the 2011
Tonga DPO but the scheme was not implemented due to the unavailability of expected
donor financing.14 However the Bank provided the impetus for the adoption of a lifeline
tariff for electricity to support low income households in Tonga. This was based on the
findings of a Bank analytic study, which provided evidence on the impact of energy
costs in hardship in Tonga.15


13
  Key features of informal social protection in the region include (i) labor exchange or
cooperative labor groups for tasks, such as land-clearing or house-building; and (ii) gift-
giving, both in relation to special feast days and to mark life-cycle events, such as births,
weddings, and deaths.
14
     IEG Review of the Tonga Economic Recovery Operations I and II; 12/11/2013.
15
     2014 World Bank Pacific Hardship and Vulnerability report.


120
                                                                                    APPENDIX G
                    EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS

Promoting Gender Equality
Regarding gender equality in the PICs, gender gaps have essentially been closed with
regard to the access of women to health and education. Except for Kiribati, all the PIC’s
have achieved the MDG target for gender parity in primary and secondary education.
The region has also made advances in improving health outcomes for women. Fertility
rates have declined since 1990, and under-five mortality rates for both girls and boys
have declined over the last 10 years across all the PICs. Noteworthy gains have also
been made in birth attendance by health professionals. In addition, the region has seen
substantial declines in the maternal mortality rate, from an average of about 115 deaths
per 100,000 live births in 2000 to 81 in 2015.

With regard to gender gaps in economic opportunity, the fact that in a number of
countries women do not have right to land ownership remains an important issue.
While Samoa has made substantial progress in expanding women’s access to economic
opportunity, in Tonga this is still a work in progress. IFC’s 2010 Tonga Gender and
Investment Climate Reform Assessment states that “women’s economic participation is
constrained by gender specific elements of the legal framework for property rights and
employment, weakness in women’s access to justice through the courts, absence of
public private dialogue with women business people, and gender regulatory constraints
to start a business.” Another problem even in Samoa is that, while women are well
represented among owners of micro-enterprises, the evidence is that very few of them
graduate into ownership of SMEs. The view is that this reflects lack of access to finance,
but also the inadequacy of networks and support systems for women entrepreneurs.

Another significant gap is the representation of women in Parliaments and civil
services. This differs widely from one country to another. In Fiji, for example out of 21
CEOs, there are no women formally appointed to the position. Two women are acting.
Overall there are more women than men in the public service, but this reflects the large
number of female teachers and nurses, rather than any explicit policy. In Tonga, the
situation is much better and fully half of the CEOs are women—five years ago there
were none. The problem is with Parliament where the high representation of traditional
leaders who are mostly men, brings down the share of women overall.

Domestic Violence remains perhaps the most pervasive and serious gender issue in the
PICs. While the incidence of Gender Based Violence has gone up, this is because of
much better reporting. In Samoa violence against women is seen as the most significant
gender issue. A 2004 study put the incidence at 30-40 percent of women having been
abused in the previous 5 years and this facilitated responses by government and NGOs.
Samoa was a signatory to the Convention on Elimination of all forms of Discrimination
against Women (CEDAW) in 1992. At the time of writing, there is a serious internal


                                                                                            121
APPENDIX G
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS
debate in Tonga as to whether to become a signatory to CEDAW. The key here is the
requirement for land ownership by women which is opposed by the traditional chiefs.
A promising initiative by the Bank is a recent $400,000 Institutional Development
Facility grant for improving services for victims of domestic violence in Kiribati.16 The
project is to support Kiribati to improve (i) access to services for victims of gender-
based violence (GBV) and in particular domestic violence; and (ii) reporting and data
collection of GBV.

The Bank has attempted to ensure that infrastructure projects factor in gender issues in
their design. In Tonga the Bank has played an important role in pushing gender
equality in the energy sector. The electricity authority is now using women linemen in
the outer islands and they are proving they can do the job. They are also recruiting
youth to do the job, with the extra incentive that they could move into jobs of this kind
abroad. More women are now going into training. This is seen as not just ticking a box,
but good for business. In two of three outer islands, the head of the maintenance
function is a woman. In Kiribati, women were specifically consulted during the initial
design phase of the road project, in order to have their issues and concerns recognized
and addressed in project designs and during implementation. Particular issues raised
included safety concerns regarding lack of street lights, bus stops/shelters, lack of
proper drainage, and dangers to children from not having pedestrian space to walk to
school. This resulted in specific investments to address these safety and other concerns.

In the Australian view: “We do not see the Bank as bringing strong gender technical
skills to the table. The good analytic work is not being translated into operational work.
Australia has committed to a $320 million investment over 10 years in gender equality
in the PICs, focused on Gender-based Violence, women in leadership, and economic
opportunity. We have invited the Bank to put proposals and ideas on the table for
utilizing the proposed investment, but the response has been disappointing. Proposals
are not well informed by the Pacific context or duplicate activities that are under way.”
There are areas however, where the contribution of the Bank Group was seen as
valuable. The Australian government has been particularly impressed with the gender
focus of IFC. “This is the first time work has been done on the business environment for
women. The Bank and IFC played an important role in promoting private sector
partnerships to promote gender equality and IFC has provided useful support in areas
such as protection for women employees on their way to work.”

What explains the disconnect between the Bank’s efforts to support gender equality in
the PICs and the Australian perception that this has not been effective? There is no lack

 Kiribati: IDF Grant No. TF014048 for Improving Services for Victims of Gender-Based and
16

Domestic Violence Project. May, 2013.


122
                                                                                    APPENDIX G
                    EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE PICS
of staff commitment to these issues. By and large however, Bank activities reflect the
current strategic guidance of the Bank on mainstreaming gender into Bank operations
i.e., that gender should be mainstreamed in activities that are undertaken as part of the
overall strategy. The Bank is doing well in the default mode of ensuring that its projects
and programs factor gender equality into their design. But these rarely provide an
instrument to address issues such as Domestic Violence for example. The hypothesis of
the evaluation team is that the frustration of the Australian authorities derives from the
Bank’s failure to put on the table concrete programs and approaches to address the key
remaining gender gaps in the PICs.




                                                                                            123
Appendix H. Evaluation of World Bank Group
Assistance in Enhancing Competitiveness and
Private Sector Development
Promoting a Business Friendly Environment
A consensus seems to be emerging that ‘bending the growth curve upwards’ is going to
require that SMEs become a more prominent feature of the landscape in the PICs. A
number of countries have evolved to the point where there is sufficient entrepreneurial
capacity to take on an expanded role and remittances can provide the seed capital
needed. The private sector faces a difficult environment however, and there is a need to
address the constraints. There are a number of regional institutions that are working in
this area with leadership being provided by ADB. The recent Systematic Country
Diagnostic (SCD) gives considerable prominence to private sector development (PSD)
and discusses in some detail the performance of the PICs on the Doing Business
Indicators and the nature of the constraints.

Managing issues of land tenure and customary lands appropriately is critical. Land
issues constrain the ability to move quickly on projects that require land acquisition and
clear title, but also pose risks of triggering social conflict or social harm if not well
managed. While there are considerable areas of government owned land, particularly in
the urban areas, much of the rural pasture, crop-land and forests are owned by
communities with the local chief traditionally having the right to provide the land to
individuals for their use. The precise relationship of the chiefs to the land is not uniform
across countries and the modalities of transfer differ from one to another. Land issues
and disputes are prevalent across the Pacific. In Kiribati for example, land issues
account for 80 percent of all court cases. A tourism project in Kiribati, supported by IFC
was held up by 1.5 years on account of the need to resolve lease issues on land. Land
issues will remain an ongoing challenge as countries try to encourage the development
of commercial agriculture. Even where leasehold arrangements have developed, the
period of leasehold tends to be fairly short and this discourages investments in land
improvement and structures, as well as limiting the scope for borrowing using land as
collateral. The Bank has done some analytic work in Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands
through the Justice For The Poor program aimed at finding practical ways of using
leasehold arrangements to provide the surety needed for investment. These were the
appropriate priority targets given land issues as a source of social conflict in these
countries, but increasing work on land tenure issues may also be beneficial elsewhere.



                                                                                         124
                                                                                   APPENDIX H
               EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
The most important contributions of the Bank to PSD have come through its
involvement with infrastructure. The Bank has not started by asking what it can do to
support PSD in the PICs. Instead it has come at these issues indirectly through for
example supporting the outsourcing of road maintenance to the private sector, through
reforming public procurement in areas such as health and infrastructure, through
opening up areas which were previously monopolized by public companies to
competition from the private sector, etc. Some of these are discussed in detail in the
section on infrastructure below. This has arguably been more effective in supporting the
private sector than taking PSD on directly.

IFC (together with ADB) has taken the lead in working with governments to improve
the enabling environment and lower the costs of doing business while the Bank has
focused on the regulatory environment. In Tonga for example, where the legislative
framework is very weak, the government worked closely with IFC on the business
environment, and the country is now highly rated in the ease of doing business. In the
words of a senior official: “IFC has been of great assistance in reducing the cost of doing
business.” The Bank has been supporting independent regulators in areas such as
energy, telecoms and water.

The Bank has also provided support for enhancing the enabling environment through
its DPOs. In Tonga for example prior actions included the approval of two bills on
receivership and on business registration to improve the business environment, and
Cabinet approval of a policy framework for foreign investment in order to open the
fisheries and agriculture sectors to foreign investment. Together with IFC’s efforts this
constitutes a useful contribution to improving the enabling environment in the PICs
through a range of disparate efforts. Going forward however, with the need for more
effective support for PSD, the Bank needs to make this part of its strategic approach and
define a more coherent set of programs across the Bank group to address this.

Strengthening the Financial Sector
In 2010, IFC and then AusAID developed the Pacific Microfinance Initiative (PMI) to
promote innovative ventures and to broaden access to basic financial services of
underserved people in the Pacific Region. The modality of the PMI was to provide
performance based grants (PBGs) through financial institutions to entrepreneurs on a
matching basis. The initial experience seems to have been mixed, with one or two
successful activities where PMI was working with a relatively robust institution, but
overall difficulty in building a pipeline of viable projects. A mid-term evaluation,
undertaken in 2013 found that the original objectives had been too ambitious and
reflected an over-estimate of the capacity of the financial institutions in the region. It
also questioned the model of PBGs for entrepreneurs. It noted that IFC did not have the


                                                                                         125
APPENDIX H
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
field presence required to support potential investors and help bring projects to the
point of financing.1 In the words of the evaluation “There were simply no viable
investment prospects in 2010. Microfinance investment experts concurred with the
advisory-led approach to interventions in the supply chain (but this) required intensive,
long-term, on-the-ground business development activities.” It adds that “the PBG
concept does not work well in relationships where IFC needs to assist the partner in
developing business plans and setting realistic goals.”

One of the successes of PMI has been a program to support women’s groups in Samoa
and Tonga. The South Pacific Business Development (SPBD) Foundation is a regional
microfinance network primarily focused on improved financial access for female micro-
entrepreneurs. SPBD has operations in Samoa, Tonga and Fiji. SPBD provides small
unsecured loans of up to $400 to groups of rural women. The women meet weekly and
are given training, ongoing guidance and motivation to help them start and grow small
income generating endeavors. SPBD also offers saving, credit insurance and life
insurance products. PMI provided just under $1 million in support of SPBD’s program
in Tonga and Samoa. By 2013 when the project was completed, SPBD had reached 4,230
borrowers in Tonga, and 6,482 in Samoa. The resources provided by PMI were
particularly useful in enabling a rapid scale-up of SPBD’s program in Tonga. The lesson
derived from this success is the importance of a well-functioning intermediary. It does
not resolve the issue of how PMI should operate when such an intermediary is not
present.

IFC has been instrumental in supporting banking development and building the
capacity of the banks to lend. IFC has provided support to the Bank South Pacific (BSP),
the largest local bank in Papua New Guinea, with branches in the Solomon Islands, Fiji,
Tonga and Samoa. IFCs 2010 investment in the BSP has led to a major expansion. IFC
owns 9.5 percent of BSP. This is now the only bank able to compete with ANZ bank in
the region. IFC has steered BSP toward an increased focus on small business. Partly as a
consequence of this, BSP has now reached 200,000 formerly unbanked people. In the
Solomon Islands, there has been work on mobile phone banking. This has contributed
to high rates of banking among women—they are now around 50 percent of customers
in a difficult operating environment. IFC has also helped to establish a new Credit
Bureau in Samoa which will be operational in early 2016. This should facilitate
enhanced lending to the lower two thirds of the population. In time, the credit bureau
should reduce the cost of credit overall by lowering risks.

One of the promising models for supporting financial development in the region is the
SME risk share facility launched in 2011 by the Bank Group with BSP in Papua New

1
    Pacific Microfinance Initiative: Mid-Term Evaluation Report. June 2013.


126
                                                                                  APPENDIX H
              EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
Guinea. The program provides credit enhancement to BSP to lend to SMEs along with a
technical assistance package for the bank to build internal capacity in this area. The
program also has a capacity building component to help SMEs to prepare business and
marketing plans and enhance their capacity to access credit from banks. IFC shares 50
percent of principal portfolio losses with BSP, but benefits from an IDA first-loss
counter-guarantee of 20 percent of the IFC maximum risk amount. In addition IDA has
provided $4.5 million of funding for the technical assistance program. As yet there is no
evaluation of the outcomes or impact of the program on which to base an assessment of
whether it should be expanded.

The Bank and IFC have also been working with governments and private sector
financial institutions to help bring down the costs of remittances on Pacific routes. IFC
is working with central and banks across the Pacific to strengthen payments legislation
to encourage initiatives such as new technologies and mobile money transfers. The
Pacific Payments Legislation project supported by the Bank and IFC has contributed to
lowering the cost of remittances. The project has provided support to Central Banks in
the region to draft and adopt National Payments Systems Acts (already approved in
Samoa and being finalized at the time of writing in Fiji, Tonga and Vanuatu). The
project also funded an assessment of the remittances market in ANZ. Some of the
suggested reforms have since been undertaken by the ANZ governments.

Another important contribution has been through PMI support to BSP for mobile
banking which has allowed for easier access to transfers, in rural areas. This can be an
effective mechanism for reducing the costs of remittances. The PMI mid-term
evaluation notes that there is recognition of the high quality of the experts that IFC
brought in to support this program. In 2010 the average cost of transferring an amount
of $200 was 15 percent. In 2015 partly as a consequence of these efforts it has come
down to 11.5 percent.

Another intervention of the Bank in supporting commercial bank funding of PSD is a
program whose impetus comes not from the financial sector but from support for
renewable energy. The Sustainable Energy Development program in Fiji supports the
development of wind and solar power through $5 million of GEF funding. The program
consists of a guarantee fund which is available through the Fiji Development Bank to
commercial banks. Funding is made available for 5 years, and the $5 million of GEF
money has leveraged $31.6 million of loans. The loans have triggered numerous small
village-based projects which have helped the government move closer to its objective of
100 percent access to electricity by 2020 (it is now 93 percent). Similar approaches tried
in other PICs has not proven effective with less update of the loans.




                                                                                        127
APPENDIX H
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
The financial sector has not been part of the Bank’s core strategy in the PICs. Bank
efforts have been selective and opportunistic. The efforts thus far have focused on
piloting different approaches. Both the BSP risk sharing facility in Papua New Guinea
and the Fiji renewable energy program provide evidence that the Bank can intervene
effectively in the sector by providing guarantees to help commercial banks overcome
some the perceived risks of lending to small enterprises. These could provide models
for a strategic approach to financial development going forward. With the commitment
of the Bank’s President to promote greater access to banking, the focus on the financial
sector in the PICs is likely to increase and this, together with the need for increased
support to SMEs will require a more strategic approach going forward.

Improving Infrastructure Services
There is a major donor presence in infrastructure in the PICs. As discussed earlier,
support for infrastructure development in the Pacific has been coordinated by the PRIF
which was established in 2008 as a multi-donor partnership for better infrastructure in
Pacific island countries. Infrastructure projects through PRIF are supported by the
Asian Development Bank, Australian government, European Union, European
Investment Bank, Japan International Cooperation Agency, New Zealand Ministry for
Foreign Affairs and Trade and the World Bank Group. PRIF provides a mechanism for
infrastructure financing that blends PRIF grants, multilateral loans, government
budgets and private sector equity/loans. PRIF also offers advisory services and
technical assistance. As indicated the one major flaw in the PRIF mechanism is that it
does not include China, which has emerged as a particularly important donor in recent
years, and has been active in providing support in areas where other donors have been
reluctant e.g., government buildings.

Infrastructure has also been the main focus of Bank lending for the PICs. In the
Australian view, the value-added of the Bank in infrastructure is in three areas. The first
is the IDA resources which the Bank has been able to bring to the table. Given the
relatively large amount of infrastructure funding needed, the role that the Bank and
ADB have played in this regard has been of considerable importance. Second is the
Bank’s reservoir of sound technical expertise. Changes in the Australian aid program in
recent years have led to a reduction in the amount of specialized technical capacity
within the aid agency DFAT, so this has been particularly helpful. Third, reforms in
infrastructure policies are very challenging and difficult for the bilateral donors to
achieve, especially those relating to reducing ministries’ engagement in direct
construction through their own staff (force account), and outsourcing maintenance and
other activities. In the words of an Australian official, “We can use the Bank to promote
reforms. With the Bank someone flies in and delivers the poison. It gives Australia



128
                                                                                  APPENDIX H
              EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
protection. $60 million of Australian trust funding has leveraged $240 million of Bank
credits and grants, as well as a reform dialogue and a technical contribution.”

From the country perspective the Bank has played a critical role. Generally in the PICs,
the Bank is trying to get governments to focus more on results—looking for broader
impact of the investments it supports and factoring into the programs it supports areas
such as road safety, gender and market access. The Bank has been able to maintain a
collegial dialogue in the country in spite of ‘delivering the poison.’ It has pressed
policies that Ministers and Ministries of Public Works have often viewed as counter to
their short-term interests i.e., downsizing and re-focusing on policy and regulation
rather than carrying out investments directly. In the words of a senior Tongan official:
“The Bank has been one of the drivers of the infrastructure program—helping us
achieve progress on roads and aviation.”

IFC’s support for infrastructure has focused on PPPs. Although infrastructure is a
priority for IFC, this interventions in this area present a challenge, since governments
can get cheap money from donors. Bilateral aid covers most investment in
infrastructure. There are some prospects for PPPs with IFC support in energy with
work ongoing in Fiji and for a port in Timor. A Bank DPO in Samoa (the first Fiscal and
Economic Reform Operation in August 2014) included as a prior action approval by the
Cabinet of a new PPP policy framework to facilitate increased participation of the
private sector in the state-owned enterprise sector, and IFC has completed a scoping
exercise with the government to identify potential PPP transactions. A report on this
was produced jointly by the Bank and IFC and submitted to the government in early
2015. IFC is also currently implementing a solid waste management PPP transaction
and advising the government on the future of its joint venture arrangement with Virgin
Samoa.

The Bank has made a strategic choice not to involve itself in the urban and water
sectors. The key here has been the need for selectivity in a program that is already very
large in terms of the number of separate project engagements. Questions have been
raised whether this is the right strategic choice. In the view of one donor, “No-one is
touching urbanization. Historically the Bank has moved into rural areas. This is a
mistake. There needs to be more awareness of the risks associated with growing peri-
urban slums.”

TRANSPORT

The transport sector has been a dominant area of the Bank’s engagement in the Pacific
and together with ICT, accounted for over 50 percent of total commitments during the




                                                                                        129
APPENDIX H
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
FY06–15 period.2 Bank support for the transport sector covered roads, maritime, and
civil aviation subsectors although the program focused mainly on building the assets
and institutional structure of the roads and aviation subsectors. Support for Maritime
sector activities in Fiji and Tonga included support for improvement of existing
maritime assets and for improving compliance with international standards for
procedures and infrastructure.

Aviation

Air connectivity is essential both for tourism, access to export markets for products
that have a high value to weight ratio3 and for migrant labor. In 2011 when the Bank
began a major expansion of its program, there was a real risk of suspension of jet
operations due to inadequate operating conditions in the region. This would have
had devastating consequences. Runways were deteriorating, navigational aids and
air traffic systems were not working adequately, and many of the fire trucks were
not operational. Some of the infrastructure dates back to World War II.

Aviation has become an important part of the Bank program in the PICs. The Bank first
carried out an assessment of the needs. There were three conditions for countries to
receive support under the program. The first was agreement to meet obligations4 under
the regional safety oversight program (in accordance with international obligations);
second to separate operations from regulation; and third to implement a $5 safety and
security levy on all international departing passengers to fund membership of the
regional organization (PASO).5 The Bank is providing $180 million with cofinancing
from Australia, and parallel financing from New Zealand for Kiribati. The program
mainly finances infrastructure related to runway rehabilitation, terminals, and
equipment such as firefighting equipment and navigational aids. The program is also
supporting PASO with a regional IDA grant to facilitate key business reforms that
should strengthen its service delivery in a fiscally sustainable manner. The Bank is also
supporting risk mitigation in the aviation sector with the development of an Insurance

2
 Overall, World Bank commitments under the Transport and ICT global practice accounted
for 52 percent of total commitments made during the FY06–15 period.
3 This include for examples. fresh fish, vanilla, coconut oil, etc.. In some countries, e.g.,
Tonga, the limited volume of cargo space on outgoing flights has constrained the
development of export-oriented value chains. Improving airport access, and consequently
flight frequency (contingent on demand), can thus have substantial multiplier effects on the
agriculture sector economy.
4 This refers to adequate regulatory audits and inspections
5Specifically, countries had to commit to implementing PASO’s agreed annual minimum
oversight program for aerodromes, airworthiness, and flight operations..


130
                                                                                  APPENDIX H
              EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
Asset Reserve Fund and the designing of remedial actions in the event of a natural
disaster.

Bank engagement has gradually spread to an increasing number of countries as the
benefits of involvement have become clear. The program started with Tonga, where
the Bank has been engaged with aviation since 2000 when it provided support for
corporatizing the airports authority. The Bank assisted with the transfer of assets and
people and the setting up of the legal process. In 2007 Tonga Airports Limited was
established. From 2005 to 2007 the facilities were starved of budget and seriously
sub-standard. Airlines were threatening to pull out. After TAL was set up, a
comprehensive list was prepared including upgrading of the paving and this has
been supported under the Bank Transport Sector Consolidation Project. The Bank
supported technical consolidation, safety equipment, technological support and
surveillance equipment.

The success of the support for Tonga led to a request from Kiribati and
subsequently from Tuvalu. By combining the three countries, the Bank was able to
access the regional IDA allocation (all grant funding). The number of countries has
now risen to five with the inclusion of Samoa and Vanuatu. It is intended to expand
this later to the Solomon Islands. At the regional level there is the Pacific Aviation
Safety Office (PASO) based in Vanuatu. PASO was created by an ADB loan in 2004.
States do not relinquish any sovereign rights through membership of PASO —13
states are in it including Fiji, Australia, and New Zealand which control most of the
airline traffic in the region.

 The Bank Aviation project in Samoa was approved in March 2014. The Bank-
supported runway is near completion. In November 2014 the Prime Minister
indicated that he wanted to take a $55 million loan from the Chinese EXIM bank for
a new airport terminal. There was no economic analysis of this, it did not meet
Samoa’s own procurement requirements and it contravened the agreed borrowing
criterion included in the DPO. In the Bank’s technical view the project is over -scaled
and runs a high risk of being a white elephant. The financial analysis carried out by
the Samoa Air Authority indicates that the terminal is not financially viable. The
EXIM bank loan is 7.5 percent of GNP. The Bank has re-designed the aprons from
the runway to align with the proposed terminal and a joint environmental
assessment has been carried out. Another component of Bank support for the
aviation sector in Samoa is the role that IFC has played through helping the national
airline to form a joint venture with Virgin.

A particularly important part of the Bank’s aviation support is the use of single
Technical Fiduciary Service Unit (TFSU) for all five countries, based in Tonga. The


                                                                                        131
APPENDIX H
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
TFSU is an implementing advisory unit. In some cases, by combining procurement
packages for different countries, the TFSU has been able to contract on more
favorable terms than would have been the case if countries had operated
individually. The TSFU and the cost sharing mechanism is an effort to establish a
cost efficient answer to capacity constraints. Even with this success however, the
program demonstrates the difficulties of adopting a multi-country approach. While
this is working well for Tuvalu, the authorities in Kiribati have indicated that they
would prefer the Bank to work exclusively through the country’s own agencies,6
rather than using a unit based in Tonga. Although Kiribati has its own program
manager, the unit based in Tonga provides services and is the implementing
agency. Similarly, Samoa has expressed concern about what it sees as an additional
layer of bureaucracy in implementing the project.7

Roads

The Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility, recently published a study entitled: Build,
Neglect and Rebuild, reflecting the ‘traditional’ approach to roads and road
maintenance in the PICs. Drawing on the findings of an ADB Infrastructure study, the
PRIF report noted that preventative road maintenance attracts almost no funding in any
of the PICs except Papua New Guinea, Samoa, and (to a far lesser extent) Fiji. The study
found that road assets in the region are poorly monitored, repaired on a stop-gap basis,
and are not improving in overall quality. The report attributed the sub-optimal asset
management in the Pacific to a number of interrelated factors including; a lack of
awareness of the importance of maintenance and the insensitivity to this issue at the
decision-making level, unclear institutional responsibilities and the resulting lack of
accountability, lack of incentives to foster good maintenance, lack of planning and
rational budgeting, and perhaps most critically, lack of financial resources.”

One of the Bank’s most important contributions has been to induce the PICs to adopt a
new approach to road maintenance through outsourcing, and to provide funding that is
geared to this purpose. This has been a key part of the Bank’s support in Tonga and
Samoa (see below). In Kiribati which lacks the private sector capacity to handle small
outsourced contracts, the Bank is supporting a project to set up five micro- enterprises
to handle road maintenance. The progress on this has been very slow however, and
although some technical training is being provided, there is a need to strengthen the
business and management skills of the potential entrepreneurs.


6   The investments in Kiribati are implemented through its own agency MCTTD.
7The investments in Samoa are implemented through its own agency Samoa Airport Authority
(SAA).


132
                                                                                   APPENDIX H
               EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
In Samoa, the Bank’s road projects were instrumental in downsizing the Public Works
Department (PWD) and making outsourcing the default mechanism for road
maintenance. In the words of one senior official: “SIAM I and SIAM II have changed the
country. There was a huge bureaucracy in the PWD which had 800 staff. 78 percent of
the PWD budget went on staff. The Bank came in and began a long process of helping
to restructure the PWD. Now Samoa has a PWD with 60 staff and only 15–16 percent of
the budget goes for staff.” The project also resulted in the complete separation of policy
and regulation from service provision in all transport modes, with the additional
outsourcing of services in order to develop the private sector as an engine of economic
growth.

The Bank’s major ongoing transport engagement in Samoa is its support for the West
Coast Road Project financed through a $15 million grant from the Pilot Program for
Climate Resilience. The grant was intended to finance the rehabilitation and increasing
the resilience of the entire main West Coast road from the airport to the capital of Apia.
The project was slow to get off the ground however, due in part to a series of
miscommunications between the financing partners and the government. Initially the
project was supposed to fund the full rehabilitation of the road, but the climate funding
available was insufficient for this purpose. Although some cofinancing has been
forthcoming from Australia, there is still insufficient funding to do the full road and
decisions are needed on what sections to prioritize.

The Tonga Transport Sector Consolidation Project aims to replicate the successful
experience in Samoa over the past decade of strengthening the management of
infrastructure assets. The key component of the project—the outsourcing of routine
road maintenance—sealing, potholes, branch-cutting signage and drainage—has
continued to be a source of tension with the Ministry of Public Works. Successive
Ministers of Public Works have wanted to revert to force account for carrying out the
maintenance and the Bank and the Australian government which has co-financed the
project have had to take a strong stand, fortunately with the support of the Ministry of
Finance. The MOF commissioned a review of the outsourcing which found that money
had been saved and that quality was essentially unchanged. A further review of the
outsourcing is scheduled to be undertaken with the additional financing that has been
provided. A key part of the assessment will be the sustainability of the approach. Eight
to twelve companies have been bidding for the work and it has had a positive impact
on the development of the private sector. In the view of a senior official in the
government of Tonga, there has been a major improvement over the past two or three
years. “Bank support has enabled the Ministry and Department to focus on their core
functions.” “I worked for the Ministry for 23 years, using Force Account (i.e., direct
contracting by the Ministry) for 20 years. There were endless problems especially



                                                                                         133
APPENDIX H
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
corruption and safety issues around both road and worker safety. The new contract
management section is working well. Before the project there was not a single
contractor. Now there is a group who have received proper training and in some cases
have gone ahead to obtain equipment. Many of the former workers were hired by the
new contractors. Now they get better paid for working, instead of being paid for doing
nothing. “

The Kiribati Road Rehabilitation project has been particularly challenging for the Bank.
Kiribati presents a difficult set of problems. The distances are great and access can be
challenging. As a consequence, in the words of one donor: “Consultants are reluctant to
work there. Sand and fresh water need to be brought in. There are huge layers of
complexity.” The road running through the main island was constructed 30 years ago.
The road runs the length of the atoll from south to north, with the capital city and most
of the population concentrated in the south. The road is the country’s lifeline and
because of inadequate maintenance needed major rehabilitation. The project is co-
financed by the Bank, ADB and Australia (through the Pacific Regional Infrastructure
Facility). The project was approved in 2011 with an estimated cost of $35 million. The
final award for the project’s main civil works contract was for $50.6 million (see box
H.1). The financing gap between the estimate and award arose primarily because: (i) a
remoteness cost premium was not adequately factored into the original cost estimates;
(ii) there was significant cost inflation in materials between appraisal in January 2011
and bidding in mid-2012; and (iii) a higher standard of road than originally appraised
was found to be necessary to improve road safety, strengthen environmental protection,
and mitigate the risk of maintenance delays in future. For much of the period of
implementation progress of the project was rated as unsatisfactory. There has been
improvement over the last year or two and the main stretch of road is now scheduled
for completion in early 2016 with the full project completion later in the year. As
indicated above arrangements for future maintenance remain a matter of concern.




134
                                                                                           APPENDIX H
                       EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD

    Box H.1. Accounting for Cost Overruns on the Kiribati Road Rehabilitation Project
    “The isolation of Kiribati made it difficult to estimate how many companies would be
    interested in bidding for the works, and in the end only four firms submitted bids for the
    main civil works contract. Bid prices demonstrated that the project’s isolated location was
    neither factored into the original appraisal cost adequately, nor in the project’s cost estimate
    prior to bidding. There was a lack of historical precedent for a project of such magnitude in
    Kiribati from which one could draw lessons for estimating costs. Comparisons with recent
    similar projects in the region --though even these are limited -- identified the project cost as
    an outlier. Preliminary and general costs, which include mobilization and insurance, provide
    an indicator of the risks a contractor assigns to the project. In contracts in the Pacific that were
    awarded around the same time (in Samoa, Papua New Guinea and Tonga), preliminary and
    general costs represented on average 10 percent of the total contract price. By comparison, the
    four KRRP bidders’ preliminary and general costs were 28 percent to 31 percent of the total
    costs, indicative of the high risks the market placed on the remote and inaccessible country.”
    Source: World Bank Report No: 75527-KI: Project Paper on a Proposed Additional IDA Grant to the Kiribati Road
    Rehabilitation Project.


INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY

Access to, and affordability of basic phone services, have improved substantially over
the last decade, notably in those PICS that have liberalized their telecommunications
markets and undertaken policy and regulatory reforms.8 Most of the PICs had a
government-owned Telecommunications company that had monopoly rights to all
telephone connections. With the advent of mobile communications this imposed huge
constraints on progress. Private companies could not enter the field, but the small local
public companies did not have the capacity to be effective players in this market. This
has changed in the past decade. Most PICs have liberalized their markets and as a
consequence the costs of connectivity have come down and there has been enormous
uptake of mobile phones (see figure H.1). In the Pacific islands, the number of mobile
cellular subscriptions (per 100 people) has increased from 20.2 in 2006 to 74.4 in 2014.

By contrast, access to broadband Internet is lagging significantly and its pricing remains
high. They are constrained by a combination of factors, depending on country
circumstances: (i) high international bandwidth costs and limited international
bandwidth capacity in countries dependent on geostationary satellite services (the
Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, and

8
  Reforms typically included: adoption of a pro-competitive telecommunications policy;
enactment of new or updated telecommunications legislation, introduction of competition
(including renegotiation of exclusive licences), and adoption of a new legal and regulatory
enabling framework, including the establishment of an independent regulatory authority
(source ICT 2014 note on the pacific).


                                                                                                                    135
APPENDIX H
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
Vanuatu); (ii) high international bandwidth costs associated in part with regulatory
issues (the Federated States of Micronesia, Marshall Islands, Papua New Guinea, and
Samoa); high, though falling, user device costs and (iv) insufficient user awareness
particularly among rural/remote populations. With the exception of Fiji which has
open access to the Southern Cross Cable Network and the monopolistic but higher-
income markets of Cook Islands, French Polynesia, and New Caledonia, fixed
broadband Internet penetration is typically less than one percent of the population in
the Pacific region. Mobile broadband (3G/4G) is growing rapidly in Fiji, spurred by
lower international connectivity costs, and is being deployed in Kiribati, Palau,
Solomon Islands, and Vanuatu.9

Telecoms is perhaps the area where the synergies between the Bank and IFC have made
the largest contribution to development. The Bank’s initial focus was on the enabling
environment. The Bank responded to requests for advice on liberalizing markets and
provided support for new legislation. The Bank is also assisting countries like Tonga on
e-government and has worked with the University of the South Pacific to promote
knowledge sharing, harmonization and capacity-building. Once the markets had been
liberalized, the Bank provided funding for the cable infrastructure. IFC investments
have played a key role in encouraging the entry of new private operators. Across the
Pacific, IFC has now invested $170 million to promote new telecoms market entrants
investing a total of over $500 million in Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, and Vanuatu.
The end result of reforms has been to dramatically lower telecoms costs and expand
coverage. In the words of one official document: “Improved telecommunications has
literally opened up the world to those previously disconnected. Connectivity allows
fishermen to access timely price information; enables mobile banking services; better
connects people to schools and health services, and provides entrepreneurs with better
information.”




9
    Source 2014 ICT note.


136
                                                                                         APPENDIX H
                     EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD

Figure H.1. ICT Penetration in the Pacific as of End-2013 (percent of population)


                                                                                                        Fixed Telephony
                                                                                                        Mobile Phone
                                                                                                        Broadband (fixed)




              0%
                                                             Palau    Papua
                      Fiji   Micronesia, Kiribati Marshall                      Samoa    Solomon    Tonga     Tuvalu      Vanuatu
                                                                      New
                             Fed. Sts.             Islands            Guinea              Islands



Sources: ICT-Enabled Development: Engagement Note for the Pacific Region, updated March 2014: Opportunities Through
Connectivity and Innovation; International Telecommunications Union (ITU end-2011), plus statistics provided by regulators and
operators for end-2013. 2011 is the most recent year for which ITU data are available across most countries, except for the
Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, and Samoa.
Note: These data are difficult to compile as not all countries systematically collect it, and some operators are cautious about
providing data. For mobile penetration, different operators use different definitions for “active” subscribers. Mobile broadband
penetration is not included here, but typically exceeds fixed broadband penetration where available in the region.

The Bank has now moved on to Kiribati, one of the least "connected" countries in the
world. The majority of the population either has no access to information
communication technologies (ICT) or, even if they live within range of the existing,
often unreliable networks, are unable to afford the service. About 40 percent of the
population relies entirely on public access (radio, satellite-based telecenters). At the end
of 2014 there were about 18,000 mobile and about 9,200 fixed line subscribers.
Broadband Internet penetration is less than one percent of the population. ICT is one of
the key areas of support of the programmatic DPO. The Bank is supporting the
liberalizing of the ICT sector and the introduction of competition through Kiribati’s first
programmatic DPO series. In parallel with the DPO series, the Bank is also supporting
the sector through the Telecom and ICT development project which aims to strengthen
the legal, regulatory and Institutional environment, enabling transition to a market-
driven telecommunications sector. The sector reforms proposed under the projects are
expected to significantly increase telecommunications coverage, including in remote
areas, providing access to market information to poor rural communities.

ENERGY

For energy the key areas of focus in the PICs are: (i) access, particularly in outer islands;
(ii) affordability and reliability; and (iii) clean fuels and renewable energy. Access to
electricity varies considerably as a result of differences in resources and level of


                                                                                                                               137
APPENDIX H
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
development. In some PICs, access is limited to less than 20 percent of the population
while others have achieved nearly 100 percent. Even within a particular country, vast
differences can be found between the main and remote islands, leaving some of the
remote areas without any electricity. For example, the overall access rate in the
Honiara urban area of the Solomon Islands is 64 percent; but in the rest of the country
only 6 percent have access, and in five of the nine provinces less than 4 percent have
access.10 Affordability and renewable energy are closely related, since bringing down
costs generally requires reducing dependence on fossil fuels. In many contexts in the
PICs, e.g., for outer islands, renewables are the most economical solution for electricity
generation. Integrating renewables into the grid is challenging, but there are resources
for this among the Development Partners. The main issue of reliability is weather
resilience which can be achieved through the use of underground cables. The Bank is
addressing these areas through (i) helping to develop strategies and engineering master
plans; (ii) investments; and (iii) institutional development and capacity building.

In Tonga, the Bank’s entry point has been support for the preparation of a
comprehensive energy road map. This establishes targets, defines the necessary
regulatory frameworks, identifies the role and prospects of renewable energy, reviews
the petroleum supply chain. In Tonga the National Power Utility has done a good
job in preparing the ground for implementation, but the government is moving slowly
with implementing the road map and appears to lack the capacity to follow through.
The Bank is providing support for setting up an implementation office. In the Bank’s
view one of the lessons emerging from the Tonga experience is the need to put in place
an Energy engineering master plan for the sector as a follow up to the direction-setting
role of the roadmap.

The Tonga roadmap has played an important role in establishing the potential of
renewables and the cost advantages that solar and wind power represent particularly in
the outer islands. Although the Bank has not been directly engaged in financing
renewables, one interlocutor in Tonga saw the Bank as playing a key role in changing
the philosophy of the energy authorities in Tonga toward renewables, and perhaps as
its most important contribution in the sector. Tonga has now set a target of having 50
percent of its energy generated through renewables by 2020. ADB has been supporting
renewables in Tonga’s outer islands, with New Zealand and Japan supporting wind
power. Another impact of Bank work is that resilience is no longer looked on as a
luxury in Tonga. It is recognized that this needs to be standard in projects. There are
disaster recovery systems in place for all business processes in the energy sector.



10
     Asian Development Bank (2015). Pacific Energy Update 2015.


138
                                                                                  APPENDIX H
              EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
In Vanuatu, after seeing the Tonga roadmap, the government requested a similar
exercise. The roadmap was prepared in 2011–12 and built on earlier work the Bank had
done on energy regulation. A range of projects have been prepared. The government is
keen to increase access to electricity and the objective is to go from 20-30 percent
coverage to 80-90 percent in the next 20 years. A Suez subsidiary was running the
power and water authorities, but only reaching 15 percent of the population. Vanuatu
has private companies running petroleum import and the utilities. The Vanuatu Rural
Electrification Project phase one for remote communities is looking at plugging in
systems for micro and mini-grids, to provide access to 30 percent of the population.
(Inter alia this will also replace firewood collection by women.)

In Samoa, ADB has historically led on energy sector issues and has helped the
government to develop a roadmap. While Bank engagement has been limited, IFC has
worked with the government and ADB to explore options to encourage new private
generation investment such as for proposed hydropower investments in Sava’ai Island.

In the Northern Pacific—the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, and
Palau, the Bank’s energy engagements relate mainly to petroleum supply. The Marshall
Islands had to declare a state of emergency in 2008 because of unaffordable petroleum
subsidies, caused by high prices. In the Marshall Islands, the Bank financed a consultant
study which found that the petroleum storage tanks were in urgent need of
rehabilitation. Half of the tanks were redundant and even on the most conservative
assumptions would not be needed for future activities, provided the rest were
rehabilitated. The Bank offered an energy development policy loan, but once petroleum
prices came down the government decided not to proceed with the loan. The Marshall
Islands has access to substantial funding from the U.S. government through the
Compact of Free Association. The Federated States of Micronesia currently has a $14
million project in the energy sector to do a comprehensive master plan with a focus to
more efficiently manage the sector and bring down costs and move to renewables.

Fiji has had a long engagement with the Bank on energy. Before the coup d’état, the
Bank was intending to co-finance a hydro power station. After the coup the Bank
decided not to proceed with new lending. The Bank did however continue the active
project for Sustainable Energy. This project which was supported by $5.2 million from
the GEF has been by all accounts, very successful. The program consists of a guarantee
fund which is channeled through the Fiji Development Bank to commercial banks.
Funding is made available for 5 years, and the $5 million of GEF money has leveraged
$31.6 million of loans. The loans have triggered numerous small village-based projects
which have helped the government move closer to its objective of 100 percent access by
2020 (it is now 93 percent). For many isolated communities solar power is the most
economic option available. There is also commercial development of solar power which


                                                                                        139
APPENDIX H
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
can be linked to the national grid. These systems are installed and maintained by
private companies. Initially the scheme was also tried in other PICs, but was not as
effective. Now with the experience of Fiji, there is consideration to re-extending it to
other countries. The Bank is also considering providing support to the development of
geothermal capacity in Fiji.

Governments are becoming aware that donor funding is not unlimited and are
recognizing the need to attract private investment. So far this has not been effective. In
Samoa, there was an offer of a government guarantee but this was not sufficiently
attractive. The Bank is considering providing a partial risk guarantee and there has been
some interest in this approach. In Tonga, the view is that PPPs in the power sector are
an option and there are indications that some companies are willing to support them.
The Bank has been working behind the scenes to try to make this a reality.

Sector Linkages and Value Chains for Private Business: Support for Fisheries,
Tourism and Agriculture.
As indicated there is an emerging consensus that ‘bending the growth curve upwards’
requires increased PSD in the Pacific Region. The most promising areas for PSD in the
PICs are in Fisheries, Tourism and Agri-business. The situation obviously differs from
one country to another. The atoll islands, for example, are essentially dependent on
fisheries and have limited potential in other areas. On the other hand, Fiji already has a
substantial development in tourism and agri-business and potential for further
expansion. Both fisheries and tourism have large regional dimensions and need to be
approached through coordinated efforts. Agricultural development is particularly
challenging because of the way it interacts with traditional land tenure arrangements
and the lack of a well-developed value chains linking domestic farm production to local
or export markets in most of the PICs. Mention should also be made of seabed mining,
which is discussed in the SCD. At this point, the focus in this area should probably be
on putting appropriate legal frameworks in place.

FISHERIES

For some of the PICs, especially the fishery-dependent ones (the Federated States of
Micronesia, Kiribati, the Marshall Islands, and Tuvalu) ocean resources comprise the
primary natural resource on which future economic growth will be based. The Pacific
Islands Ocean Region covers some 11 percent of the world’s ocean area. The shared
fisheries resources in the Region include: (i) ocean fisheries, largely tuna, that provide
the majority of public revenues for a number of PICs; and (ii) coastal fisheries that
directly sustain rural livelihoods and contribute heavily to food security and national
exports in many cases. The region’s ocean fisheries supply some 35 percent of the



140
                                                                                   APPENDIX H
               EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
world’s tuna catch. Foreign vessels pay the PICs according to the vessel day scheme
(VDS) which was begun in 2009 which sets a price per day for each vessel operating in
the region, as well as limiting the number of days in aggregate to sustainable levels. In
2014, the PICs earned $280 million from the VDS, up from $60 million in 2010.11

The Bank has had a dialogue on fisheries revenues for some time as part of its macro-
work on the PICs. Starting in 2009, the Bank stepped up its efforts to provide direct
support to the fisheries sector tapping into the availability of regional IDA and GEF
funding for this purpose. In 2009, the Bank published an analysis of Fisheries in the
Economies of Pacific Island Countries and Territories, and in 2012 a Fisheries
Engagement Strategy for the Pacific Islands. In late 2014, funding of nearly $40 million
was approved for the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, the Solomon
Islands, SI Tuvalu, and the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) to support
both marine and coastal fisheries. The project, the Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape
Program (PROP) is an important step toward enhanced managed of the fisheries
resources in the region, to ensure their sustainability and to protect coastal habitats. Key
features of the project are the support for regional agencies and its inclusion of coastal
fisheries. It supports a program management unit within FFA to provide
implementation support to participating countries and also supports the Oceanscape
Unit within the Pacific Island Forum Secretariat to monitor program progress. In
addition to the investment operation, the Bank 2013 DPO for Kiribati included the
approval and implementation of a national fisheries policy. Future work in fisheries
could expand to address catch sustainability issues and governance issues in
management of the substantial revenues.

At the same time IFC is engaged in supporting the development of the fish processing
sector in the PICs. The objective is to enhance the value added locally to tuna caught in
the countries’ waters. This can also provide a significant increase in local employment.
IFC is supporting tuna processing in the Solomon Islands where 1100 people are
employed in fisheries, 900 of them women. IFC has provided the main processing
company with $10 million of debt financing.

TOURISM

In the 80s and 90s, IFC had five tourism projects in the region, mainly hotels, but since
then has not been much involved in direct investment in the tourism sector. In the view
of IFC staff, IFC has limited value added here. The hotels are large multi- nationals


11
  The VDS is under increasing pressure from the fact that much larger fishing vessels are
now operating in these waters. Ideally the approach would shift to one based on the size of
the catch, but this is very difficult to administer.


                                                                                         141
APPENDIX H
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
which can obtain funding from local banks. IFC was engaged in supporting the re-
opening of the International Dateline Hotel in Tonga through transaction advice to the
government, but disengaged when the government decided to proceed with a contract
which IFC had advised against. The 2013 Tonga DPO included as a prior action
approval of a plan for private sector participation in the management of the
International Dateline Hotel. The government brought the deal to the point of
transaction through a rigorous tender process but was unable to secure a final
agreement. A more successful engagement has been the Otintaai Hotel in Tarawa in
Kiribati which is a private sector participation in a state-owned enterprise. The IFC-
facilitated PPP mobilized $2.25 million of private investment for the rehabilitation of the
hotel. IFC has provided some support for training and the promotion of a dialogue on
priorities for tourism development. In FY07, IFC provided a five day training workshop
to support the building of technical knowledge in relation to specialized tourism
investments. The intended target audience for the workshop was key personnel in the
public and private sector. IFC also undertook in FY09, a diagnostic of impediments to
the development of the tourism industry in five Pacific countries where tourism is an
important economic activity. In Samoa, several activities have been undertaken, based
on the findings of the IFC diagnostic and with the support of New Zealand.12

More recently, IFC is playing an important role in exploring various options for
promoting tourism in the region as a whole. In 2012 IFC launched the Pacific Regional
Tourism Initiative (PRTI), with three focus countries—Samoa, Tonga, and Vanuatu. The
initiative aimed at mobilizing $15 million in new investments in tourism infrastructure
as well as $30 million in new tourism investment to support up to 4,000 new tourist
arrivals across the three pilot countries over three years.13

The ambitious targets IFC has set, have not been achieved, and will require the fruition
of a number of ongoing initiatives. In addition to the PRTI, IFC also has an advisory
project aimed at creating new markets, by promoting Pacific tourism in China through
operators in Beijing and Shanghai and is also looking to promote fly/cruise vacations
that will start from Fiji rather than requiring the cruise ship to originate the voyage in
Australia or New Zealand or further afield. Carnival Australia is going ahead with a


12
  IEG’s Evaluative note for the project indicated that a number of follow-on activities to the
diagnostic have been initiated including; establishing a formal tourism sector Public-
Private Dialogue (PPD) process via the Samoa Tourism Forum, a new draft law completed
by Samoa Tourism Authority and Public Sector Reform Facility to formalize its role in
tourism promotion, and establishing workplace training programs in the tourism sector.
However, none of these follow-on activities involve IFC financial support
13
     Project Supervision Report for the Pacific Tourism project FY15 Q4.


142
                                                                                   APPENDIX H
               EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
trial of this. In the view of IFC staff, “if it works it could be a game-changer with the
potential to create huge employment.”

AGRICULTURE

Governments of the PICs are showing increasing interest in promoting agricultural
development. There are a number of common approaches. First, governments put
emphasis on food security, mainly through production of taro and cassava. Second
there is increased interest in horticulture production to meet demand from the urban
areas and to serve the tourism sector. In addition, there is export potential for some
tropical fruits and vegetables to the ANZ markets. Third there seems to be increased
interest in livestock production for similar reasons. Fourth there is scope for export of
traditional foodstuffs to the expatriate ethnic market. During the years of the mandate,
some of the PICs had substantial commercial agriculture production, exported to New
Zealand, but on independence the commercial farms were broken up with the
consequence that agriculture is dominated by very poor quality subsistence farming at
present. In many cases farming is more of a hobby than a reliable source of family
income.

In Tonga, the Bank had conducted joint analytic work with IFAD (Sep 2014 to Oct 2015)
to assist the authorities in developing agriculture and fisheries sector plans to guide
investments in the sectors going forward. These plans provide the foundation for
Tonga’s application to the Bank’s Global Agriculture and Food Security Program
(GAFSP) in mid-2016.

In Samoa, the Bank has two projects providing direct support for farmers and
fishermen. The first of these, the Samoa Agricultural Competitiveness Enhancement
Project (SACEP) was financed by a combination of IDA credits and grant resources
from the Global Food Crisis Response Program (GFRP) and was designed to improve
productivity, quality, and take greater advantage of market opportunities. The focus is
on supporting increased livestock and fruit and vegetable production by
semicommercial farmers. Support is in the forms of matching grants, business
development planning and operation, and technical advice to help improve production
and marketing practices. In addition to the main focus on semi-commercial farmers,
some training is to be provided for subsistence farmers (but no direct inputs/grants).
The farmers apply for participation in a training program, and a group of them are
selected after the training to participate in the project. There was concern about the
focus on commercial farmers rather than a broader outreach to subsistence farmers. The
key is however, to develop viable models of commercial farming linked to value chains
that can be replicated in the future.




                                                                                            143
APPENDIX H
EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD
The second project, the Samoa Agriculture and Fisheries Cyclone Response Project was
approved in FY14, in the wake of Tropical Cyclone Evan. This project was discussed in
environmental resilience section of Chapter 3. The project was financed by a grant of $5
million from the IDA Crisis Response Window (CRW) and was designed to provide
recovery assistance to cyclone affected farmers and fishermen through vouchers and
grants with the aim of restoring their lost production capacity. The project also sought
to enhance preparedness of the agricultural sector to better respond to future disasters.

The SACEP project has a major focus on upgrading livestock and meat processing in
Samoa. There has been substantial destocking in Samoa and herds have declined from
50,000 down to 30,000. Many farmers seem to keep cattle mainly as a means of meeting
the social obligations linked to funerals in Samoa, when cattle are slaughtered and
given as gifts to church groups.14 The program is focused mainly on import of breeding
cattle and work with local institutions to propagate breeds. Farmers get grants for
pasturing.15 Samoa did not have any abattoirs. The project has provided funding and
the mobile abattoirs will arrive shortly. A major is the lack of middlemen. It will take
time to develop the links needed for value chains.

The project has also covered most vegetable varieties. The next task will be to
validate the trials and build supply chains. There are on-farm investments through
matching grants. Typically farmers invest in improved water harvesting and drip
irrigation, in shade and storage houses, and fencing. Rock removal is also an
important feature of the project in Samoa where rocks are a major issue for farm
production. Lack of secure tenure is an issue here as well. The key however, as with
livestock and meat processing is the need for linkages with the companies that
currently import raw and processed foods and to contract reliable supplies to the
domestic and particularly the tourism markets (hotel, restaurants) in Samoa. If this
can be done, the project will provide an important model for future development of
the agriculture sector in the PICs.16


14
  A government official told the mission that they were trying to encourage farmers to give
live animals to the local pastors rather than slaughter them, in the hope that the pastors
themselves would become significant cattle farmers.
15
  The evaluation team was informed that 40 percent of matching grants under the project
go to women, but could not verify this and while a number of project beneficiaries were
visited, none were women. It is possible that in some cases wives are being put down as
nominal beneficiaries in order to secure access to funding, although, if this is the case, they
would be required to attend the training that is a pre-condition of support under the
project.
16Current investment opportunities exist in the poultry sector, beef and mutton branding,
fruits and vegetable packaging, and a range of agro-processing ventures. There is room for


144
                                                                                   APPENDIX H
               EVALUATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE IN ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS AND PSD

In Fiji, the Bank has done some analytic work and the CEN lists agriculture as
one of the possible sectors for engagement. Agriculture is a priority for the
government. There are good prospects in Fiji given the potential market that the
large tourism sector represents. In addition Fiji’s sugar sector is declining and there
is a need to find new employment options for displaced workers. As far as the
constraints are concerned, there are significant land tenure issues. In particular the
ethnic Indian population has a problem getting land rights given the prevalence of
traditional tenure systems. Only 10 percent of the land is freehold outside the
traditional system. For the rest there are only temporary user rights to the land.
There are lessons from a number of countries as to how to work within customary
land tenure systems so as to provide sufficient security that farmers are able to
invest in productivity enhancements. The Bank’s program in the PICs needs to
draw on this experience. This will be a major issue to resolve when the Bank
increases its engagement in the sector. In fact, the use of innovative land tenure
arrangement that encourage investments in agriculture—both sugar and
nonsugar—has been central to the identification of the proposed Fiji Agriculture
Sustainability and Transformation Project.17

The support for these key commercial sectors presents a very mixed picture. There is
evidence of good collaborative approaches adopted by the Bank and IFC in the
Fisheries and Tourism sectors. It is too soon to assess the outcomes with regard to the
agriculture sector, but in this area there was somewhat less evidence of effective
Bank/IFC collaboration, and this is perhaps reflected in the relative weakness of the
project’s design and efforts to promote agricultural value chains. The Bank needs to
give priority to a more coordinated effort in this area. The evidence from the evaluation
team’s visit to project sites suggests that this is going to be a particularly difficult project
to implement. The marketing arrangements are weak and farmers lack a commercial
orientation. This seems a case where the Bank may need to consider a presence on the
ground.




IFC to tap into these opportunities, particularly with the larger agro-entrepreneurs. The
Bank and IFC have agreed on the need for IFC technical assistance in quantifying the
demand for food in the retail outlets within the tourism linked hospitality industry.
17The sustainability of the Fijian sugar industry depends on flexible management of land
leases, coupled with land consolidation, in order to sustain farm livelihoods and keep them
on par with improving livelihood opportunities in the nonagriculture (mainly tourism-
related) enterprises.


                                                                                            145
