                                            FYR MACEDONIA

                                   Monthly Economic Developments

                                              January 2014

        FYR Macedonia’s fiscal deficit in 2013 percent was 4 percent.
        Public debt is projected to increase rapidly over the medium term.
        The Government launched a new Treasury system as agreed under the PE PBG.



FYR Macedonia’s fiscal deficit as a share of GDP was 4 percent in 2013. This is half a percentage higher
than originally budgeted. Revenues plummeted to 29.1 percent of GDP - the lowest level in eight years -
as a result of the clearance of VAT refund arrears in the first two months of 2013 and lower non-tax
revenues. Social spending was higher than budgeted as pension expenditures increased by 9.9 percent
due to legislative changes, reaching 9.3 percent in terms of GDP. Central government executed capital
was 17.4 percent lower than originally budgeted but total public capital expenditures was 13.9 percent
higher than in 2012 as the newly founded PESR invested about 1.0 percent of GDP in infrastructure
projects.

Total public sector debt is set to rise rapidly over the medium term. On the basis of planned
borrowings by the PESR and other SOEs to finance an ambitious agenda of infrastructure and other
investment projects, public enterprise debt is projected to rise from 4.9 percent of GDP at end-2012 to
15.4 percent by 2018. Total public sector debt is projected to increase from an estimated 43.2 percent in
2013 to 51 percent by 2018, assuming sustained high growth rates of around 3.5 percent of GDP and a
significant tightening of the central government’s fiscal stance. Lower than projected growth and a
looser fiscal stance in the context of the upcoming elections could raise public debt even further.

The Government launched the updated Treasury Information System in January as agreed under the
reform program of the 2013 Public Expenditure Policy Based Guarantee (PE PBG). As of January 1st 2014,
all budget users are obliged to enter all multi-year obligations in the system. The updated version should
facilitate entry and monitoring of multi-year liabilities and support multi-year budget planning. At the
same, arrears in the health sector have continued to increase reaching around 0.5 percent of GDP as of
end 2013. The Health Insurance Fund (HIF) and the Public Health Providers (PHP) are currently exempt
from complying with the requirement that the government has to pay incurred obligations within 60
days as specified in Law on Financial Discipline which has been approved in parliament in December
2013. The HIF and PHP will be obliged to comply with the Law three years after its enactment.
