Financing Sustainable Development

    IDEAS
     for
        ACTION
                           2016

                                  Edited by
                       Mahmoud Mohieldin
                         Djordjija Petkoski
Financing Sustainable Development


       IDEAS
        for
           ACTION
                               2016
                                         Edited by
                             Mahmoud Mohieldin
                               Djordjija Petkoski
Contents
  Overview                                                                v
  Acknowledgments                                                        ix

1 A Peer-to-Peer Hyperlocal Approach to Last-Mile
  Delivery in Nigeria                                                     1
  Abstract                                                                1
  Problem and Context: Last-Mile Delivery Opportunities and Challenges    1
  Solution: A Multi-sided Platform to Facilitate Interaction between
     Senders and Transporters                                             2
  Expected Impact                                                         4
  Comparable Product Offerings                                            5
  Potential Challenges                                                    5

2 OINCS: Using a Collaborative and Community Driven
  Approach to Citizen Mobility and Security                               7
  Abstract                                                                7
  Problem and Context: Security and Safety                                7
  Solution                                                                8
  Future Outlook                                                         11

3 Increasing Transparency in Indian Slum Labor Markets:
  Providing Access to Employment Information                             13
  Abstract                                                               13
  Problem and Context: Lack of Mobility, Large Slum Population,
     Low Work Participation Rate                                         14
  Solution: Dual-Platform System                                         15
  Expected Impact                                                        19
  Comparable Product Offerings                                           19
  Potential Challenges                                                   20
  Future Outlook                                                         24
  References                                                             26

4 HerLife: A Term Life Insurance Product for Working
  Mothers in China                                                       27
  Abstract                                                               27
  Problem and Context                                                    28
  Solution                                                               30
  Product Development, Roll-Out, and Marketing                           31
  Expected Impact                                                        37


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                      iii
     Comparable Product Offerings                                             38
     Potential Challenges                                                     39
     Future Outlook                                                           40
     References                                                               40

5 Innovative Floating Rate Green Bond for the Reduction of
  Air Pollution in China—An Application to the
  Shanxi Province’s Case                                                     43
     Abstract                                                                 43
     Problem and Context: Chinese Green Bonds Market and Air Pollution        44
     Solution                                                                 48
     Expected impact                                                          54
     Comparable Product Offerings                                             58
     Potential Challenges                                                     59
     Future Outlook                                                           59
     References                                                               60

6 A New Model for Impact Investing: Application of Impact Units to
  Assess Feasibility of Social Investment Opportunities
  and Interventions in Kenya                                    65
     Abstract                                                                 65
     Problem and Context                                                      66
     Solution                                                                 66
     Potential Challenges                                                     72
     References                                                               73
     Additional Reading                                                       73

Appendix
A Novel Practice for Mobile Money Payments: Using Fingerprints to
  Enable Real-Time Transactions in Nelamangala, India                         75
     Abstract 75
Agency Organization System: A Financing Model for
  Revolutionizing the e-Waste Recycling Business in Guiyu, China              76
    Abstract 76
Improving the Quality of Life for Artisans from Rural Communities
  through Empowerment of Women                                                78
     Abstract 78
Reinventing Global Payment Processing for Migrant Remittances,
  Microenterprise Funding Infusions and Nationwide Direct Benefit
  Transfers (DBTs)                                                            79
     Abstract 79


iv                            Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Overview
We are pleased to present the 2016 Ideas for Action (I4A) initiative, a youth
competition on financing for development jointly launched in November
2014 by the World Bank Group (WBG) and the Zicklin Center for Business
Ethics Research at Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. This
year’s winners were selected from among 309 proposals from 492 teams
from 125 countries.
   The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), adopted by the United
Nations General Assembly in September 2015, are a set of 17 global goals,
which seek to end poverty by 2030, promote peace, and preserve the planet
for future generations. More ambitious than their predecessor, the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), the SDGs cover a broad range
of interconnected issues, from ending poverty to addressing inequality and
creating sustainable economic growth, from governance to global public
goods such as climate change.
   In the first year of SDG implementation, youth engagement has been,
and will continue to be, crucial to the successful implementation of the
SDGs. For youth the SDGs provide an inclusive, transformative, universal
framework towards a better world in 2030. The innovative ideas needed to
tackle global challenges will likely come from youth. The I4A competition
engages young people from around the world to encourage them to develop
and share their ideas for financing solutions that can help achieve the 2030
development agenda.
   In its inaugural year in 2015, the competition drew global interest, and
the winning proposals were compiled in the book titled, Financing
Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action.
   This year, the competition attracted engagement from young people
around the world, with about 11 percent of participants from Europe, 13
percent from North America, 21 percent Africa, 12 percent Asia, and 42
percent from Latin America.
   The winners were selected through a vigorous three-stage selection pro-
cess based on the creativity, significance, feasibility, and clarity of the pro-
posals. Reviewers included young WBG staff and Wharton students, along
with technical experts and senior executives from the WBG , Wharton,
Master Card, PepsiCo, and the G-24 Secretariat. Other competition part-
ners included: the World Bank Group Youth to Youth Community (Y2Y),
Young Americas Business Trust (YABT), and the Organization of
American States (OAS).




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                           v
   The 2016 winners will present their proposals at the WBG-IMF Annual
Meetings in October 2016 in Washington DC and at other high level inter-
national events. The Wharton School will offer the winners training and
knowledge exchange opportunities.
   The 2016 I4A winning proposal by Team DLVR from Nigeria is an inno-
vative yet practical approach to a peer-to-peer service for local communi-
ties in Nigeria that seeks to tackle logistical challenges for low-income
people in emerging market nations. It would create an online technology
platform that connects transporters and senders, to enable the completion
of both scheduled and on-demand deliveries. This service focuses on logis-
tics and supply chain bottlenecks, harnessing the knowledge of local com-
munities to build an innovative distribution network at the “last mile” of
the supply chain. It has numerous applications, including e-commerce,
agriculture, and medical service delivery.
   The second-place team, OINCS from Uruguay, describes a mobile crowd-
sourcing platform that enables users to quickly report and share informa-
tion about crimes and vehicular traffic in their cities. OINCS promotes a
better city life experience by helping people travel throughout the city faster
and more safely. Community users inform and alert others of any adverse
event or information that could be relevant to either traffic or citizen secu-
rity, allowing users to react appropriately to events around them.
   The third-place team, NaukriSearch from the United States, presents a
dual platform employment service aimed at increasing transparency in the
slum labor market of Mumbai by improving access to employment infor-
mation and opportunities. NaukriSearch emphasizes the readily available
technologies of each segment of the labor market. The system enables slum
residents to receive accurate, up-to-date information concerning potential
employment opportunities within their region.
   The Her Life team, one of the three runners-up in the 2016 I4A compe-
tition, proposed a solution for the life insurance market for Chinese work-
ing mothers (CWMs) who need to protect their children from unanticipated
financial risks and to enhance their ability to pay for long-term insurance
products. The team proposes a partnership with a designated Chinese life
insurance company to develop a term life insurance product called HerLife.
The product uniquely caters to CWMs by providing education on life
insurance, requiring a partner insurer to waive and fund premiums for
three years based on contingent, women-specific life events (e.g., diagnosis
of malignancies of female organs), and allowing CWMs to pay premiums
suited to varying financial needs while staying within the insurance pro-
vider’s policies.




vi                           Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
   Five out of Five, another runner-up, recommends the issuance of green
bonds aimed at financing air pollution reduction initiatives including, but
not limited to, technological upgrades, reconstruction of industrial com-
position, and air purification strategies in Shanxi province. The local gov-
ernment would be responsible for setting the coupon rate and face value,
while cooperating with professional organizations in developing selection
criteria and processes to access eligible green programs.
   The final runner-up team, Wylde International, introduces an impact
performance measurement and valuation tool (“Impact Units”) that will
enable impact creators such as local innovating companies, or non-profit
or for-profit institutions running Community Social Responsibility (CSR)
initiatives to develop social interventions that demonstrate real and mea-
surable impact as measured and certified by the proposed Impact Units.
   The I4A competition offers the winners a platform to share their ideas
and encourages young people to take ownership over implementation of
the SDGs. It also provides them access to some of the leading professionals
in the global development industry and the private sector. Young adults
must be the ones formulating and planning to reach goals like the SDGs,
since their generation will be the most affected. Our hope is that the Ideas
for Action competition will foster a sense of ownership while incubating
some exciting ideas that can shape our shared future for the better.
   The submissions included in this book, as well as the rest of the 309 sub-
missions, have clearly demonstrated the innovative potential of youth
empowered by technology and sophisticated social media networks. Young
professionals are often the best equipped to think of creative solutions to
tough global problems.
   I4A is not exclusively just about being an “essay competition.” As a cor-
ollary, this year, I4A has convened several workshops called “IdeasLab” as
opportunities for interested young people to get information and share
knowledge and ideas. Equally important was the creation of six I4A Clubs
with the most active ones being from Wharton, Belgrade, and Hong Kong.
These targeted activities have engaged both those young professionals who
took part in the competition, as well as those simply interested in global
development. In addition, this year’s pilot—Ideas for Action 14–18—for
high school students was successfully completed with an event at Wharton
where the participants presented six winning proposals. While the inaugu-
ral year included only several high schools in the U.S., the I4A 14–18 ini-
tiative will expand to include international entrants for the upcoming year.
   The goal of I4A continues to be engagement with leading schools of
finance and management and connecting them with governments around
the world. This helps redefine the global development conversation, and



Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                       vii
helps the World Bank Group and other development organizations lever-
age their resources and convening power more effectively.
  We hope this book and the I4A initiative will provide a space for creative
and innovative thinking, so that the next generation of global leaders will
think beyond the existing confines and approaches on development issues.
Young professionals must be catalysts and “change-makers” within their
organizations and schools in order to achieve lasting and substantial perfor-
mance improvements. The 2015 version of this book was used as a teaching
tool at undergraduate and graduate classes at Wharton as well as several
other schools throughout the world. The students had the opportunity to
comment on the winning proposals and directly shared their ideas with the
winning teams. We hope that the 2016 book will be used more broadly as a
teaching tool in schools around the world. To facilitate the use of the book,
teaching notes will be made available to interested academics.
  Finally, we hope that I4A will help the World Bank Group and other
development organizations and partners across the world to recognize
young people with bright development ideas so they can participate fully
in solving the world’s greatest challenges—as they become the leaders of
tomorrow.

                                                     Mahmoud Mohieldin
                   Senior Vice President for the 2030 Development Agenda,
                                             UN Relations and Partnerships
                                                    The World Bank Group

                                                         Djordjija Petkoski
                    Lecturer, Legal Studies and Business Ethics Department,
                           The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania




viii                        Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Acknowledgments
The Ideas for Action (I4A) was launched jointly by the World Bank Group
(WBG) and the Wharton Business School in partnership with the World
Bank Group’s Youth to Youth Community (Y2Y) and the Young Americas
Business Trust (YABT) at the Organization of American States. This is the
second year of this initiative and it would not have been possible without
the interest and entrepreneurship of young professionals from these orga-
nizations, as well as several other champions of the initiative.
   We would especially like to thank: the World Bank team of Arunima
Dhar and Farida Aboulmagd from the Senior Vice Presidency for the 2030
Development Agenda, UN Relations and Partnerships (SVPMM); the
Wharton team of Marie-Louise Wiegert, Halle Abraham, Walid Beramdane,
Jeffery Chen, Nelson Dong, Melissa Jassir, Joseph Kupferberg, Sue
Mohieldin, and Kami Stavreva; the WBG Y2Y partner colleagues including
Stathis Anagnostou, Renzo Sotomayor, Jemi Lacle’, Minhae Choi, Mphatso
Matenda, Busayo Odunlami, Annabelle Libeau, Ermal Vila, Nadia Bashnin,
Slavena Georgieva, Stephane Chi Detchou, Adnan Sirajee, Claudia Koerbler;
and the YABT team led by Luis Viguria and Isabella Troconis.
   Ned Shell also provided valuable inputs towards this initiative.
   The selection process was done in three phases. First round reviews were
conducted by: Farida Aboulmagd, Nicholas Bian, Lisa Castro, Arunima
Dhar, Victoria Flamant, Lisa Marie Johnson, David Kuijper, Veronica
Piatkov, Halle Abraham, Walid Beramdane, Jeffery Chen, Nelson Dong,
Melissa Jassir, Joseph Kupferberg, Sue Mohieldin, Kami Stavreva, and
Marie-Louise Wiegert.
   The 30 English Language proposals that were chosen for the second
round were reviewed in two working groups, reviewing 15 proposals each,
chaired by Jos Verbeek, Adviser, WBG SVPMM and Mike Kelleher, Adviser,
WBG SVPMM. The working group participants were: Steven Dimitriyev,
Lead Private Sector Development Specialist, WBG; Alexander G. Sotiriou,
Investment Manager at MicroVest Capital Management; Jeffrey French,
Managing Director North America, The Do School; Mia Adelberg, Associate
Principal, Higher Education Corporate Strategy and New Ventures at The
Advisory Board Company; Steven Shalita, Manager, Africa Region, WBG;
Stoyan Tenev, Senior Manager, IEG, WBG; Christian Eigen-Zucchi, Senior
Economist, WBG; Sara Haq, SH International LLC; and Djordjija Petkoski,
Lecturer and Senior Fellow, the Wharton Business School.
   The eight Spanish language proposals that were chosen for the second
round were reviewed by Christopher Juan Costain, Lead Financial Sector


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                      ix
Specialist, WBG; and Gabriela de la Garza, Latin America Sustainability
Manager, PepsiCo.
  In addition, the I4A team received advice and input from Heike Reichelt,
Lead Financial Officer, WBG; and Raghav Narayanan, Evaluation Officer,
IEG, WBG.
  The final ten proposals were reviewed by an expert panel comprising
ofLuis Montoya, President, Latin America Beverages, PepsiCo; Marilou
Uy, Director, G24 Secretariat; Tara Nathan, Executive Vice President,
Public-Private Partnerships, MasterCard; Sir Paul Judge, Businessman and
Education Supporter; Kelly Widelska, Global Head, IFC; and Prof. Djordjija
Petkoski, Lecturer and Senior Fellow at Wharton Business School. The
panel was chaired by Mahmoud Mohieldin, Senior Vice President for the
2030 Development Agenda, UN Relations and Partnerships, World Bank
Group.
  Finally, very special thanks go to the young people who contributed to
the 309 submissions. It is also important to recognize the involvement of
over 26,000 individuals who in many different ways, both online and
in-person, engaged in the I4A initiative.




x                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
CHAPTER 1
A Peer-to-Peer Hyperlocal
Approach to Last-Mile Delivery
in Nigeria
Team DLVR
Simi Oguadowole, University of Aberdeen, Class of 2015
Emeda Nnodu, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Class of 2014
Udon Okoh, University of Aberdeen, Class of 2014



Abstract
Logistics and supply chains are the wheels of trade, commerce and eco-
nomic activity around the world. However, in developing economies and
emerging markets there are numerous challenges that make access diffi-
cult. Most prominent are the lack of standardized addressing systems, and
inefficient or inadequate countrywide postal infrastructure that raises the
cost of logistics, especially in delivery at the last mile.
   Our proposal recommends a low cost peer-to-peer delivery system
where senders are connected to local transporters who can carry out sched-
uled or on-demand deliveries. This system will be executed by means of a
technology platform that facilitates this interaction between the different
customer segments. There is significant opportunity and potential in estab-
lishing this service in emerging economies around the world that face sim-
ilar problems. Because of the large market opportunity and its significance
in the West-African region, Nigeria is our target for the solution. Our plan
is to eventually expand this service regionally.


Problem and Context: Last-Mile Delivery
Opportunities and Challenges
Logistics, especially last-mile delivery, is a challenge in emerging mar-
kets because of the absence of proper postal infrastructure and networks,
and non-standardized address systems. These drawbacks, combined
with other factors peculiar to the local environment have contributed to
challenges in doing business for most companies, since they do not have


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                        1
the resources or know-how to extend their value offerings to the cus-
tomer at the last mile.
   At this time, breakout successes like Alibaba and Amazon have increased
awareness of how technology can change processes in a complex industry
such as logistics and supply chain management. In Nigeria, logistics has
become highly competitive, with traditional mass transit operations mov-
ing into delivery and logistics as well. In many cases, companies have had
to build out their own logistics infrastructure and distribution network,
radically increasing the cost of doing business in the country.
   Industry insiders confirm that these operations are becoming increas-
ingly profitable when compared to their existing mass transportation busi-
ness. In the last year alone, over 10 logistics companies have commenced
operation. Even the big global players (e.g., DHL) are expanding opera-
tions to develop the last-mile sector of the logistics value chain.


Solution: A Multi-sided Platform to
Facilitate Interaction between Senders and
Transporters
DLVR intends to innovate in the logistics space by creating a line of prod-
ucts and services to tackle logistics problems that are commonplace in
emerging markets and likely to worsen with population increases. The
company is primarily focused on the Sub-Saharan African region, rolling
out service in Nigeria.
  DLVR’s flagship service is a multi-sided platform that facilitates the
interaction between senders and transporters, two distinct but interdepen-
dent customer segments of our business model. The DLVR platform is
designed to enable the earliest form of courier service between these cus-
tomer segments.
  The solution is in two parts: the platform and the logistics operation.
•   The flagship platform serves the purpose of aggregating demand for
    deliveries in a central location. This means that organizations or indi-
    viduals with delivery needs (senders) can place these orders through
    the platform.
•   On the logistic operations end, transporters will be empowered to ful-
    fill these orders through the use of our platform and its mobile
    application.




2                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Relevance
Our solution creates an enabling environment for business creation and
growth, and improves the business environment in developing economies.
Logistics are a significant part (and cost) of operations in the region, and
many businesses and organizations are limited in their reach due to a lack
of a solution for last-mile delivery. By building out the infrastructure, we
allow companies to focus on their core business, while we expand the
“rails” of commerce in Nigeria.

What is new about it?
By crowdsourcing delivery using local transporters, we are creating a
shared economy—an aggregated pool of resources and assets that out-
weigh any one operator. This creates an efficient distribution network, even
at (especially at) the local level.
   Also, our model uses the transporters’ specific knowledge of their local
environment. By synthesizing and documenting this knowledge, we can
better understand some of the unique issues that are prevalent in the region.
   Through our approach to partner with schools by co-location we reduce
our costs, and we benefit from the economies of scale that schools are
uniquely positioned to enjoy in emerging economies (steady power supply,
large labor pool, functional infrastructure, etc.). In synergistic parallel, we
provide hands-on education (both in operations and technology) to the
demographic that forms over 60 percent of the country’s population and
create a steady pipeline of employment for those people.
Implementation Plan
The DLVR project is already being implemented. We conducted pilot test-
ing and are currently in the intermediate stages of product development.


 By Who?            What?           How?                                  When?
 DLVR               Pilot testing   Engaging our prospective              First phase
                                    customers to test key assump-         completed
                                    tions and understand their most       February 2016
                                    important needs
 DLVR               Application     Iterative development: building       In progress
                    development:    out the functionality of the
                                    platform
 DLVR & Financial   Recruitment     Security screening and back-          Quarter 3 2016
 institutions                       ground checks for
                                    transporters
                                    Recruitment of key personnel
                                                                      (continued on next page)




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                         3
(continued)

 By Who?          What?           How?                                When?
 DLVR             PR, Marketing   Referrals, online and print media   Quarter 3 2016
                  & Advertising
 Financial        Funding for     Innovative mix of grants,           In progress
 institutions,    product and     low-interest loans and other
 investors and    service         concessions
 Development &    development
 Public Sector    and scaling
 Partners
 DLVR             Market          Desk and ﬁeld research to           May 2015–
                  research        understand the landscape            January 2016




Expected Impact
The impact of this service will be felt in multiple sectors of the economy.
1. Medical: Our platform can help expedite delivery of essential supplies
   and vaccines in case of emergencies or epidemics, which are of current
   concern in the region’s political/socio-economic climate. Also, the plat-
   form can facilitate movement of essential health workers and specialists
   to underserved locations.
2. Agricultural: Food security in the changing environment is a global
   issue, with special relevance to the West African region at large. A
   major issue in the Nigerian food value chain is the cost of getting pro-
   duce to the market. Much product is lost due to inefficient transporta-
   tion and storage options. Our platform will open up these segments of
   the value chain to optimization, and help transport food from the pro-
   ducer to consumer.
3. Consumer: The consumer, who is increasingly becoming a global citi-
   zen with access to information from around the world, can benefit
   from a wider reach of products and services that will satisfy their
   unmet needs.
4. Trade/Commerce: Logistics infrastructure forms the rails of trade and
   commerce in any economy. Developing DLVR will spur network
   effects that will aid trade and commerce by providing access at the last
   mile.
5. Energy saving: The platform will enable the combining of resources in
   geographic areas, saving on the energy needed to carry out these pro-
   cesses if they were in disparate locations. This reduces the environ-
   mental footprint and allows both senders and transporters to save
   energy that would otherwise be expended on individual transporta-
   tion and logistics.

4                            Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
6. Education: Involving students and their institutions in this multifac-
   eted operation provides valuable skills, both digital and operational,
   which are priceless in today’s economy. This knowledge transfer helps
   strengthen institutional capabilities for research and training, and pro-
   vides students with opportunities and employment after graduation.


Comparable Product Offerings
Companies around the world have implemented similar shared economy
businesses. One of the better-known brands is UBER, which used a similar
model for ride sharing. They are active in Nigeria as well as other emerging
markets, and several other new entrants into this space, such as Metro
Africa Xpress and ACE have adapted their ride-sharing model.
  Globally, several other outfits have successfully employed similar models
for package delivery such as Roadie, Postmates, Deliveroo, etc.


Potential Challenges
Challenge                     Mitigation
Infrastructure and cultural   Our technology deployment needs to be a hybrid solution
barriers to technology        that combines high- and low-level technology solutions for
adoption                      eﬀectiveness in our target market.
Trust                         We will overcome the trust barrier by marketing through
                              referrals and trusted peer reviews. In addition, social media
                              channels, which are favored by our target demographic, will
                              be relied on heavily to advertise as well as convey the “voice
                              of the company.” Awareness of our internal security
                              measures will also reassure prospective users.
Funding to scale              Financing is actively being sourced from various public and
                              private institutional funds.
Coordinating supply and       Platform optimization. By use of advanced technology on
demand                        the back end of our operations, our platform is designed to
                              be convenient for both sides of the market, linking people
                              who need service with people who can provide it locally.
Security                      Changes in policy by the government are seeing more
                              regulatory intervention, with several schemes being rolled
                              out to reduce fraud and aid identity management. These
                              changes allow us to design a more secure business with
                              bank-authorized veriﬁcation. Our business rules have also
                              been designed with low tolerance for failures—unfulﬁlled
                              orders, late deliveries, stolen packages, damaged packages.
                              Our standard is that over 93 percent of all orders must be
                              successfully completed.




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                            5
CHAPTER 2
OINCS: Using a Collaborative and
Community Driven Approach to
Citizen Mobility and Security
Team:
Marcelo Wilkorwsky, CEO and co-founder
Rafael Cavestany, creative director and co-founder
Ignacio Bazzano, chief technology oﬃcer



Abstract
Oincs is a mobile platform that aims to look after its users by keeping them
alert to everything that is going on in the streets. It works thanks to the
cooperation of the community itself, which shares and updates informa-
tion in real time to the benefit of all.
   To address rising security concerns in Latin America, community users
themselves can use OINCS to inform and alert others of any adverse event
or information that could be relevant to traffic and citizen security. This
means that any citizen consulting our mobile app or web platform can be
informed and attuned to events going on around them, saving them time,
money, and risks to security.


Problem and Context: Security and Safety
Security is a major problem for the population of Latin America. According
to Latinobarómetro, concern about crime in Latin America has grown by
360 percent from 1995 to 2015.
   This study also indicates that one in four people responded that “crime”
is their greatest concern; the perception of 63 percent of those surveyed, is
that their countries are increasingly unsafe.
   It is not easy to precisely calculate levels of theft in a society, as many such
crimes are not reported to the authorities. A quarter of Mexico’s population
indicates having been a victim of crime, but 93 percent of victims fail to file
a report. Of the seven percent of reported crimes, less than one percent
ends in conviction, creating a lack of confidence in the capacity of law
enforcement authorities.

Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                              7
   According to Gerardo Rodriguez Sánchez Lara, an expert specializing in
crime from the Universidad de la Américas Puebla, when populations feel
that they are living where there is little accountability for crime, violence
feeds upon itself: criminals know that they will not be punished, which
encourages them to continue criminal behavior.
   The Latin American and Caribbean region is the least safe in the world.
The latest data show that in 2012 there were 437,000 murders worldwide,
equivalent to a world rate of 6.2 homicides per 100,000 people (United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime). Although Latin America and the
Caribbean accounts for less than 9 percent of the planet’s population, 33
percent of homicides occurred in the region. While the murder rate is
just one manifestation of the problem of violence, it is the most reliable
indicator because it involves an act that is generally reported; this con-
trasts with robberies, kidnappings, domestic violence, and other offenses,
which are often not reported and which lack standardized definitions.
Nonetheless, the reported incidence of these acts in Latin America is
disproportionately high, and has grown significantly on average over the
last two decades. Lastly, there are other types of issues that directly affect
citizens—including infrastructure, hooliganism, and climate-related
factors—that need to be solved in order to improve the quality of life in
cities.
   Major cities face the additional challenge of traffic congestion. According
to a study sponsored by IBM, the intense traffic conditions of major cities
has a negative effect on health and professional performance. For example,
in Mexico it is estimated that people lose 2.4 years of their lives due to time
spent in traffic. Urban conditions directly impact a community’s produc-
tivity and quality of life on a daily basis. When governments do not provide
a solution, people look for other options. Oincs provides the solution to
these problems through a collaborative tool which helps its users take con-
trol of traffic and safety issues in their communities.


Solution
Oincs is attempting to solve traffic and citizen security problems using a
collaborative approach, with the help of the community.
  Community users themselves inform and alert others of traffic and citi-
zen security concerns. Our mobile app or web platform allows citizens to
be informed and attuned to events going on around them, and it has the
potential to save users time and money, and to lessen risk.
  Every day, thousands of people check the information reported on Oincs
to find the safest and fastest route for their journey, just as thousands of

8                            Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
people share information every day with the sole objective of assisting and
alerting their fellow citizens to incidents of this nature.
   The media also use the information shared via Oincs to produce their
own informational content, thus creating a virtuous cycle in which all citi-
zens unite with the objective of getting around the city in a safer and more
efficient manner.

Product Design and Implementation
The product is a free mobile app available for iPhone and Android. The app
can be downloaded directly from the official Apple and Google stores.
   It is simple to operate: users simply download the app and register, and
are then able to check reports for their local area and/or create reports to
share with the community.
   Oincs is a mobile platform that makes it possible for its users to be alert
to both crime and traffic in the surrounding area. The key component is
the cooperation of the community itself, which shares and updates infor-
mation in real time. Two years after its conception, Oincs has more than
150,000 registered users, making it the most downloaded app in Uruguay.
It ranks in the App Store’s top three apps in 11 countries in Latin America
and the Caribbean, and has received numerous national and international
distinctions and prizes, including Best Software Product in 2014 and Best
App in 2015 from the Cámara Uruguaya de Tecnologías de la Información
(Uruguayan Chamber of Information Technologies; CUTI). In addition,
Oincs received the highest number of awards at the Demand Solutions
event organized by the Inter-American Development Bank in Washington
D.C., where it won three prizes: Startup with Highest Potential Growth,
Most Innovative Concept, and People’s Choice Award.

Innovation
We see two sources of innovation: the first comes from using technology to
help ensure that the members of any community have free, real-time access
to information about local conditions, thus allowing them to make better
decisions and improve their quality of life (getting home faster and more
safely, helping other members avoid areas in which robberies are taking
place, etc.). Secondly, the information is provided and maintained by the
community itself, which collaborates to make mobility better and safer.

Market opportunity
The mobile market in Latin America is the fourth largest in the world today,
with almost 326 million unique subscribers and 718 million connections in

Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                         9
September 2014. Just over half of the region’s population now has a mobile
subscription. This figure is expected to reach 60 percent by 2020, in line with
the world average.
  Latin America is experiencing a marked acceleration in data traffic
growth, driven by the rapid migration to high-speed connections that is
taking place across the region. At the end of 2013, more than two-thirds of
connections were 2G. It is anticipated that by 2020 almost 80 percent of
will take place using faster 3G and—increasingly—4G networks.
  The region is projected to have a total of 605 million smartphone con-
nections by 2020, equivalent to almost 70 percent of total connections. At
that point, Latin America will have the second highest number of smart-
phone connections in the world.
  Investment in digital advertising is also expected to grow more rapidly
in Latin America than in any other region in the world through 2019.

Scalability and Replicability
Our primary business model is based on the Oincs subscription freemium1
service. Having received and analyzed hundreds of messages with feedback
from users and conducted dozens of customer interviews, we’ve identified
a need (and opportunity) to provide a subscription-based model paid for
on a monthly basis. With this service, every subscribed user will have a
access to a personalized virtual traffic and security assistant before and
during excursions in their city. In this way, subscribers can receive mes-
sages and intelligent alerts to help them make better decisions in order to
save time and feel more secure.
  There are also secondary revenue streams for Oincs such as through
media channels and advertising. Media channels are already using the
Oincs platform to integrate real time crime and safety information on their
websites and newscasts. In addition, potential advertisers would target
audiences of men and women aged 20–50 who are often active in social
networks, are gainfully employed, own smart phones with internet access,
and commute daily using personal vehicles as opposed to mass transit. Our
main advertising clients in the future may include auto companies, insur-
ance firms, pharmacies, convenience stores, alcohol companies (with road
safety messages), service stations, etc.
  Although not yet implemented, there is also potential to monetize sale of
data to transport providers or other clients seeking historical and
predictive traffic and safety info (e.g., Airbnb overlaying Oincs data on

1
  Freemium is pricing strategy used for many digital applications, in which the basic prod-
uct is free, but a premium is changed for proprietary features, or specific functionality.


10                               Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
their app for customers to identify the safest location to rent a room).
Additional future revenue streams may also include product licenses for
the media and/or institutions, commissions for leads, and sponsorships.
   With respect to scalability and replicability, our platform is based on its
crowdsourcing nature, insofar as all reports are created by our users and
for the benefit of the community. This feature is the key to a platform that
is easy to scale up. As we are already integrated with global geo-positioning
technology, all we need to operate in a new market is a community of users.
The technology can scale on its own, both for live reporting and for our
new on-demand model, which is powered by artificial intelligence and
goes beyond an app, as an omni-channel freemium service. Therefore, the
marginal costs for every new market are reduced to the cost of creating a
marketing campaign and a sales team (if the market is not Spanish-
speaking, we may need to translate the platform’s user interface as well,
which is fairly easy and inexpensive to do).
   Another feature of our replicability is our white-label-based2 model,
where every city or municipality in the world can license the platform and
customize it to the needs, preferences, and tastes of its population. As long
as the basic structure of geo-positioned reports is respected, we can provide
city-by-city customized user reports, tracking, and methods of communi-
cation with users. We can also customize the look and feel of the platform
for each city or municipality. This last point is what we believe will be the
key of our replicability strategy: it allows municipal governments to sus-
tainably invest in technology to improve their constituents’ safety and lives.
   These models are synergistic insofar as every report and data generated
by the users, be it through live reports, on-demand services, or municipal
government licenses, feeds the same platform and database. This synergis-
tic approach allows the platform to learn from a larger pool of data due to
machine learning and artificial intelligence. This, in turn, helps our mis-
sion to provide people around the world with reliable data to make better
decisions, live safely in their cities, and save time in their daily commutes.


Future Outlook
Our main strength is the enormous engagement that exists in the commu-
nity. As indicated previously, our apps have more than 150,000 registered
users. More importantly, repeat users accounted for 96 percent of sessions
in the last month.

2
  A white-label product is one that is developed and produced by one company, who then
allows other companies to rebrand and market the product as their own.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                 11
   Users share information in real time (crowdsourcing) about criminal
activity, security, and traffic.
   We are creating a rich database with extraordinary potential for analysis
by different public and private sectors and institutions.
   Growth has been largely organic, with word-of-mouth playing an essen-
tial role in spreading information about the venture.
   The media’s effective use of the information generated by the community
has also had a major impact, together with the potential that exists for
establishing partnerships with municipal governments to help improve
cities.




12                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
CHAPTER 3
Increasing Transparency in
Indian Slum Labor Markets:
Providing Access to Employment
Information
Team NaukriSearch
Chhavi Aggarwal, The Wharton School, Class of 2018
Kent Hutchison, The Wharton School, Class of 2018
Robert Levinson, The Wharton School, Class of 2017
Daniel Kwak, The Wharton School, Class of 2017



Abstract
NaukriSearch is a dual platform employment service. Its goal is to reduce
unemployment through increased transparency in the slum labor market
of Mumbai by improving access to employment information and opportu-
nities. NaukriSearch is unique from other attempts at unemployment
reduction because it emphasizes use of technology that is readily available
to each segment of the labor market: Internet-enabled computers for
employers, and cellular SMS messages for employees. This system enables
slum residents to receive accurate, up-to-date information concerning
potential employment opportunities within their region.
   The majority of slum residents are employed informally. NaukriSearch
will provide crucial structure this economic informality. This proposal
demonstrates the appropriateness of a dual platform system for a highly
asymmetric Indian labor market in which employers enjoy disproportion-
ate access to information. Through the implementation of electronic mar-
keting campaigns easily accessible to slum populations, our team seeks to
attract marginalized workers to NaukriSearch, thereby reducing frictional
unemployment in the informal economy.




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                     13
Problem and Context: Lack of Mobility,
Large Slum Population, Low Work
Participation Rate
In Mumbai, there is a three-fold challenge to reducing unemployment: the
lack of mobility in a large slum population with a low work participation
rate. In 2011, 93 million people lived in slums in India, which is expected
to grow to 104 million by 2017 (Slums in India 2011. See Table 1.). The
highest percentage of slum population is in Mumbai, where 54 percent of
the city population lives in slums (WDR 2009). The work participation rate
of the Indian slum population is only 36.4 percent (Slums in India 2011),
representing a large amount of untapped human capital. Adding this pop-
ulation into the mainstream economy would lead to an increase in India’s
economic efficiency and productivity.
   Currently, most slum dwellers are employed in the informal sector,
which consists of jobs such as construction workers, house helpers, tailors,
and taxi drivers. Though this sector is responsible for 90 percent employ-
ment of India’s population, these workers have no formal recognition from
the Indian government, and have to rely on word of mouth to find jobs and
negotiation skills to secure pay (Yardley). Most slum dwellers lack
certification, access to employment offices, an enforced minimum wage,
and other protections of their rights.
   From a consequentialist perspective, we expect utility to be maximized
due to increased labor market participation and upward social mobility,
which in turn will create an upward development spiral. From a deontolog-
ical perspective, we believe that slum dwellers should have the right to
information about possible employment opportunities and that it is our
social and moral obligation to reduce poverty, especially when it consti-
tutes over a 100 million people with poor living conditions. Human nature
ethics would suggest that this platform would allow for slum dwellers to
fulfill their capabilities. Moreover, it would be in line with the Sustainable
Development Goals, such as “promoting sustained, inclusive and sustain-
able economic growth.”



Table 1 Projected Slum Population to 2017 (in million)
                                    Projected Slum Population for the Years
 Country        2011         2012         2013         2014          2015     2016     2017
 India         93.06        94.98         96.91        98.85         100.79   102.73   104.67
Source: Report of the Committee on Slum Statistics / Census, 2010.



14                                    Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Solution: Dual-Platform System
NaukriSearch seeks to create a dynamic online- and SMS-based platform
to facilitate the connectivity of employers and employees. This will effec-
tively and comprehensively address the inefficiency in the labor market of
marginalized Indian communities, This solution will take into consider-
ation both the needs of the employers and the minimal technological and
financial resources at the disposal of the employees. Through the imple-
mentation of a dual platform system, NaukriSearch hopes to maximize
ease of use while minimizing barriers to entry.

Platform One: Online Database
Our solution targets a specific employer market: middle- and upper-class
households and the businesses their occupants manage. This market
enjoys widespread connectivity to the Internet for both personal and pro-
fessional use. Access to the Internet is essential for the success of our first
platform, an online job-posting database. This database will stress func-
tionality, with a strong emphasis on ease of use. It should be noted that our
solution is not intended to serve employers based in slums, but rather
employers located in other nearby areas in an attempt to diversify slum
dwellers’ options for employment.
   After accessing our website, employers will be prompted to enter key
information about their future job openings. This brief questionnaire will
serve as a one-stop-shop for employers in reaching potential employees.
First, employers will enter their name or the name of their company. Then,
the location of the job is requested.
   The next section of the questionnaire is critical to the functioning of our
project. Employers will indicate which “Job Identifiers” describe the employ-
ment opportunity. NaukriSearch has chosen the identifiers shown in Figure
1 based on common occupations in the informal Indian economy. Employers
must choose at least one, but may choose more. The design of the question-
naire is crucial: by asking a multiple-choice query, we effectively standardize
responses into sortable buckets. This sorting of identifiers will prove essen-
tial to project implementation in the SMS-based phase of the project.
   Employers may then write a description of the job. This open text field
caters to a wide range of employer preferences. For example, Employer A
may include a description of expectations, hours per week, pay range, and
age or gender preferences. In contrast, Employer B include only a descrip-
tion of expectations, leaving discussions concerning pay range and hours
per week open to negotiation.



Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                         15
Figure 1 Online Database Platform (for employer use)




Source: Authors.




16                   Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
  In order to address concerns of employer response overload,
NaukriSearch has included in the survey an option that limits the num-
ber of job seekers that will be informed of the posting. Should an
employer choose “Less than 30,” a maximum of 29 unique subscribers
will receive SMS notifications alerting them to the new job opening. This
feature is intended to minimize the potential for spamming of
employers.
  Finally, employers are asked to indicate their preferred method of con-
tact. Employers may choose to be contacted either by phone or email. As
the majority of potential employees lack access to reliable Internet,
NaukriSearch has included subtext so as to encourage employers to list a
phone number for job inquiries. Our website will use survey logic to
prompt employers for the indicated information.
  Upon completion of the survey, the data will be moved to a secure online
database. In this database, each entry will receive a unique Job Number,
which will be used in coordination with the SMS-based platform.

Platform Two: SMS Service
As indicated, NaukriSearch seeks to connect employers with the margin-
alized populations of Indian slums. Accordingly, NaukriSearch proposes a
unique integration of online database (for employers) and SMS service
(for employees).
   Automated SMS systems are a well-established part of life in the devel-
oped world. They are perhaps best known for their role in sweepstakes:
media outlets often run contests in which listeners’ text a predetermined
word or phrase to a specified number in order to gain admission to a raffle
for tickets or experiences. NaukriSearch plans to emulate this concept,
expanding it significantly so as to make an impact on the employment
prospects of marginalized India.
   In NaukriSearch’s automated SMS system, job seekers will be asked a
short, user-friendly series of questions to obtain the most relevant matches
with employers. After completing the survey, job seekers will, in effect,
have created an applicant profile, from which they will receive information
concerning job availabilities (Figure 2).
   Information will be dispersed in the form of simple, user-friendly text
messages. When an employer posts a job opportunity with a given tag
(such as “carpentry”) that the job seeker has indicated an interest in, that
job seeker will receive a text. The text will contain essential information for
the job seeker, pulled from the unique Job Identifier number in the data-
base. Such information would include the job description, the location of
the job, and the potential employer’s phone number.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                         17
Figure 2: SMS to Database Process


     NaukriSearch. What types of jobs
                                                         Subscribe           Maid, Cook            400017          B
     are you interested in? Examples:
     construction, mechanic, maid,
     tailor. Pls separate responses
     with commas




     What’s your postal code?


                                                  A         B            C            D            E            F
     How many job posts would you          1 Job Number Job ID #1    Job ID #2    Job ID #3   Postal Code   1RWLÀHG
     OLNHWREHQRWLÀHGRISHUGD\"$
     XSWR%XSWR&XSWR   2    10001      cook       midwife       tailor      302016         10
     'XSWR                           3    10002     driver    maintenance                 110062          5
                                           4    10003      maid        cook                     400017         10
                                           5    10004   plumbing     carpentry    security      110076         15
     Thanks for signing up! You have       6    10005   electrician                             110047          5
     been registered at NaukriSearch,
     and will start receiving job          7    10006   mechanic maintenance                    282006         20
     opportunities via SMS tomorrow.
     Text “NO” to unsubscribe at any
     time.




Source: Authors.



   This SMS-based platform improves the job seeker’s chances of employ-
ment by increasing access to information concerning the job and by pro-
viding immediate connectivity to the potential employer. This represents a
marked improvement over traditional interpersonal channels of commu-
nication, which can often confuse job details and lead to dead ends for
employment. It also opens job seekers up to a wide array of employment
opportunities, effectively increasing their power to choose satisfying and
empowering work.
   After making contact the employer and employee will arrange further
details concerning duration of employment, wages, and other benefits. It is
important to note that NaukriSearch does not seek to directly impact such
negotiations, but rather to serve as a facilitator of connectivity between
employer and employee.
   NaukriSearch’s proposed solution is also unique in its ability to provide
access to job opportunities outside of traditional boundaries. Labor mar-
kets in slum communities in India can often suffer from an excess of labor,
without the corresponding job opportunities. Our team hypothesizes that a
significant portion of the lack of job opportunities stems not from a lack of
need for productive labor, but rather market friction that results from inad-
equate communication between employers in relatively well-off communi-
ties and job seekers in slum neighborhoods. Potential employers may, for
example, be uncomfortable searching out labor in slums, or unsure of how
best to begin the search for new employees. Our team’s proposal has the



18                                         Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
potential to reduce that friction significantly, through connecting employ-
ers directly with employees via phone or email. In such a way, employers
can reach new labor markets while job seekers are provided with the oppor-
tunity to work and gain skills outside of their immediate locale.


Expected Impact
We expect NaukriSearch to achieve significant market penetration in the
Indian informal economy within three years of launch.
   Our platform will provide slum residents access to opportunities outside
of their local vicinity in a way that is, for the first time, simple and accessi-
ble. With more high-paying jobs and access to areas outside of the slums,
these residents should be able to provide long-term benefits to their family
for generations to come. Either slum residents will be able to relocate
because of newly found consistent pay, or their improved personal eco-
nomic condition may stimulate the slum’s local economy so that it is no
longer designated as a slum.
   NaukriSeach will also give employers access to labor resources they would
otherwise be unaware of, providing an opportunity to hire from a larger
group, and more easily fill positions that suit candidate qualifications.
   By linking the two otherwise incompatible parts of the labor market,
NaukriSearch will improve on local economies and also bring into balance
information between job seekers and potential employers. We expect that
impact measurements in the early years to show that this platform can
change the lives of residents in many slums across India by ultimately
reducing the informational disconnect within the labor market.


Comparable Product Offerings
Maid in India
Decimal Foundation, a non-profit organization based in Mumbai, man-
ages this employee network specifically geared towards the domestic ser-
vices industry. Maid in India first vets potential maids, administering
background checks to ensure reliability. When an employer requires a
maid, he or she may access an online portal to complete a short job-posting
questionnaire. Crucially, Maid in India fulfills a social mission beyond pro-
viding employment: for each job accepted, Maid in India designates a por-
tion of the salary to maids’ “vocational training, health and savings benefits,
insurance, and job security” (Kamal and Mishra).


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                           19
  NaukriSearch takes Maid in India’s central concept and expands it far
beyond the scope of the domestic services industry. NaukriSearch is geared
towards greater inclusion of all members of the informal economy, includ-
ing both men and women. Furthermore, while Maid in India limits possi-
ble employment locations to a short list of broad options (Delhi, Colaba,
etc.), NaukriSearch more effectively identifies locations via the use of postal
codes, thus better matching employers with potential employees.

Challenges in Computerized Job Search for the
Developing World
In their report, Challenges in Computerized Job Search for the Developing
World, Medhi Thies et al. consider the functionality of a computerized sys-
tem of job posting for marginalized Indian communities. Their report con-
cludes that, before the advent of a computerized job search system can be
realized, a paper-based system that connects employers to potential employ-
ees must first be implemented.
   At NaukriSearch, we believe that the use of SMS-based services can power
a jump past paper-based systems. In much the same way that mobile bank-
ing enabled impoverished African societies to leapfrog traditional forms of
banking, NaukriSearch’s dual platform will provide laborers with access to
real time, accurate job listings. Furthermore, our SMS platform will enable
job seekers to immediately contact potential employers, greatly reducing the
market friction that would exist in a paper-based job posting system.


Potential Challenges
Revenue Model
We believe that by working closely with locals, NGOs, local government,
and city governments from the start of the venture, we can incorporate all
the stakeholders to effectively address the needs of all involved. This
includes generating revenue from those that are best equipped to sponsor
our mission and needs.
   Because we realize that our objectives align with various NGOs looking
to reduce impoverished regions in and around prominent cities, we will be
seeking subsidization for the first few months not only from NGOs, but
also government and business competition and foundation grants. These
grants will be the main source of income that will jumpstart our business
in the first year. The first year focus is building a user base for both job
seekers and employers, effectively improving our services according to the


20                           Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
users’ needs. With less than 100 jobseekers and less than 50 employers the
infrastructure costs will be light. We plan to seek a contract with telecom-
munication companies to potentially reduce the cost of dispersing text
messages. Both private and public telecommunication services will be
approached, but BSNL and MTNL (both government telecommunication
companies) may be the best option to providing the necessary subsidies.
The primary costs in Year 1 will be with the contracted work of creating
and maintaining the website. We know that these costs will be generated
primarily during the first year, and that in subsequent years we will only
need to continue to update our site and make minor changes. Other costs
will be associated with onboarding of users through marketing efforts such
as radio broadcasts, ads, and other tactics.
   In the following years, we will begin to grow into other neighborhoods
after we secure the platform in Mumbai. We anticipate that by this time we
will have enough employers interested in using our site to justify a (not-yet
determined) premium level of subscription for those that hire more than
ten employees a week (actual number can be altered based on base level
after first year findings). At this point costs should still focus around main-
taining a bare minimum number of full-time employees (FTE) and a low
overhead cost from the site and a possible office space. These FTEs will
focus on customer relations, administrative work, marketing efforts, and
general maintenance of the entire business. Because of the web-based
nature of the business, we will only need to scale the number of workers
slightly as we expand to other locations. Once expansion to nearby cities
reaches a critical mass, we will begin to explore corporate impact sponsor-
ships, especially from companies such a private telecommunication com-
panies that align well with our services and interests. Furthermore, such
corporate sponsorships may either provide funds or services to further
lower our costs. As a possible alternative, FTE can be effectively replaced
by reaching out to local communities for volunteers that would be trained
and brought in as full-time volunteers with certain benefits, such as food
and training. Our revenue efforts will be focused on trending away from
grants and corporate sponsorships to ads and premium users. As the years
go on, we hope to be fully sustainable without relying on corporations,
foundations, and grants.

Initial Launch Strategy
To help NaukriSearch gain initial traction, we will implement a beta pro-
gram, which will not only raise awareness about our product, but also serve
as a testing and feedback tool. We hope to run the month-long beta pro-
gram 2–4 times. This timing will allow implementation of the quantitative


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                         21
Table 1 Financial Projections for NaukriSearch’s First
        Five Years
 5-Year Financial Projections (in thousands of rupees)
                              Year 1       Year 2        Year 3   Year 4     Year 5
 Revenue
 Grants                        300           300          200       100          0
 Corporate Sponsors               0          500         1,000    2,000      2,000
 Ads on Site                      0           50          200      500       1,000
 Company Usage Fee                0          100          300      500       1,000
 Total Revenue                 300           950         1,700    3,100     4,000
 Expenses
 Personnel                        0          600         1,200    1,800      2,400
 Contract Services              100           30           30       30         30
 Other Direct                    30           30           30       30         30
 Overhead                         0          400          500      600        700
 Onboarding                      80           80           80      200        500
 Total Expenses                 210         1,140        1,840    2,660     3,660
 Net Income (Loss)               90         –190         –140      440        340
 Net Assets, end of year         90         –100         –240      200        540
Source: Authors.



and qualitative feedback received from participants. Our goals include
overall employer/job-seeker satisfaction with the platform (measured via
frequent feedback surveys), a 0.7 job/jobseeker ratio, and platform ease-of-
use for both sides of the informational divide. To kick-off our beta program,
we hope to build essential partnerships with both sides of the market—
employers and jobseekers. During a two-month period, we will reach out to
telecommunication companies (which we hope to work with on the plat-
form development), and will target charitable foundations of large corpora-
tions as well as government agencies that are looking to fill job positions
quickly. We will also connect with local NGOs that support slum popula-
tions of Mumbai, and through them encourage slum dwellers to use our
platform. Examples of organizations include Apnalya, SP Jain Institute of
Management and Research, and National Slum Dwellers Federation, which
already work toward the goal of sustainable employment.
   To measure goal attainment at the end of each month, the team will
require a feedback form from each of the employees and employers at the
conclusion of the beta cycle. This survey will include questions to mea-
sure the usability of NaukriSearch and rating the interactions between
employees and employers. Through pointed questions about the quality
of the program with rankings of 1 to 7 for each measure, the survey will

22                                 Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
serve as a benchmark for two of the goals. Through this feedback form,
we will also ask each employer and employee to recommend three poten-
tial NaukriSearch users. This way, we can easily transition to the actual
launch. The third goal, a 0.7 job/jobseeker ratio (i.e., for every 10 job
seekers on the site, there will be seven jobs available), will be measured
just by analyzing the counts of each set. During the implementation
period after the beta program month, we will analyze and internalize the
feedback received. This period of time will be dedicated to recruiting and
gathering a new batch of employers and employees. Some from each
group may continue from the previous beta period if they didn’t get a job
or find an employee. Otherwise, the rest will be recruited for the next
cycle. During the same timeframe, we will make changes to NaukriSearch
according to feedback received, and logistically prepare for the next pilot
round. (Figure 3).



Figure 3 NaukriSearch Traction Timeline
                               Month 1:              Month 2:        Month 3:             Month 4:               Month 4:
                              Groundwork            Groundwork     Beta Cycle #1       Implementation          Beta Cycle #2
 Notes
 Examples:
 Apnalya NSDF, SP           Engage with NGOs
 Jain Institute
 Examples:
 Reliance Foundation,                Recruit Employers
 Local service businesses

 Target: 50 employees                                            Enroll
 per Beta Cycle                                                  employees

 Matched with beneﬁt                                                Match employers
 of NGO knowledge and                                               and employees
 experience

 Survey both employers                                                          Collect
 and employees                                                                  Feedback

 Determine action steps
                                                                                           Analyze
 to improve program                                                                        Feedback
 experience

 Adopt action steps                                                                             Implement
 into mission                                                                                   Changes



         Iterate                                                                                            Enroll
                                                                                                            employees


                                                                                                               Match employers
                                                                                                               and employees


                                                                                                                           Collect
                                                                                                                         Feedback


Source: Authors.



Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                                   23
   After the beta program one of the most important challenges our project
will face is attracting new users from both sides to make the platform
self-sustaining. We will follow the pattern developed in the beta program,
again working closely with NGOs, and the partners to expand into a live
release. We will incorporate feedback into testimonials, and give beta tes-
ters the opportunity to refer friends and family for the program. This will
create a self-propagating method of bringing in users.
   Moreover, to expand our user base, we will also design a comprehen-
sive marketing campaign that targets both potential employers and job
seekers. The first part of our marketing campaign is advertising to users
who do not have Internet access. This effort is of crucial importance—
only 3.3 percent of Indian slum residents have Internet connection (Slums
Census Data). This means NaukriSearch must reach them through new
and innovative methods. One way we can spread the word about the
product is by sending mass texts encouraging subscription. This effort
will be aided if we develop a good working relationship with several tele-
communication providers.
   We will reach out to potential employers by maintaining active social
media campaigns using services such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and
YouTube. These tools are high reach/low cost forms of advertising that can
help us build a loyal online community. We also hope to design and main-
tain a website that could provide important information to potential
employers. This site will also give users the option of signing up to receive
future email communications and updates, ensuring that all potential
employers stay connected to our organization. As the platform grows, we
also aim to hold workshops on interview skills, career analysis, and other
job-oriented lectures to attract locals to NaukriSearch and promote the
cause of sustainable employment. We are confident that these integrated
efforts will help us spread the word about NakuriSearch, allowing us to
acquire an initial customer base.


Future Outlook
Impact Measurement
In order to continue the projected growth of our venture, it is important to
have a key performance indicator. Given that our core mission is to reduce
the friction between potential employees from the slums and employers in
the city, the focus of most of our metrics should revolve around the con-
nections that we help forge and those that we directly impact.



24                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
   From the perspective of an employer, it is important to see that the time
it takes to find an employee is not only short, but also the quality of
employee is high. Measuring the time that it takes to find an employee is
simply a matter of finding the time from when an employer submits a
request to when it is fulfilled. On the other hand, quality of employee can
hinge on a variety of measures. Our team believes that there should be
quality assurance measures for both employers and employees. For employ-
ees this is a weighted average that takes into consideration the level of pay,
hours worked, work done, and (to cross-reference the compatibility) the
employer’s evaluation of the employer. From the perspective of an employee
a similar metric should be used, but more focused on the quality of the
employer, how long it took to find an occupation, and the accuracy of the
occupation in relation to the job queried.
   We will measure our growth as an organization on performance targets
such as the number of partner organizations, number of cities to which we
expand our services, and the number of employees and employers matched.
With these figures, we will be able to effectively understand our growth
patterns, challenges, and which areas need more focus. Of these metrics,
the number of employees and employers matched is the heartbeat of our
service. Additionally, we will track the complaints that we receive, record-
ing them in both electronic and physical form. In order to effectively
address complaints, we have budgeted in a dedicated customer service pro-
fessional starting in Year 2. Our goal is to be at 10,000 jobs matched within
two years and expansion to four unique regions by Year 3. Tracking these
metrics will enable us to scale properly and effectively, and also have a pos-
itive impact on the most people.
   Access to employment  opportunities and information will directly
increase work participation rate—increasing both the number of people
who are employed and the number of people who are aware and actively
looking for employment. We aim to scale up our proposal by implement-
ing the NaukriSearch platform in other major urban cities in India such as
Delhi (about 49 percent of Delhi’s population lives in slums), Chennai, and
Bangalore. We also see the potential of offering our service in Hindi and
regional languages such as Marathi to overcome language barriers. As the
usage of our platform increases, we hope to increase the female work par-
ticipation rate by encouraging females to use our platform. We also hope to
improve community engagement in our project by hiring local workers
and students, with an emphasis on hiring females.




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                        25
References
Apnalaya. 2013. http://www.apnalaya.org/. Last viewed: April 22, 2016.
ArthaKranti. 2014. Vision and Mission. http://www.arthakranti.org/vision-mission.
   Last viewed April 22, 2016.
Bjarat Sanchar Niagam Limited. 2014. Connecting India. Last viewed April 22,
   2016.
Government of India. 2011. Slums in India: A Statistical Compendium. Ministry of
  Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation. Last viewed, December 10, 2015.
Indo-Asian News Services. 2013. “More Slums Dwellings with Power, Phone than
   Toilets: Census Data.” NDTV.com. March 21, 2013. Last viewed, December 11,
   2015.
Jethwani, Kamal and Saket Mishra. 2012. Providing Sustainable Livelihood for
    Women through Social Enterprise: Maid in India. The Development Review.
    Last viewed, December 1, 2015.
Mahanagar Telephone Niagam Limited Dehli (MTNL Dehli). 2016.   Customer
  SelfCare Portal: Online Book Landline, Broadband and Other Services. Last
  viewed, April 22, 2016.
Medhi, Indrani, Geeta Menon, and Kentaro Toyama. 2008. “Challenges in
  Computerized Job Search for the Developing World.” Proceeding of the Twenty-
  sixth Annual CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
  Computing Systems — CHI ‘08. Last viewed, November 12, 2015.
Rahman, Maseeh. 2013. India’s Slumdog Census Reveals Poor Conditions for One
   in Six Urban Dwellers.  The Guardian, March 22, 2014.
SPARC — Society for the Promotion of Area Resource Centers, 2014. http://www.
   sparcindia.org/aboutsparc.php. Last viewed: April 22, 2016.
World Bank. 2009. WDR 2009: Bombay Fights the Markets, and More than Half of
  Mumbai’s Residents Live in Slums. World Development Reports. Last viewed,
  December 10, 2015.
Yardley, Jim. 2011. In One Slum, Misery, Work, Politics and Hope. The New York
   Times. Print, The New York Times, December 28, 2011. Last viewed, December
   1, 2015.




26                           Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
CHAPTER 4
HerLife: A Term Life Insurance
Product for Working Mothers in
China
Team HerLife
Devika Dhawan, Senior Analyst, American Express
Sudhira Reddy, Senior Analyst, Accenture Strategy



Abstract
The life insurance market for women is large, growing, and underdevel-
oped. This is particularly true for Chinese working mothers (CWMs) who
have a need to protect their children from unanticipates financial risks and
enhance their ability to pay for long-term insurance products. The life
insurance market growth for CWMs is accelerated relative to other mar-
kets: the estimated opportunity is $10.2 billion and will grow to over $60
billion by 2030.3,4 Yet Chinese life insurance companies deliver generic life
insurance policies that only consider gender as an actuarial factor.5 The
proposed solution is a partnership with a designated Chinese life insurance
company to develop a term life insurance product called HerLife. HerLife
uniquely caters to CWMs by providing education on life insurance, requir-
ing a partner insurer to waive and fund premiums for three years based on
contingent, women-specific life events (e.g., diagnosis of malignancies of
female organs), and allowing CWMs to pay premiums suited to varying
financial needs while accommodating the insurance provider’s policies.
HerLife is also a launch pad to which other women-specific insurance
products can be added. It will enable CWMs to secure their families’ futures
while encouraging additional tailored insurance solutions for women to
take part in the insurance market.




3
    IFC et al., 2015.
4
    CIA World Factbook 2015.
5
    McKinsey & Co. 2012.



Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                       27
Problem and Context
In China, the life insurance market for women is expanding rapidly and is
largely untapped. The global market for the annual premium value of wom-
en’s life insurance is expected to nearly double from $448 billion to over
$825 billion by 2030.6 China’s growth rate is faster relative to other markets:
the life insurance market for women is $36 billion and is projected to grow
to over $205 billion by 2030 (see Figure 1).7 The drivers for this anticipated
growth are higher tertiary education of women, as well as an increase in
female labor rates and household bargaining and purchasing power.8

Figure 1 China represents a large market for life insurance
         from 2013–2030, reaching an estimated value of
         over $205 billion by 2030


                                                                              Turkey

                                                                                                                 China
                                                         Morocco

                        Mexico
                                                                                       India               Thailand

                                   Colombia
                                                                   Nigeria

                                                                                               Indonesia
                                                          Brazil
      Market Potential
           High (> $20B USD)
           Medium ($5–19.9B USD)
           Long Term (< $5B USD)




                                                        Growth from
2013 Women’s Life Insurance                             2013–2030                      2030 Women’s Life Insurance
Market Size in the 10 Focus                             (As a multiple of              Market Size in the 10 Focus
Markets (USD)                                           its 2013 size)                 Markets (USD)
China                                         $36 B             6–9X                                                  $205–315 B
Brazil                   $5 B                                     8–12X                      $41.8–64.5 B
India                      $8.6 B                            2–3X                         $17.7–27.6 B
Mexico                $2 B                                      6–9X                      $11.7–18.1 B
Indonesia             $700 M                                         10–16X              $7–11 B
Colombia              $1.1 B                                    5–8X                     $5.7–8.8 B
Turkey                $500 M                                       8–12X                 $4.4–6.7 B
Thailand              $690 M                                    5–8X                    $3.6–5.4 B
Nigeria               $76 M                                        8–13X                $621–952 B
Morocco               $7.5 M                                 2–3X                       $16.2–24.8 B

Source: IFC, Accenture, and AXA Group. “SheforShield: Insure Women to Better Protect All - Accenture.”
2015. http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/a2d8348049d01b0c82a5a3e54d141794/SheforShield_Final-
Web2015.pdf?MOD=AJPERES.


6
    IFC et al., 2015.
7
    Ibid.
8
    McKinsey & Co., 2012.


28                                                    Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
   Life insurance enables policyholders to provide financial security for
their beneficiaries in the event of their death. Three players dominate
China’s highly concentrated life insurance market with over 53 percent of
market share among them: China Life (30.4 percent), Ping An Life (13.6
percent), and New China Life (9.6).9 Given their dominant market posi-
tion, it is critical to partner with one of these firms to ensure widespread
delivery of a life insurance product.
   However, there are three gaps in serving Chinese women: non-gender
specific life insurance policies, misalignment with female needs, and low
awareness—all of which will be amplified by the growth of this consumer
base. Chinese insurance companies currently deliver blanket life insurance
policies that consider gender for actuarial rating purposes only. The indus-
try implements a mass-focused sales approach with generic products that
consumers opt out of due to misalignment with customer needs and lack
of education on life insurance.10 Mothers, for example, may be willing to
invest in life insurance to protect children but are unaware of other finan-
cial benefits. CWM represent approximately 40 percent of Chinese women
and have expendable income to protect their assets: China has a 71 percent
female labor force participation rate, one of the highest compared with
other emerging economies (see Figure 2).11,12 Both tailored life insurance
solutions and eduation on these products is unavailable to this consumer
segment. Consequently, CWMs, the key target segment of HerLife,



Figure 2 The Chinese Female Labor Force Participation
         Rate is 71% and is High Compared to Other
         Developing Economies
              71%                                                                     69%
     65%
                       59%
                                            53%
                                                       48%                 48%
                                                                 36%
                                  30%                                                         32%




     Brazil   China Colombia India Indonesia Mexico Morocco Nigeria                 Russia   Turkey

Source: Authors. [Data from: World Economic Forum. 2014. “The Global Gender Gap Report.”]



9
   Saldias & Grigaliunas, 2014.
10
    McKinsey & Co., 2012.
11
    CIA World Factbook, 2015.
12
    World Economic Forum, 2014.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                              29
represent an untapped market opportunity currently worth $10.2 billion
that will grow to over $60 billion by 2030.13,14
   Given the robust market opportunity, lack of gender-differentiated solu-
tions, and increased purchasing power of Chinese women, there is high
potential for a term life insurance product designed for and marketed to
CWMs.


Solution
The proposed solution to bridging these gaps in the growing women’s life
insurance market is a term life insurance product called “HerLife,” specifi-
cally designed for CWMs aged 25–50 years. HerLife will provide 10–15
years of term life insurance with the requirement to waive and fund the
premium for three years in the event of a pregnancy complication, birth of
a child with a congenital disorder, diagnosis of malignancies of female
organs, or death of a spouse (see Figure 3). HerLife premiums, costs, and
benefits will be iterated through a partnership with a primary Chinese life
insurance provider (e.g., China Life Insurance) to ensure adjustments
based on risk factors and desired cash-flow generation. HerLife provides a
solution for the current lack of products, awareness and education on life
insurance among CWMs.


Figure 3 HerLife Example Product Option
                                                                      Waiver of Premium
                                                                          for 3 Years




                                          Women-Specific Life Event (e.g. diagnosed
                                          with malignant cancer of the female organs)
                          Year 1     Year 2    Year 3     Year 4    Year 5    Year 6    Year 7    Year 8    Year 9    Year 10
 Premium contribution 10,000¥       10,000¥   10,000¥       0¥        0¥        0¥      10,000¥   10,000¥   10,000¥   10,000¥
 paid from HerLife
 customer
 Premium contribution                                     10,000¥   10,000¥   10,000¥
 paid from Insurance
 Partner

               Year customer pays premium               Year insurance partner waives and funds premium customer

Source: Authors. [With date from the source: HDFC Life. 2014. HDFC Life Smart Woman Plan, 2014. http://www.hdfclife.com/
women-insurance-plans/smart-woman-ulip-plan.


13
     IFC et al., 2015.
14
     CIA World Factbook, 2015.


30                                    Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
   HerLife provides a simple, step-by-step “shopping” experience focused on
meeting the CWM’s financial needs (see Figure 4). It will offer high-level as
well as optional deep-dive views of information when selecting products to
provide education and transparency to the customer before choosing cover-
age. HerLife will provide details on how the CWM’s premium was calcu-
lated, which risk factors/personal details contributed to its price, and which
factors she can modify to change the pricing and payment of her plan.
   After choosing her plan, the CWM will be given the option to select
different payment plans, including micropayments by week, to make it
more financially feasible some mothers. She can also add multiple coverage
types to her “shopping cart,” enabling her to compare policy options and
pricing. She will be able to pay for her chosen HerLife plan through an
integrated payment system that will include both Alipay and mobile text
payments. HerLife aims to be a partner to consumers throughout their
lives and to be adaptable to different life stages.
   Once women have completed the HerLife shopping journey, they will
adhere to any other standard processes and policies required by the insur-
ance partner (underwriting, background checks, exclusions, etc.). HerLife
and the insurance partner will use existing big data on CWMs and mortal-
ity to effectively model risk of life and life events and calculate price to
guarantee success.


Product Development, Roll-Out, and
Marketing
(Please refer to the Implementation Timeline in Figure 7 for additional detail)
  After developing the product, HerLife will be piloted and adjusted before
rollout to a larger consumer base. Because Chinese companies are not
required by law to provide life insurance, it is necessary to use multiple chan-
nels in addition to employers.15 In the pilot stage, HerLife will distribute the
product across four main channels: 1) web sign-up; 2) mobile messaging;
3) sales agents (preferably female); and 4) public and private employers.
1. Web Sign-Up: The web will serve as the main platform through which
   all CWMs can purchase HerLife due to the prevalence of Chinese
   females aged 19–50 who have Internet access and engage in
   e-commerce.16



15
     Livermore, 2012.
16
     China Internet Watch, 2014.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                          31
Figure 4 HerLife Customer Education and Sign-Up Interface Example
 1                                  2                                   3                                    4

     I am:                              Choose Life Stage                   Anually Earn:                        Information on Life
                                                                                                                 Insurance and How
     18–26 Years of Age                 Pregnant                            ¥ 229,000 +                          to Choose Coverage i

     27–40 Years of Age                 Have children                       ¥ 106,000 –

     40 + Years of Age                                                      ¥ 60,000

                                                                            Less than ¥ 60,000


 5                                       6                              7                             8
     Do you have any other                    Would you like to              How many years               What is your health status?
     annual costs?                            replace 100% of                do you need to
                                              this income?                   replace this for?            Average
     Business      <Enter
     Debt          Amount>                    Yes                            <Enter Here>                 Below average
     Education     <Enter                                                                                 Poor
                                              No         <Enter
     Debt          Amount>
                                                         Amount>
     Mortgage      <Enter
                   Amount>
     Other         <Enter
                   Amount>


 9                                            10                            11                   12
                                                                                                      Information Premium:
     For a higher cost are you                      Enter your                   Enter your            • Full transparency on HOW the
     interested in having your                      city of Residence            Occupation              premium was calculated
     premium waived in the                                                                             • Full transparency on WHY the
     event of following:                            <Enter Here>                 <Enter Here>
                                                                                                         premium is priced the way it is.
                                                                                                       • Education on key watch outs
     Pregnancy complications/
                                                                                                         for premiums such as process
     birth disorders
                                                                                                         of increasing and decreasing
     Diagnosis of cancer                                                                                 premiums once bought           i
     of female organs
     Death of Spouse


        13                              14                                  15                                    16
             Your Calculated                 Do you want to                                                            Your recommended
             Premium                                                             Premium Payment plan                  Insurance Coverage
                                             change anything?
                                                                                 Weekly                                Plans: Click on each
                                             Yes                                                                       to see WHY they
                                                                                 Monthly                               ﬁt your needs
                                             No
                                                                                 Anually


17                  18                       19
     Add to My           Secure                   Payment
     Cart                E-Signed                 (Alipay
                         Contract                 or Mobil)


Source: Authors.




32                                            Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
2. Text to Insure: Because 89 percent of China’s population has a mobile
   phone and China has the most mobile phone users worldwide, HerLife
   customers will be given a number they can text that will generate a
   series of text messages guiding them through the same prompts as the
   web interface.17 This will facilitate the sign-up process for busy, work-
   ing mothers and mothers who have non-smart mobile phones or lim-
   ited data.
3. Sales Agents for Pilot: To gain a critical mass of users during the pilot,
   HerLife will use currently employed agents (preferably females) from
   the chosen insurance partner (e.g., China Life) to directly sell to new
   customers. It will also provide a transition period from traditional
   dependency on agents to using mobile and/or web technology to
   obtain HerLife.18
4. Public and Private Employers: HerLife will leverage the designated
   life insurance partner to provide this product as an option in benefits
   packages for both public and private employers. Employers will be able
   to promote and educate women on HerLife and life insurance, build-
   ing HerLife’s credibility and accelerating acquisition of new users.
   For each distribution channel, the key messages for CWMs are that
HerLife is a simple solution for her to protect the future of her children,
prepare her to overcome potential future financial shocks, and empower
her to decide how much life risk to cover.
   Executing a strong pilot is critical to acquiring new customers, testing
the product, and establishing a brand. The pilot will leverage the insurance
provider’s customer data and KPIs such as the number of CWMs, their
average income, and their likelihood to invest in life insurance to identify
and target early adopters. Because of the high prevalence of employed
women in both urban and rural areas, HerLife will employ targeted mar-
keting strategies for CWMs across rural and urban China.19 In rural areas,
sales agents already employed with the insurance partner will be trained
on HerLife and go door-to-door to sell the product. In urban areas, these
agents will set up education and policy sign-up stands in locations that
experience high traffic of CWMs (e.g. children’s health providers, family/
maternal wings of hospitals, large retailers, and childcare service centers).
This pilot program will provide initial results on HerLife’s success and
allow for adjustments and re-positioning prior to the full rollout.



17
     The Statistics Portal, 2015.
18
     McKinsey & Co., 2012.
19
     Catalyst, 2012.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                       33
   After the pilot and adjustment, the product will be rolled out and mar-
keted to the full customer segment across multiple channels such as social
media, partnerships, and video advertising. These efforts are expected to
provide good results because there are a significant number of women on
social media and Chinese women trust their social networks.20 It will
leverage existing users from the pilot and social media networks to insti-
tute product credibility and visibility. Additionally, partnering with retail-
ers focused on families; healthcare providers focused on maternal care/
babies; schools; and childcare services to spread the word is crucial to
reaching the CWMs. Furthermore, because the Chinese female consumer
is increasingly drawn to beauty and retail as her earning power increases,
a partnership with a Chinese comestic brand that has broad brand appeal
will enhance the HerLife brand.21 This cosmetic brand could provide
pamphlets on HerLife at point of sale or HerLife could offer free samples
upon sign-up of the product. In return, the cosmetic company would
benefit from increased advertising, brand awareness, and sales. HerLife
can also use video advertising to demonstrate the ideal CWM with life
insurance as having a happy, healthy family and lifestyle to visually depict
the value of the product’s benefits.

Product Pricing & Costs
Once HerLife is developed, there are two potential price models based on
the type of partnership pursued. Option 1 would consist of a provider such
as China Life Insurance developing HerLife in-house and paying the req-
uisite investment and operating costs. Option 2 would entail a partnership
with China Life Insurance (or similar firm) where HerLife would be devel-
oped and managed externally. For Option 2, an external funder (poten-
tially the World Bank or a philanthropist) would pay the one-time
investment costs for the start-up and build.
   For both options, a negotiated set percentage of the annual life insurance
premium will be reinvested back into HerLife for growth and adjustments.
This will include additional investments as well as other selling, general,
administrative and operating expenses (see Figure 5).




20
     IFC et al., 2015.
21
     Ni, 2012.


34                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Figure 5 Sample HerLife Partnership and Pricing Options
                      Option 1: Insurance Provider Funds Initial Investment


                      Chinese Life Insurance Provider Funds Initial Investment


            Chinese Life Insurance Provider Sells HerLife Plan (e.g. $1,000 annually)



   Certain Percent (e.g. 30%/$300)                            Certain Percent (e.g. 70%/$700)
        Reinvested back into                                       Reinvested back into
               HerLife                                                  Chinese Life
                                                                    Insurance Provider

                         Option 2: Third Party Funds Initial Investment


                                Third Party Funds Initial Investment


       Chinese Life Insurance Provider Sells HerLife Plan (e.g. $1,000 premium annually)



   Certain Percent (e.g. 30%/$300)                            Certain Percent (e.g. 70%/$700)
        Reinvested back into                                       Reinvested back into
               HerLife                                                  Chinese Life
                                                                    Insurance Provider


                   Chinese Life Insurance Provider    HerLife Team      Third Party

Source: Authors.




Key Partners
In order for women’s life insurance to be deployed, it is critical to form
strong partnerships among several players: the HerLife team, life insurance
provider(s), employers, CWMs, marketing partners, and the World Bank.
Each stakeholder group has a different set of incentives that we believe will
make them feasible partners for HerLife (see Figure 6).

Product Timeline for Implementation
As shown in Figure 7, our prospective implementation timeline has five
phases: product development, pilot, product adjustments, full product
rollout, and ongoing metric tracking and adaptation.




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                             35
36
                                                      Figure 6 Stakeholder Analysis
                                                                                                                                             Key Stakeholders
                                                                         HerLife Team         Life Insurance            Employers                  Chinese Working Mothers              Marketing Partners      World Bank
                                                                                              Provider (s) (e.g.,                                  (CWMs)
                                                                                              China Life Insurance)
                                                       Beneﬁts           • 30% revenue         • Penetration of a new   • Inclusion of women-    • Provides tailored access to          • Positive image for    • Business plan
                                                                           from sales            market and new           speciﬁc beneﬁts in       life insurance                         promoting women’s       integrates social
                                                                         • Autonomy and          customers                compensation           • Allows for additional                  life insurance          protection and
                                                                           ownership for       • 80–90% revenue           package                  decision-making in the               • Potential revenue       provides safety nets
                                                                           new product           from sales             • Brand image              household                              from number of          for Chinese children
                                                                         • Ability to leverage • Ability to leverage      improvement            • Helps families avoid poverty           policies sold         • This plan could
                                                                           model across          model across           • Potential cost savings   by better securing and                                         integrate a
                                                                           multiple types of     multiple types of        based on calculated      smoothing the ﬁnancial                                         longitudinal study to
                                                                           insurance and         insurance and            premiums and             needs in the event of death                                    analyze the beneﬁts
                                                                           multiple countries    multiple countries       likelihood of payout                                                                    of women signing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  up for the insurance
                                                       Risks             • Revenue changes    • Integration of          • Unwillingness to         • Understanding HerLife’s            • Lack of willingness • Funding initial
                                                                           with sales           product and               partner                    product and beneﬁts                  to partner            investment
                                                                           ﬂuctuations          distribution with       • Imbalance of power       • Working women and women            • Time and monetary
                                                                         • Adaptation to        current portfolio and     in pricing                 entrepreneurs are time               investment in
                                                                           Chinese life         channels                  negotiations               constrained and have little          policy education
                                                                           insurer and                                                               time to invest in new                and selling
                                                                           Chinese                                                                   products
                                                                           government
                                                                           preferences
                                                       Risk              • Identify and      • Identify integration     • Clearly understand       • Ensure simplistic education        • Assess key desires    • Provide detailed
                                                       Mitigation          adjust potential    points, bundling,          pricing ﬂexibility and     of the product and beneﬁts           of marketing            proposal and
                                                       Strategy            revenue changes     packaging, and             necessities                are tied into the product itself     partners and tailor     investment details
                                                                           depending on        distribution that        • Communicate              • Product will have user-              partnerships to         with follow-ups
                                                                           sales ﬂuctuations   harmonizes with            detailed value             friendly and quick education         meet unique needs     • Provide monitoring




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
                                                                           prior to product    current product            proposition to incent      and sign-up will take less         • Ensure simplistic       and evaluation
                                                                           launch              oﬀerings                   employers to join the      than 10 minutes                      education and
                                                                                                                          partnership              • Leverage existing networks           payment of HerLife
                                                                                                                        • Connect and form           of working women and                 and beneﬁts are
                                                                                                                          deep relationships         women entrepreneurs to               tied into HerLife
                                                                                                                          with partner               share beneﬁts of using the
                                                                                                                          employee leadership        product
                                                      Source: Authors.
Figure 7 Proposed Timeline for Implementation
                                                                                                       5. Outgoing Metric
                                                                                                          Tracking and
            1. Production                  2. Pilot         3. Adjustment             4. Roll-Out      Product Adaptation

         Identify high, medium,
            low priority areas
           for both urban and         Run pilot in
            rural geographies         high priority
           based on potential        areas for both
               opportunity             urban and
                                          rural                                                                Adjust HerLife
                                      geographies                                                             product features
              Develop                                                                    Execute Roll-Out
            and finalize                                                                                     Readjust
                              Identify                          Adjust HerLife              Marketing          target
              product         KPIs to                          product features
           partnerships,                                                                                     markets
                             measure                                                                         based on
             prototype      and track
                and                                                                Full roll-out            penetration
                                                           Collect and          to high, medium,             and size
 Obtain      interface Train                              analyze KPIs
necessary                                                                      low priority areas
 funding                female                                                in both urban and
                       agents on              Execute                                  rural           Collect and
       Assemble         HerLife                Pilot                                                  analyze KPIs
         team                                Marketing




                                  6 Months            12 Months          15 Months                  21 Months

Source: Authors.




                       Expected Impact
                       We believe our solution will positively impact the lives of CWMs and their
                       families in three key ways. First, through the purchase of life insurance,
                       Chinese women can prepare for events that leave their children without a
                       mother, prevent the family from falling into poverty, and smooth familial
                       financial shocks. Additionally, HerLife’s product experience will provide
                       education on life insurance and its benefits to guide the CWM in making
                       the right life insurance investment. Finally, HerLife will increase women’s
                       decision-making power over their financial security, empowering them in
                       other aspects of life.
                          HerLife can also stimulate the Chinese life insurance market by increas-
                       ing demand for other insurance companies to market specifically to
                       women, providing companies that do so with an opportunity to acquire up
                       to millions of new customers and billions of dollars of sales. This can open
                       the door to the development of new insurance products and companies
                       tailored to women within and outside of China. Furthermore, several stud-
                       ies have found evidence that the development of the insurance sector leads
                       to economic growth—developing HerLife can potentially lead to greater
                       economic growth for China as well.22

                       22
                            Beck & Webb, 2003.


                       Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                                 37
Figure 8 Comparable Products in the Market
                            Life Insurance     Women-Speciﬁc        Launched in
 Insurance
                               Product           Beneﬁts           Chinese Market
 HDFC Smart                      9                   9                    8
 Woman
 JASSUR                          9                   9                   8
 ING-BOB                         8                   9                   9
 HerLife                         9                   9                   9
Source: Authors.


Comparable Product Offerings
While there is not a life insurance product tailored and delivered via mobile
technology to women in China, there are currently several life and health
insurance products targeting women offered within other emerging mar-
kets as well as health insurance products designed for women in China.
The examples below fall short in several ways: only one is offered in China
(and it does not have a life insurance component), they do not leverage
digital channels, nor have they achieved significant scale in sales. HerLife
can leverage the power of the World Bank and cooperation with a Chinese
life insurance provider to address a market gap in China and penetrate the
market for CWMs (see Figure 8).
   One example of an affordable, comparable product created and offered
by HDFC India is called “Smart Woman.” This life insurance and invest-
ment product provides a savings plan as well as coverage for key events in
a woman’s life. HDFC sold over 4,000 “Smart Woman” policies within the
first month and has experienced strong continued sales within India.23
Similarly, JASSUR, a woman-owned and operated life insurance firm in
Morocco, provides tailored insurance advice as well as sales training to
incorporate women into their sales force as agents. This model has proven
successful and now approximately 50 percent of its agents are women.24
   In China, there are insurers targeting women for select health insurance
policies. For example, ING-BOB has launched an insurance policy for
women, but similar to most insurance products in the Chinese market, it
is tailored to women for health instead of life insurance. It includes insur-
ance for some medical conditions specific to women (e.g. pregnancy and
fertility costs) but lacks significant differentiations toward women with
their life insurance offering.25

23
     HDFC, 2014.
24
     IFC et al., 2015.
25
     Towers Watson, 2012.


38                                Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Figure 9 Potential Challenges and Mitigation Strategies
 Potential Challenge                        Mitigation Strategy
 China has speciﬁc market regulations       1. Primary and secondary market research on
 for pricing, monitoring, and disbursing       dynamics of Chinese market and limitations
 life insurance policies.                      on delivery and rollout of HerLife
                                            2. Potentially assemble a team of experts on the
                                               Chinese market to help identify the most
                                               eﬀective strategy for market entry and
                                               pitching/selling to key partners in China
 Low awareness is a signiﬁcant              1. HerLife’s marketing plan and product
 challenge to the success of the               experience focuses on educating women on
 product—even older, more educated             the beneﬁts of life insurance
 women fail to understand the beneﬁts       Please refer to the product description and
 of life insurance and how to obtain it.a   marketing plan for additional detail.
 Chinese women generally do not buy         1. Leverage the designated insurance partner’s
 insurance outside of their employers’         current delivery of life insurance policies to
 oﬀerings due to insuﬃcient assets             employers of CWMs
 and/or inexperience with the ﬁnancial      2. Identify and form partnerships with high
 cost of loss. b                               potential employers and oﬀer HerLife as a
                                               preferred life insurance plan for CWMs. Create
                                               a compelling value proposition for both foreign
                                               and domestic employers that includes a better
                                               brand image and more productive employees
                                            3. Partner with 3rd party employment agencies in
                                               China to oﬀer HerLife to employers
 There is an imbalance of power in          1. Leverage potential network and expert sales
 negotiations between the HerLife              team to conduct due diligence as well as
 team and potential Chinese life               demonstrate the ﬁnancial feasibility and
 insurance partners, which may                 beneﬁcial outcome for the insurance partner
 negatively impact the partnership.         2. Form relationships with key decision makers
                                               at partner ﬁrms
Note:
a
  IFC et al., 2015.
b
  Ibid.




Potential Challenges
HerLife recognizes four primary challenges: 1) a potential gap in knowl-
edge of specific market regulations in China; 2) low awareness of life insur-
ance products among CWMs; 3) the fact that CWMs generally purchase
welfare benefits through employers; and 4) the imbalance of power in
negotiations between the HerLife team and the designated Chinese life
insurance provider. The HerLife team has addressed these challenges and
provided mitigation strategies for each challenge in Figure 9.




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                            39
Future Outlook
The future outlook for tapping into the global market potential of women’s
insurance products is bright, with the opportunity for life insurance esti-
mated to be over $800 billion by 2030.26 Accordingly, this product can be
expanded internationally to secure women’s life insurance markets in other
growing markets such as Brazil and Mexico.
   Additionally, while this initial plan requires at least one insurance part-
ner, the HerLife team would hope to continue developing partnerships
with multiple insurance providers with the objective of delivering life
insurance catered to female consumers. HerLife is also a launch pad to
which other types of insurance (e.g. health/car) can potentially be added
and sold. The expected global growth for all types of women’s insurance is
estimated to double from approximately $770 billion now to over $1.4 tril-
lion in 2030.27 In the future, HerLife can potentially serve as a vehicle to
help a woman choose insurance across all aspects of her life and encourage
the entry of new insurance solutions for women into the market.
   Overall, women’s life insurance is an enormous and largely untapped
market thus far both in China and globally, and we anticipate very positive
growth for both HerLife and the market in the future.


References
Beck, Thorsten, and Ian Webb. 2003. “Economic, Demographic, and Institutional
   Determinants of Life Insurance Consumption across Countries.” World Bank
   and International Insurance Foundation.
Catalyst. 2012. Catalyst Quick Take: Women in the Labor Force in China. 2012.
   http://www.catalyst.org/knowledge/women-labor-force-china
Central Intelligence Agency. 2015. CIA World Factbook. https://www.cia.gov/
   library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ch.html
Chinese Female Internet Users Insight. 2014. http://www.chinainternetwatch.
   com/10199/female-internet-users-insight
HDFC Life. 2014. HDFC Life Smart Woman Plan, 2014. http://www.hdfclife.com/
  women-insurance-plans/smart-woman-ulip-plan




26
     Ibid.
27
     Ibid.


40                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
IFC, Accenture, and AXA Group. “SheforShield: Insure Women to Better Protect
   All - Accenture.” 2015. http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/a2d8348049d01b-
   0c82a5a3e54d141794/SheforShield_Final-Web2015.pdf?MOD=AJPERES
Livermore, Adam. 2012. China Briefing. “Mandatory Social Welfare Benefits for
   Chinese Employees.” 2012. http://www.china-briefing.com/news/2012/02/21/
   mandatory-social-welfare-benefits-for-chinese-employees.html
McKinsey & Co. “Growth Under Uncertainty.” 2012. http://www.mckinsey.com/~/
  media/mckinsey/dotcom/client_service/financial%20services/latest%20
  thinking/reports/growth_under_uncertainty.ashx
Ni, Vivian. 2018. Consumption Trends and Targeting China’s Female Consumer. 2012.
    http://www.china-briefing.com/news/2012/03/08/consumption-trends-and-tar-
    geting-chinas-female-consumer.html
Saldias, Carola and Linas Grigaliunas. 2014. “China’s Insurance market Overview:
   Characteristics, Trends, Challenges and Opportunities for Foreign Insurers.”
   Dagong Europe Credit Rating.
The Statistics Portal. 2015. Number of Mobile Cell Phone Subscribers in China
   from November 2014 to November 2015 (In Millions). http://www.statista.
   com/statistics/278204/china-mobile-users-by-month/
Towers Watson. 2012. “The Chinese Insurance Market.”
World Economic Forum. 2014. “The Global Gender Gap Report.”




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                           41
CHAPTER 5
Innovative Floating Rate Green
Bond for the Reduction of Air
Pollution in China—An Application
to the Shanxi Province’s Case
Team Five out of Five
Jiangjie Qiu, The University of Hong Kong, Class of 2018
Sol Kim, The University of Hong Kong, Class of 2018
Xiaoming Zhong, The University of Hong Kong, Class of 2017
Junzi Wang, The University of Hong Kong, Class of 2018
Xinyue Huang, The University of Hong Kong, Class of 2018



Abstract
Green Bonds combine fixed income financial instruments with the need to
raise capital for low-carbon or green projects—assets or business activities
and an environmental benefit.1 With rising capital needs for funding green
projects, a growing investor focus on green financial instruments, and
mature corporations’ awareness regarding social responsibilities, the vol-
ume of total green bonds has increased constantly in the past few years.
There are many successes in financing sustainable programs and promot-
ing green initiatives in a global context. However, China, both a major air
polluter and a country that suffers from deterioration of air quality, still
lags far behind in the development of green bonds.2
   Shanxi province is among the regions most severely affected by air pol-
lution. This area, the main provider of coal resources in China, is highly
dependent on revenue from coal and mining and their affiliated indus-
tries, and is exposed to devastating air pollution challenges. However, the
deceleration of economic growth and consequential lack of government
funding hinder the local government’s ability to support sufficient invest-
ment in air pollution reduction initiatives, especially within high-carbon
emission industries.



1
    KPMG International, 2015.
2
    Kidney, Beate, & Oliver, 2015.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                      43
   Our proposal recommends the issuance of green bonds aimed at
financing air pollution reduction initiatives, including but not limited to
technological upgrades, reconstruction of industrial composition, and air
purification strategies in Shanxi province. The local government will be
responsible for setting the coupon rate and face value and cooperating
with professional organizations in developing selection criteria and pro-
cesses to access eligible green programs. The key measurements and char-
acteristics of each bond product will be released into the market in the
same way as conventional bonds, to gain credit ratings and scrutiny. One
of the most notable features of the bond is that the annually paid coupon
rate will fluctuate negatively in correlation with specific performance
indicators. Air quality improvement will lead to a more moderate coupon
payment, while low effectiveness will result in a higher payment burden
for the borrower. We believe that by using green bonds and linking the
coupon rate with an Air Quality Index (AQI), the capital can be raised
with the purpose of improving air quality while incentivizing the local
government to maximize the effectiveness of the fund. Investors will also
benefit from constant payments that are no less than conventional bonds
with the same maturity.


Problem and Context: Chinese Green
Bonds Market and Air Pollution
The Global Market for Green Bonds
Green bonds have developed as a new investment channel that promotes
sustainable development. It has grown speedily since first issuance in
2007. By 2015, global green bonds issuance has increased to more than
US$40 billion.3 There are two interesting properties about the current
global green bond market. First, development banks and corporations
remain the major issuers, while the role of local governments is limited
(see Figure 1), indicating that local governments have great potential to
enhance their impact in green bonds markets. Secondly, with diversity in
the category of climate-aligned bonds, transportation and energy take up
the largest percentage (Figure 2). Projects targeting waste and pollution,
of significant concern to citizens and media in many countries, have a
disproportionately small share of investment.



3
    Bloomberg News, 2015.


44                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Figure 1 Trend of Major Issuers of Green Bonds, 2012-2015


                     20

                     15



       US$ Billion
                     10
                                                                                            Development Bank
                                                                                           Corporate
                      5
                                                                                        Muni/Provincial/City
                          0                                                         Bank
                                    2012                                          ABS
                                              2013
                                                          2014
                                                                      2015

                              ABS      Bank    Muni/Provincial/City   Corporate    Development Bank


Source: Climate Bonds Initiative, Bonds and Climate Change: The State of the Market in 2015..



Figure 2 Climate-aligned Bonds by Themes, 2015
                                         Waste & Pollution Water
                          Buildings & Industry 1.2%        0.5%
                                  3.3%                          Agriculture & Forestry
                                                                         0.4%
                          Multi-Sector
                               4.7%


                                               Energy
                                                19.8%


                                                        Low Carbon Transport
                                                               70.1%




Source: Climate Bonds Initiative, Bonds and Climate Change: The State of the Market in 2015..




Air Pollution in Shanxi Province
Shanxi Province is located in a belt of coalmines in northern China, and
has recently experienced stagnation in its economic growth. In 2015, the
GDP growth rate of Shanxi was only 3.1 percent, ranked second to last
among 31 provinces in the country.4 The industrial structure of Shanxi
Province relies heavily on the coal mining industry (Figure 3). The slump

4
    Sina Finance, 2016.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                                            45
Figure 3 Value Added of Industry by Sector in Shanxi
         Province, 2013
        Production and
      Supply of Electricity,
      Heat, Gas and Water
              7.9%



                                                                             Coal
                                                                            Mining
                                           Mining                           57.6%
            Manufacturing                  60.7%
               31.4%




                                                                   Others      Ferrous
                                                                    0.6%     Metals Mining
                                                                                 2.5%

Source: Shanxi Province Statistics Year Book, 2014.




in the mining industry and the decrease in the price of coal are principal
reasons for its economic stagnation.
   In addition, Shanxi Province suffers from severe air pollution. Scholars
have studied how coal mining and coal-related industries result in severe
air pollution in the region.5 The coal mining industry in Shanxi Province
has led to ecological losses estimated to be 487.5 billion yuan since the
1970s.6 Atmospheric pollution in the province is among the most severe in
China (Figure 3). The major air pollutant indexes include sulfur oxides,
nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, volatile organic compounds, particu-
late matter, and ozone.
   Air pollution in Shanxi Province not only results in ecological damage
but also widespread public and individual health impacts. According to a
report issued by the World Bank and Institute for Health Metrics and
Evaluation, ambient particulate matter air pollution is one of the leading
causes of premature death and disability in East Asia and Pacific.7 In 2013,
Brauer et al. found that air quality in China was largely influenced by out-
door air pollution from burning coal, resulting in approximately 366,000
deaths in China.8 Hazardous air pollution has pressured government insti-
tutions to improve the quality of the local environment.

5
  Haibin, Liu, and Liu Zhenling, 2010; Also see Xie Kechang, Li Wenying and Wei Zhao, 2010.
6
  Luna Lin, 2013.
7
  Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, Human Development Network, The World
Bank. 2013.
8
  Brauer M, et al., 2013.


46                                        Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Figure 4 Map of Areas under Air Pollution based on
         Monitoring Data of PM2.5




Source: Li, Li, and Dong-Jun Liu, 2014.




   The local government has realized the urgent need to resolve the issue
and taken several steps to do so. In 2013, Shanxi Provincial Government
released the Letter of Responsibility for Air Pollution Prevention and
Control to prefecture-level cities and a corresponding implementation
plan.9 This effort has achieved only limited effectiveness, due in part to
dependence of the Chinese energy sector on coal.
   The Shanxi government has promised to shut down polluting factories
and to close a large number of illegal mines, but no action has been taken
to close the coal-burning power plants in the region that are responsible
for more than half of the pollution, since coal produces electricity and runs
industries, most notably supplying the capital Beijing.10 Additionally, the
local government lacks sufficient funds to enforce its environmental policy
and boost green industry. Pollution control equipment is expensive, and
once installed in factories, it is costly to maintain and expends a great deal
of electricity that could have been sold to consumers.

9
     CCIED 2013.
10
     Bradsher and Barboza, 2006.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                        47
Emerging Green Bonds Market in China
Chinese policy-makers have placed more emphasis on environmental pro-
tection since former Chairman Hu Jintao proposed the notion of “scientific
development.” Developing the green bonds market is a promising channel
to fund China’s pollution-reduction policy. China, as an important player
in the global investment market, has recently taken a great step forward.
The Green Finance Committee of the China Society for Finance and
Banking issued its “2015 Directory of Supporting Green Bonds Projects,”
aimed at improving China’s ecological environment and alleviating pres-
sure on resources.11 At same time, the Central Bank officially announced
the introduction of green financial bonds in the inter-bank bond market.12
Following the policy encouragement, Shanghai Pudong Development
Bank issued China’s first domestic green bond on January 2016 and raised
20 billion yuan.13 China’s steps to develop a green bond market reflect
China’s demand for capital to build its environmental protection cause.


Solution
To address the issue, our proposal suggests the issuance of new kinds of
green bonds which integrate the profitability of the bonds’ products, the
essence of sustainability empowerment, and the innovative idea of a float-
ing coupon rate that is correlated to air pollution in the form of the AQI
standard (Air Quality Index). According to our research, similar bonds
have not yet been offered in China or other regions of the world.
   Our proposal creates a new model that we believe can address the finan-
cial needs of investors and the environmental concerns of stakeholders.
First, in line with the intrinsic characteristics of traditional bonds, green
bonds provide investors with constant, low-risk, and secure yield payments
and simultaneously fuel green projects in need of sufficient financial sup-
port for the relative long term in Shanxi province.14 Second, because green
bonds are targeted at air pollution reduction programs, investors’ portfolios
are diversified toward more socially responsible purposes. This innovative
financial instrument adheres to the World Bank ideal to “make public funds
available earlier for development via the issuance of bonds.”15 Additionally,


11
   Green Finance Committee of China Society for Finance and Banking, “Directory of
Supporting Green Bonds Projects.” December 22, 2015.
12
   Kong Yuling, 2015.
13
   Bloomberg, 2016.
14
   Gustke, C.. 2013.
15
   World Bank, 2015.


48                            Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
local people and industries will be the beneficiaries of improvements in air
quality and sustainable resilience. Third, the floating rate, which is the most
innovative aspect of our model, will fully reflect the outcome of investments
and government execution capability in terms of the coupon rate. For
example, if a ten-year bond fails to fulfill its initial air pollution goal in one
year, the government will bear more coupon payment in the form of a high-
her coupon rate in that particular year. However, if the government suc-
ceeds in meeting the criteria the next year, the coupon will decline to the
level stated when issued. This method avoids bureaucracy, corruption, and
misuse of the fund, maximizing the externalities of the capital.
   There were similar bonds issued by local or central government previ-
ously, which leads to less concerns regarding the issuing process. However,
the selection of eligible corporations and the validity of the AQI measure-
ments may need more expertise and scrutiny from the World Bank, aca-
demic institutions, and other professional NGOs

An Implementation Plan in Shanxi
Our innovative green bonds target air pollution reduction programs, includ-
ing but not limited to enhancement of energy efficiency, transformation of
traditional fuel sources, and reconstruction of environmental-friendly
source structures. Stakeholders include local government, central govern-
ment, corporations, and World Bank or other professional institutions with
expertise in the domain of air pollution alleviation or evaluation. During the
issuance of the bonds and using the money, the abovementioned stakehold-
ers will play different roles to guarantee the goals of the bonds are reached.
   There are three broad stages in our implementation plan: 1) compile selec-
tive criteria for green bonds recipients and evaluate potential recipients; 2)
formulate systematic air quality indicators to which the coupon rate is cor-
related and issue the bonds; and 3) evaluate the effectiveness of the local gov-
ernment in combating air pollution and pay the coupon payments annually.
Stage One: Compilation of Selective Criteria and Evaluation of
Potential Recipients
In order to select eligible corporations and valuable programs, the local
government, the Ministry of Environment of China and the World Bank
could compile the criteria. Since the selection procedures cover too many
technical details that go beyond the financial spectrum, our proposal does
not address this perspective in detail. Nevertheless, we suggest that the
local government seek more expertise from external organizations, and
adopt pre-existing guidelines for these procedures, which will enhance the
objectivity and standardization of the projects.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                            49
   The Shanxi government could negotiate with the regulators in bond
issuance, specifically the Chinese Ministry of Finance and People’s Bank of
China, to guarantee that all steps in setting criteria and selecting recipients
are conducted within a legal framework. Since the local government has an
identified need to finance air pollution reduction, and since this is also of
concern to the central government, getting permission for issuance should
not be a primary challenge at this stage.
   Since the Shanxi government has experience in issuing similar financial
instruments and has a comparative advantage, as well as administrative
power, in getting critical corporations’ information, the local government
should play a leading role in collecting data on the volume of the invest-
ments and the validity of each program’s expected outcomes as a result the
financial support. The recipient corporation should also be responsible for
providing objective data and relevant information to accurately evaluating
the actual need for green bonds and the possible air pollution improve-
ment it can generate as a result of the investment.
   The World Bank, the Ministry of Environmental Protection of the
People’s Republic of China (which is the ministerial governmental organ
responsible for environmental issues), and other NGOs should be
involved at this stage. Their expertise will be effective in developing quan-
titative, systematic, and standardized methods to assess the “greenness”
and applicability of the programs. Pre-existing criteria, such as China
Banking Regulatory Commission or the International Climate Bond
Standards Scheme can also be used as references. It is our belief that the
role of NGOs and the World Bank should not be ignored; their expertise
and neutrality will add creditworthiness to the bonds. It will be necessary
for the local government to be open and transparent about the accessibil-
ity and accuracy of data.
   After compilation of the criteria, the local government should seek eligi-
ble corporations and relevant programs within Shanxi. Since the coal and
mining industry comprises over 30 percent of the provincial fixed invest-
ment (see Figure 5), there will be a huge and long-term demand for the
bonds. We emphasize that the Shanxi government should be compliant to
all previously set criteria.
Stage Two: Formulate Systematic Air Quality Indicators to
which the Bonds are Correlated and Issue the Bonds
According to our research, there is no alternative air pollution indicator
other than AQI to measure and objectively scale air quality. The index is
globally recognized, which means that it will be understood by interna-
tional investors. However, the Shanxi Province Environmental
Monitoring Center, an Institutional Organization subject to the


50                           Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Figure 5 Shanxi 2015 Total Investment in Fixed Assets by
         Economic Sector (rural households investment and
         trans-provincial investment are included) (Unit:
         100 million)
                                                        Farming, Forestry, Animal Husbandry
                       Others                           and Fishery
 Banking and Insurance    17%                           11%
                    0%                                              Mining
                                                                    10%
       Real Estate Trade
                     23%                                            Construction
                                                                    0%
     Information Transmission,                                      Manufacturing
      Software and Information                                      18%
           Technology Services
                            1%                                   Production and Supply of
                                                                 Electricity, Heat, Gas and Water
      Hotel and Catering Services                                10%
                               1%      Transport,    Wholesale and
                                 Storage and Post    Retail Trade
                                              6%     3%

Source: Shanxi Economic Statistics Year Book 2015.




guidance of Shanxi Environmental Protection Agency measures and
announces the index. The existence of the conflicts of interests between
the government interests and the conduct of air quality measurement
make the index more vulnerable to human manipulation.
  We will deploy two methods to maintain the objectivity of the index.

1.   Involvement of a third-party partner
   The Shanxi government should involve third party institutions, includ-
ing the World Bank and Climate Bonds Initiative, in the daily scrutiny and
report of the AQI. The methods, ranges and veracity of the index should be
guaranteed under the cooperative framework between the government,
governmental organizations, and NGOs to minimize possible manipula-
tion of the index.
2. Cooperation with national-level environmental agencies
   In the administrative structure, the Ministry of Environmental
Protection of People’s Republic of China and the Shanxi government
should share parallel status. Direct cooperation with the ministry will cre-
ate more impetus for objective and professional publicity, and avoid pos-
sible conflicts of interest.
   After settling the technical details, the bonds will be marketed and priced
in the same way as conventional bonds. Financial institutions, such as
credit rating agencies or investment banks could evaluate the bonds and
give specific ratings according to analysis done beforehand. Since these


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                            51
bonds will retain the financial characteristics of conventional bonds, we
believe they can also be traded in the secondary market in accordance with
supply and demand in that domain.
Stage Three: Evaluate Effectiveness – Post Issuance Tracking
and Monitoring
To guarantee the effective use of the funds raised by green bond issuance,
a strict monitoring mechanism will be constructed at different levels. The
Shanxi government will need to publish periodic reports of the impact of
green bonds. Reporting needs to satisfy the requirements stated in the
International Capital Market Association’s Green Bond Principles 2015,
which calls for full disclosure of the selection of eligible projects, the use
of proceeds, and commitments of different sectors and regions. Since
green bonds will primarily fund projects related to waste management
and energy efficiency, the reduction in industrial waste and energy con-
sumption should be specified in the report.
   In addition to the overall report on the impact of green bonds, proj-
ect-specific reports are also desirable. Detailed allocation of funding and
environmental indicators such as sulfur oxides, nitrogen oxides, and partic-
ulate matter will be provided in separate reports that summarize the impact
of one type or multiple types of green projects. Third-party audits from the
National Environmental Monitoring Centre or Shanxi Environmental
Monitoring Station will be involved to ensure the accuracy and the objec-
tiveness of the reporting. The transparency and integrity in reporting and
monitoring is the key to guarantee the smooth functioning and improve the
effectiveness of green bonds. All the reports, publications, and documents
will be made accessible to the public upon bond issuance.

Hypothetical Cash Flow Under Diﬀerent Scenarios
Assumptions:
a. Issuance of green bonds with 1,000 face value, 5 percent coupon rate,
   paid annually, 10 year to maturity
b. Upper limit for coupon rate: 8 percent, the rate will be floated by 1
   percent each year
c. Annual Air Quality Goal: 80 percent of days within a year with air
   quality index within the domain of “ Excellent” to “ Good”




52                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Table 1 Projected Cash Flow of Green Bond
Year   Coupon Rate        Coupon Payment       Scenario
1             3%                    30         Government reaches air quality goal
2             3%                    30         Government reaches air quality goal
3             4%                    40         Government fails to reach air quality goal
4             5%                    50         Government fails to reach air quality goal
5             6%                    60         Government fails to reach air quality goal
 6            7%                    70         Government fails to reach air quality goal
 7            8%                    80         Government fails to reach air quality goal
 8            7%                    70         Government reaches air quality goal
 9            6%                    60         Government reaches air quality goal
 10           5%                    50         Government reaches air quality goal
 10           N.A                1,000         Principal Payment




Beneﬁts and Risks
Table 2. Beneﬁts and Risks to Issuers and Creditors
              Local & Central Government
 Categories                                                   Green Investors (Creditors)
              (Green Bond Issuers)
 Beneﬁts      • Bond issuers can be leaders in what will      • Green Bonds issued by the
                become a huge market.                           government has less
              • The government can demonstrate its              default-risk
                commitment to social responsibility           • Institutional investors can
                objectives and green credentials to citizens    address environmental,
                and investors.                                  social, governance (ESG)
              • Large-size bonds are more attractive to         mandates and corporate
                investors: Green bond allows issuers to         social responsibility (CSR)
                integrate diﬀerent environmental assets,        initiatives.
                such as solar, water and pollution cleanup    • Privilege oﬀered by the
                investments into a larger bond.                 government may be
              • Green bonds provide a technology-neutral        available to green investors
                tool to encourage the ﬂow of capital to green   (e.g. tax advantages)
                projects by providing support through
                regulation, tax beneﬁts, and credit
                enhancements.
              • Issuing green bonds costs less than
                implementing the government’s direct
                policy in reducing air pollution.
              • Issuing green bonds minimizes the
                magnitude of ineﬃciency that can be caused
                when the government intervenes to
                eradicate air pollution.


                                                                      (continued on next page)




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                         53
Table 2. Beneﬁts and Risks to Issuers and Creditors                              (continued)

             Local & Central Government
Categories                                                    Green Investors (Creditors)
             (Green Bond Issuers)
Risks        • The government’s criteria of identifying the   • Because the green bond
               green project may not be universally             market is relatively a small
               accepted among others                            market, in which the
             • When the investment is not “green,” the          investors hold the bonds
               media reputation of the government will          until maturity, it lacks
               decrease                                         liquidity
             • The government’s administration                • Investors may not be able to
               expenditures for managing the increased          track use of the money
               amount of green bonds being issued               when the malfunctioning of
                                                                transparent reporting
                                                                occurs
                                                              • Green bonds have relatively
                                                                low yield
                                                              • There is a lack of suﬃcient
                                                                complex research available
                                                                to make educated
                                                                investment decisions




Expected impact
Pollution Alleviation
By providing sufficient funding for green projects, we expect an observable
environmental improvement in the local community. A reduction in waste,
gas emissions, and industrial sewage will be a direct outcome of the green
bonds. The proceeds of green bonds will be primarily used to control the
emission of sulfur oxides and nitrogen oxides as well as provide industrial
wastewater treatment. The green projects will directly target the source
points of pollution, providing financial resources and equipment necessary
to reduce the level of pollutants in industrial discharge, leading to an
improvement in air and water quality in Shanxi province. With more finan-
cial support in pollution reduction mechanisms for controlling industrial
waste discharge, overall pollution will be reduced and environmental quality
can be improved.

Energy Eﬃciency Improvement
In addition to the alleviation of pollution, green bonds will contribute to
energy efficiency in Shanxi province by supporting energy-saving pro-
grams and the construction of new energy plants. The proceeds of the
bonds can be allocated to the construction of wind and solar power plants
as well as the installation of energy-saving equipment. As reported in the


54                               Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
“List of investment projects approved by the government of Shanxi prov-
ince” (2015)16 the government invested a substantial amount (0.93 trillion
RMB) in the construction of a solar and wind power plant in 2015. A num-
ber of energy efficient programs are also in process. Programs that pro-
mote the combined use of heat and electric power, clean conversion of
natural gas, and installation of energy-efficient facilities are all the projects
that need sizable funding. Our green bond initiative can help the govern-
ment finance the projects and achieve desirable energy-saving outcomes.
The improvement in energy efficiency is expected to generate a number of
positive impacts in a variety of production activities, including resource-ex-
ploitation, combustion of fuel and coal, electricity generation, and trans-
portation of mineral resources. The result will be a significant reduction in
energy consumption and numerous benefits to the industry sector in
Shanxi province.
Transformation of Economic Structure
The impact of green bonds involves improvement of the environment, as
well as the transformation of Shanxi’s economic structure. The abundant
mineral resources in Shanxi enable it to become the largest exporter of coal
and coal-generated electricity in China. Shanxi’s economic growth relies
heavily on its mining industry and thermal power, with coal mining and
metallurgy industries comprising more than 50 percent of the total output in
2015.17 However, over mining results in the gradual exhaustion of coal
resources. A slumping mining industry brings massive layoffs and slows
economic growth.18 The golden age of the mining industry has ended and
Shanxi needs to seek new driving forces to boost its economy.
   The issuance of green bonds can accelerate its economic transformation
from an economy based on exporting raw materials and traditional energy to
a modern economic center with a diversified, polymeric, and comprehensive
energy base. Through financing green projects that promote the development
and use of wind and solar power plants, our bond progressively transfers the
economic structure of Shanxi and helps it achieve sustainable economic
development. This is also in line with the aim of the Chinese central govern-
ment to upgrade the energy consumption structure and boost the economic
transformation of China. Shanxi’s initiative to use green financing to drive
economic transformation can serve as a reference and exert significant
impact for the reform and development of the whole country. 19


16
     Shanxi Government, 2015a.
17
     Shanxi Government, 2015b.
18
     Q. Q. Chen, 2016.
19
     Xinhua News, 2015.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                           55
Improvement of Government’s Financing Ability
Through the issuance of green bonds, Shanxi’s government can obtain a
stable source of funding for environmental projects and expand its envi-
ronmental practice. Bonds that specifically target green projects guarantee
a minimum amount of money invested in environmental programs and
reduces illiquidity risks. In addition, energy conservation and pollution
reduction programs usually have long cycles. To finance projects with long
cycles, banks and governments leverage funds using maturity mismatch,
which increases the interest risks and limits their ability to manage liabil-
ity.20 Issuing green bonds that are tailored made for green projects signifi-
cantly reduces the risks of asset-liabilities mismatch. Green bonds provide
a stable source of funding and risk reduction for the government, thereby
improving the government’s ability to finance green projects.
Achievement of Government’s Development Goals and
Increasing its Credibility
As stated in the 13th five-year plan of Shanxi, many efforts are needed to
meet the environmental requirements set by the central government. The
government needs to tackle the problems of excessive pollution and the
inefficient use of energy. Since there is a distinct parallel between the pre-
viously discussed benefits of green bonds and the development objectives
of Shanxi’s government, green bonds can effectively help the government
reach its objectives.
   Evaluation of the government’s performance is largely based on its ability
to meet its development goals, meaning that greater progress on the envi-
ronmental and economic goals contributes to a better reputation for the
government. Moreover, Chinese citizens will have a better perception of
Shanxi’s government because of its commitment to environmental protec-
tion. Combined with improved transparency brought by the establishment
of a monitoring system, the credibility of the government will also be
improved. From the government’s perspective, green bonds can bring tre-
mendous benefits by helping meet regional development goals and improv-
ing the government’s image.
Impact on the Global Green Bond Market
The issuance of the proposed green bond does not simply enlarge the over-
all size of the global green bond market, but provides an innovative model
for the structuring of green bonds. Distinct from the traditional green
bond, the proposed green bond offers a floating return based on both
financial and environmental indicators. The idea of “green” is further
incorporated into the design of the product, combining the concepts of

20
     People’s Bank of China, 2015.


56                                   Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
                     “green credit” and “financial innovation”. The creative coupon rate design
                     can serve as a model for global green bond issuers, who aim to improve the
                     environment at a low cost of financing. The flexibility of our products
                     makes it adaptable for a wide range of markets.

                     Timeline
                     Considering the extent of Shanxi’s environmental issues and their current
                     severity, an immediate start is strongly suggested. However, due to the com-
                     plex implementation process and imperfect institutional mechanism, the
                     first stage can last for two years. It is understandable that this time period is
                     still too limited to build a well-functioning mechanism, however, it is nec-
                     essary and possible to settle all necessary preparations for issuing a new
                     financial instrument, such as negotiations between the issuer and under-
                     writers, searching for independent auditors and other factors mentioned
                     above. It is understood that such functionality will be constantly improved
                     upon during the bond cycle.
                        Official issuance would likely be feasible in 2018, after a two-year prepa-
                     ration cycle. To allocate bond income and coupon payments more appro-
                     priately, bonds should be issued once every year with evenly distributed
                     amounts by combining bonds with different maturities. Considering that
                     most investments’ ranges are relatively long, bonds with 10 or more years
                     to maturity are preferred.
                        Coupon payments are started after one year and are regularly accumu-
                     lated during the following nine years as the number of issued bonds increases.
                     In 2028, after 10 years of paying coupons and investing in greenness, the
                     government will need to repay par values with income generated from their
                     investments. At the same time, governments should invest in profitable
                     green projects to generate future cash flows and address environmental pol-
                     lution. Thereafter, during 2028–2038, governments can ideally reach a
                     breakeven point and finally pay off all debts at the end of 2038.

Figure 6 Projected Timeline
2018: First public issue, start investing in greeness   2028: First payment on par values
Related parties: government, corporations, auditor      Related parties: government, purchaser, corporation, auditor


                  2018–2028: Pay coupons,
                  invest in green projects

                                                              2028–2038: Pay par values,
                                                              proﬁt from invested projects

2016: Start preperation                                                               2028: Payoﬀ and breakeaven
Related parties: government, investment bank,                                         Related parties: government,
auditor, potential purchaser                                                          purchaser, auditor


                     Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                                         57
Comparable Product Offerings
The concept of green bonds is not a new one. Introduced by World Bank in
2008, green bonds have been effective financing tools for worldwide envi-
ronmental development. The issuance of water bonds by Asian Development
Bank, floating rate green bonds by World Bank, and climate bonds by
International Finance Corporation (IFC) are all successful examples.21 The
green bond market in China also started attracting the attention of inves-
tors last year. The Agriculture Bank of China (ABC) issued a green bond
targeting air pollution and energy efficiency in October 2015,22 soon fol-
lowed by a green bond issuance by Shanghai Pudong Development Bank
in February 2016 that successfully raised 20 billion RMB to support envi-
ronmental protection and clean energy.
  Although our products are different in terms of structure and issuing
purposes from these green bond products, we will review two similar
products: IFC’s Green offshore renminbi bond and the green bond by ABC
for the reference of our target investors.

IFC Green Oﬀshore Renminbi Bond
IFC issued RMB 500 million ($80.29 million) of green bonds in March
2014 to finance Chinese climate-friendly investments. It was the first
multilateral green bond in the Chinese markets and was listed on the
London Stock Exchange.23 The bond aims to reduce greenhouse gas emis-
sions by updating transmission facilities, installing solar and wind power,
and providing funds for technology regarding efficient energy usage. By
fiscal year 2015, the bond had financed climate-related investments of $3
billion a year.

Green bond of the Agriculture Bank of China (ABC)
The Agriculture Bank of China (ABC) raised US$ 1 billion in Oct 2015.24
The proceeds of the bond will be used on both domestic and foreign invest-
ments in renewable energy, waste management, transportation and so on.
25
   The issuance included US$ 400 million of 3-year bond (at 2.125%), US$
500 million of 5-year bond (at 2.773%) and US$ 94.49 million (600 million
RMB, at the exchange rate on the date of issuance) of 2-year bond (at

21
     GoldmanSachs, 2014.
22
     Chan, 2015.
23
     Klöpfer, 2014.
24
     China Daily. (2016). Green bonds issued for renewable energy,
25
     London Stock Exchange, 2015.


58                                 Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
4.15%). These bond were rated as A1/A/A by Fitch and faced a 4 times
oversubscription.26 This implies an increasing interest of domestic inves-
tors and the confidence of green bond market. By January 2016, around 40
projects were approved under the selection of ABC green bond, with total
loan of about US$ 1.52 billion (10 billion RMB, at the exchange rate of 18
Jan, 2016).27
   Using green bonds together with other financing tools, IFC was esti-
mated to finance the climate-related investments of US$ 3 billion by the
fiscal year of 2015.


Potential Challenges
In addition to challenges mentioned in the section regarding the
Implementation Plan, another potential challenge is the mechanics of
attracting investors to consider green bonds. Green bonds have drawbacks
that may reduce investment incentives of investors. First, there are no
worldwide, unified criteria to evaluate the performance of green projects.
Sometimes it is difficult for investors to distinguish how green a project
really is. Second, green bonds generally have relatively low yields. According
to Climate Change Initiative, the majority yield is less than three percent,28
which may lead investors from green bonds to alternative financial prod-
ucts. Moreover, a common disadvantage of bonds is that they also lack
liquidity. Green bonds take up a small proportion in investment market
and most green bonds will mature in three to seven years, with very limited
space for green bonds to be resold.29 All these factors may discourage
investors from investing in green bonds.
   Several measures may mitigate the challenges and increase investor con-
fidence in green bonds issued by Shanxi government. The government can
increase transparency for green projects and make information open to the
public. Additionally, the government can devote itself to establishing a
more complete and rigorous evaluation system of its green projects. To
increase yields, the government can reasonably raise the coupon rate of
green bonds, as proposed in the previous section. Finally, Shanxi provin-
cial government can also develop secondary trading market for green
bonds, thereby increasing their liquidity.



26
     Fitch, 2015.
27
     Q. Q. Chen, 2016.
28
     Gustke, 2013.
29
     Ibid.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                        59
Future Outlook
The green bond we proposed is more than the regional issuance of a tradi-
tional bond, but an innovative fixed-income model that incorporates envi-
ronmental indicators into the determination of the return. The creativity
and flexibility of our products provides for the possibility of various adapta-
tions across different regions for different environmental purposes. Other
than Shanxi, any province in China might find solutions in our green bond
model to fund their green projects. For example, the Guangdong govern-
ment, which aims to alleviate water contamination in the Pearl River, can
issue green bonds with a coupon rate linked to the levels of metal contami-
nants in the river. The proceeds of the bond can be used to subsidize the
end-pipe treatment of industrial sewage, which can largely improve effi-
ciency in wastewater management and reduce the government’s financial
burden in controlling water pollution. Another application of our model can
be a green bond that protects the rainforest. If the public sector or NGOs in
South American countries would like to raise funds to battle deforestation in
the Amazon rainforest, they might issue green bonds that have the coupon
rates pegged to vegetation coverage in a specific region.
   If the pilot implementation plan in Shanxi is successful, various adapta-
tions of our bond can also be promoted in the market. In addition to
fixed-income securities, we can further extend the idea into green deriva-
tives or other financial instruments. The innovative green financing model
we proposed is far beyond a regional bond. It lays the foundation for the
development of a variety of innovative financial products, which might
contribute to the future development of the global financial market.


References
Bloomberg. 2015. China to Boost $100 Billion Green Bond Market for Renew-
   ables. November 3. Retrieved from http://www.bloomberg.com/news/arti-
   cles/2015-11-03/china-to-boost-100-billion-green-bond-market-for-clean-
   energy
Bloomberg. 2016. China’s $230 Billion Green Bond Thirst to Supercharge Mar-
   ket. February 4. Retrieved from http://www.bloomberg.com/news/arti-
   cles/2016-02-04/china-s-230-billion-green-bond-thirst-to-supercharge-market.
Bradsher, K. and David B.(June 11, 2006) The Energy Challenge: Pollution from
   Chinese Coal Casts a Global Shadow. New York Times. Retrieved from http://
   www.nytimes.com/2006/06/11/business/worldbusiness/11chinacoal.
   html?pagewanted=all&_r=0



60                           Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Brauer M., G. Freedman, J. Frostad, et al. 2013. “Ambient Air Pollution Exposure
   Estimation for the Global Burden of Disease 2013,” Environmental Science &
   Technology. November 23, 2015. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.5b03709.
Chan, R. 2015. ABC in $1b maiden green bond issue. Finance Asia. Debt. Retrieved
  from: http://www.financeasia.com/News/402797,abc-In-1b-maiden-green-
  bonds-issue.aspx
Chen, Q, Q. 2016. Shanxi’s crumbling mining industry leaves trail of layoffs,
  unpaid workers. Global Times. Retrieved from: http://www.globaltimes.cn/
  content/966987.shtml
Climate Bonds Initiative. n.d. How to Issue a Green Bond in China. Retrieved
   from https://www.climatebonds.net/files/files/How-to%20GreenBonds%20
   China.pdf
China Council for International Cooperation, Education and Development. 2013.
   “Shanxi Issues the Letter of Responsibility for Air Pollution Prevention and
   Control to Cities.” Retrieved from: http://www.cciced.net/encciced/newscen-
   ter/latestnews/201310/t20131025_262237.html
Environmental Finance. 2015. ABC green bond four times oversubscribed.
   Retrieved from: https://www.environmental-finance.com/content/news/abc-
   green-bond-four-times-oversubscribed.html
Fitch. 2015. Fitch Rates Mainland China’s 1st Green Bond from Agricultural Bank
    of China. Retrieved from:https://www.fitchratings.com/site/fitch-home/
    pressrelease?id=992734
Goldmansachs. 2014. Environmental Finance Innovation Summit. Retrieved
   from:http://www.goldmansachs.com/our-thinking/pages/new-energy-land-
   scape-folder/environmental-finance-innovation-summit-2014/efi-sum-
   mit-report.pdf
Green Bonds. n.d. Why green bonds. Retrieved from http://www.gogreenbonds.
   org/why-green-bonds/
Green Finance Committee of China Society for Finance and Banking. 2015.
   Directory of Supporting Green Bonds Projects. Retrieved from http://www.
   greenfinance.org.cn/displaynews.php?id=450
Gustke, C. 2013. A growing appetite for green bonds, despite downsides. Retrieved
  from: http://www.bbc.com/capital/story/20131204-eco-bonds-get-the-green-
  light
Hayat, U. 2015. Green bonds: what’s right, what’s wrong [Web log post]. Retrieved
   from https://blogs.cfainstitute.org/investor/2015/07/09/green-bonds-whats-
   right-whats-wrong/
ICMA. 2015. Green Bond Principal--Voluntary Process Guidelines for Issuing
  Green Bonds.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                           61
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, Human Development Network,
   The World Bank. 2013. The Global Burden of Disease: Generating Evidence,
   Guiding Policy – East Asia and Pacific Regional Edition. Seattle, WA: IHME.
   http://www.healthdata.org/policy-report/global-burden-disease-
   generating-evidence-guiding-policy-%E2%80%93-east-asia-and-pacific.
Jiang, X, Q. 2016. Green bonds issued for renewable energy. China Daily. Business.
    Retrieved from: http://europe.chinadaily.com.cn/business/2016-02/04/con-
    tent_23391542.htm
Kedney, Sean, Beate Sonerud, and Padraig Oliver. 2015. “Growing a green bonds
   market in China.” Climate Bonds Initiative, & International Institute for
   Sustainable Development. Retrieved from https://www.climatebonds.net/files/
   files/Growing%20a%20green%20bonds%20market%20in%20China.pdf
Klöpfer, A. 2014. IFC Issued First Renminbi-Denominated Green Bonds on the
   London Stock Exchange to Support Climate-Friendly Investments.
   Retrieved from: http://ifcext.ifc.org/ifcext/pressroom/IFCPressRoom.
   nsf/0/FC77F4FC8451405685257CFA004C56D3
Kong, Y. 2015. China Officially Launched Its Green Bonds Market. Caixin Net.
  Retrieved from http://china.caixin.com/2015-12-23/100891746.html
KPMG International. 2015. Sustainable Insight_Gearing Up for Green Bonds.
  Retrieved from: https://www.kpmg.com/Global/en/IssuesAndInsights/
  ArticlesPublications/sustainable-insight/Documents/gearing-up-for-green-
  bonds-v2.pdf
Lin, L. 2013. Shanxi Province: Saving the Coal Industry, but Sacrificing the
   Environment. China Dialogue. Retrieved from https://www.chinadialogue.
   net/article/show/single/en/6300-Shanxi-province-saving-the-coal-
   industry-but-sacrificing-the-environment
Li, Li, and Dong-Jun Liu. “Study on an Air Quality Evaluation Model for Beijing
   City Under Haze-Fog Pollution Based on New Ambient Air Quality Standards.”
   International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 11.9 (2014):
   8909-8923.)
Liu, H. and Liu Z. (2010). Recycling utilization patterns of coal mining waste in
   China. Resources, Conservation and Recycling 54.12, 1331-1340.
London Stock Exchange. (2015). Green Bonds on London Stock Exchange and
   Borsa Italiana MOT. Retrieved from: http://www.londonstockexchange.com/
   specialist-issuers/green-bonds/20150925-green-bonds-Presentation.pdf
Moskowitz, D. n.d. Green Bonds: the benefits and risks. Investopedia. Retrieved
  from http://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/081115/green-bonds-
  benefits-and-risks.asp




62                            Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
People’s Bank of China. 2015. Establishing China’s Green Financial System.
   Retrieved from: https://www.cbd.int/financial/privatesector/china-ecgfs-
   5Green%20Bonds.pdf
Reynolds, J. 2009. Disabilities in China’s Polluted Shanxi. BBC. April 24. Retrieved
   from http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia-pacific/8012852.stm
Shanxi Government. 2015a. List of Investment Projects Approved by the
   Government of Shanxi.
Shanxi Government. 2015b. Shanxi Statistics Year Book 2015. Retrieved from:
   http://www.yearbookchina.com/naviBooklist-YUYTY-0.html
Sina Finance. 2016. GDP Growth Rates of 31 Provinces were Released, Liaoning
   and Shanxi were ranked at the Bottom. January 28. Retrieved from http://
   finance.sina.com.cn/china/2016-01-28/doc-ifxnzanh0227860.shtml
World Bank. 2015. Financing the Post-2015 Development Agenda. Retrieved from
  http://www.worldbank.org/mdgs/post2015.html
Xie K., W. Li, and Z. Wei 2010. Coal Chemical Industry and its Sustainable
   Development in China. Energy 35.11, 4349–4355.
Xinhua News. 2015. The Proposal of Shanxi Provincial Committee on the
   Implementation Plan of 13 Five-Year Plan. Retrieved from: http://www.sx.xin-
   huanet.com/sxld/20151209/2635884_c.html




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                              63
CHAPTER 6
A New Model for Impact Investing:
Application of Impact Units
to Assess Feasibility of Social
Investment Opportunities and
Interventions in Kenya
Team Wylde International
Valentine Korir , Assistant, Human Capital Development, Wylde
   International Ltd. (2015)
Kiriinya Kithinji , Director, Strategy and Advisory, Wylde
   International Ltd.



Abstract
An important driver of achieving Sustainable Development Goals, impact
investing encourages social interventions that increase access to basic ser-
vices such as finance, healthcare, education, clean water, and energy. Despite
the growth in African economic activity, the need for high impact social
interventions remains high.1 The generally low level of development in Third
World countries continues to provide opportunities for impact investing
through the creation of products and services that contribute to improved
social, financial, and environmental welfare of local beneficiaries.
   East Africa is one of the centers of global impact investing, with a dis-
bursement of more than US$9.3 billion over the past five years.2 Kenya
accounts for nearly half of the impact capital disbursed in East Africa.
However, there is little evidence of differences that can be traced to specific
impact investments. Results sometimes appear ambiguous, and many
claims attributed to impact interventions are often unsubstantiated.
   Our proposal introduces an impact performance measurement and val-
uation tool (“Impact Units”) that will enable impact creators (such as local
innovating companies, or non-profit organizations, or for-profit institu-
tions running Community Social Responsibility (CSR) initiatives) to

1
    UNDP, 2015.
2
    Global Impact Investing Network, 2015.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                         65
develop social interventions that demonstrate real and measurable impact
as measured and certified by our proposed Impact Units.
  In summary, the impact creator (most likely an entrepreneur) develops
interventions targeting social impact, we (Wylde International) convert
the benefits of the interventions into Impact Units which then enables the
impact creator to source for buyers of the Impact Units depending on the
extent of the fit between the Impact Units buyers’ objectives and the impact
creators’ interventions.
  The resulting better fit between the impact buyers’ objectives and the
impact creators’ interventions increases the possibility that the most
deserving of beneficiaries get to benefit from creators of socially inclined
interventions.


Problem and Context
Impact investments are investments made by individuals, communities,
companies, organizations, and funds with the intention of generating mea-
surable social impact.
  It is difficult, however to assess the outcomes of their investments from a
beneficiaries’ point of view because actors in the sector usually adopt var-
ied understandings and measurements of impact.
  In order to address these challenges to accurate measurement of impact,
Wylde International proposes a tool to that will provide an objective and
reliable way of both measuring and assigning value to interventions that
target social impact. This idea borrows from W+ Units’ concept developed
by Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resource
Management (WOCAN) to track the changes to women’s lives brought
about by technology.


Solution
The Idea of Impact Units Explained
Impact Units (IUs)are the bedrock of our proposed model, whose overall
aim is to bring together multiple collaborating partners into a beneficial
network of investors, investees, and local beneficiaries.
  IUs are a unique certification methodology that assigns higher impact
value to projects that result in increased social and economic benefits for
deserving beneficiaries such as marginalized communities, disaster prone
groups, and communities living in hardship areas. These communities
could certainly benefit from interventions such as access to renewable

66                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Figure 1 Impact Units Cycle

                                                     Implementation
                             Registration of
                                                      of pilot project          Awarding of
   Creation of an            impact creator
                                                        followed by          Impact Units to
  online database             (entreprenuer)
                                                          impact              impact creator
    consisting of            and first stage
                                                        assessment               by Wylde
  relevant metrics              scoring of
                                                         by Wylde              Internatioinal
                            potential impact
                                                       International



                 energy technologies, time and labor saving devices, improved agricultural
                 productivity, and access to improved water and sanitation.
                    The Wylde International Impact Units model seeks to assess the feasibil-
                 ity of impact investment opportunities in Kenya by inviting impact cre-
                 ators to demonstrate the actual benefits of their interventions through pilot
                 projects.
                    It empowers potential impact investors to make informed decisions on
                 where best to deploy their financial and other resources to address the
                 social issues that resonate best with their objectives.
                    The model in Figure 1 awards higher Impact Units based on the quality
                 of the intervention and evidence of their successful implementation based
                 on results of pilot studies.

                 Online Database Creation, Metrics Deﬁnition, and
                 Weighting of Impact Interventions
                 In this first stage, Wylde International will provide access to a comprehen-
                 sive and reliable set of social, economic, and environmental data such as
                 (but not limited to) maternal deaths per thousand, the number of people
                 with access to clean water, and the number of primary school enrollments.
                    Wylde International will then create an online impact scoring method-
                 ology that will use a three-stage ranking system; the first ranking based on
                 regional metrics, the second based on sector ranking, and the third based
                 on the in-sector priorities as detailed below.
                 Regional ranking
                 This metric will entail the ranking of Kenya’s 47 Counties from the poorest to
                 the richest. For instance, the Table 1 shows the ten poorest Counties in Kenya
                 as at November, 2013 indicating that Turkana County was the poorest.
                    This first stage of the ranking system will facilitate the ranking of impact
                 creators’ interventions based on high need locations. For instance, the
                 model will award more points to impact creators who direct their interven-
                 tions to Turkana County (which is ranked the poorest), and fewer points to

                 Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                            67
Table 1 Kenya’s Poorest Ten Counties
 Ranking                           Region(County)
 1                                 Turkana County (poorest)
 2                                 Mandera County
 3                                 Wajir County
 4                                 Marsabit County
 5                                 Tana River County
 6                                 Samburu County
 7                                 Kwale County
 8                                 West Pokot County
 9                                 Isiolo County
 10                                Makueni County
Source: Kenya National Bureau of Statistics.




those who choose to direct their interventions to Makueni County (which
is ranked as better off than Turkana County).
Sector ranking
This next stage will facilitate the ranking of impact creators based on the
application of key sector metrics that take into account the main social
issues for each of the 47 Counties, with less points going to interventions
that target lower ranking sector priorities.
   For example, Tables 2 and 3 (which use fictitious information) rank the
main sector issues in Nairobi and Mandera Counties. Based on our model,
impact creators whose interventions prioritize either education in Nairobi
County or poverty solutions in Mandera County will be awarded higher
points.
   This ranking model is also applicable in other areas of the world pro-
vided that actual ground statistics are used.




Table 2 Sector Issues Ranking –                           Table 3 Sector Issues Ranking-
Nairobi County                                            Mandera County
 Sector                                Ranking                Sector                   Ranking
 Education                                 1                  Poverty                     1
 Health                                    2                  Water and Sanitation        2
 Hunger                                    3                  Education                   3
 Water and Sanitation                      4                  Hunger                      4
 Poverty                                   5                  Poverty                     5




68                                      Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
Intra-sectoral dynamics ranking
The goal of this stage is to help impact creators to focus their interventions
to the most pressing needs within each sector.
  For instance, based on data in Table 4, our scoring methodology will
assign the highest scores to impact creators in the education sector in
Nairobi if they target beneficiaries with no formal education.

Registration and Impact Scoring
Upon the successful creation of the database and ranking system, the next
step will be to invite interested impact creators to provide specifics of their
proposed projects, using our online platform to derive a score on their
proposed interventions.
   Once the impact creators are satisfied with their scores and indicate will-
ingness to proceed with their proposed interventions, Wylde International
will gather details such as the impact creator’s name, the description and
objectives of the proposed interventions, tax compliance and registration
certificates, contact details, profiles of key personnel, and recent history.
   This information obtained in this stage will be used by Wylde
International to contact the impact creators, verify their data, and agree on
the timetable and design of implementation of the pilot project.

Implementation of the Pilot Project and Impact
Assessment
The primary goal of this step is to confirm if the impact creators’ proposed
interventions do in fact achieve their stated objectives, and confirm the
relationship between the intervention and the changes witnessed among
beneficiaries.
   Wylde International will require impact creators to develop and share
detailed work plans and other relevant details such as locations and time-
lines of pilot studies to enable full assessment and valuation of the impact
of interventions.



Table 4 Education Levels in Nairobi County
 Education Level                               Percentage        Ranking
 No formal education                               11%              1
 Primary education                                38%               2
 Secondary education and above                    51%               3
Source: Kenya National Bureau of Statistics.




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                         69
   Wylde International will monitor the pilot projects by tracking the activi-
ties and outcomes and adjust the outcomes observed for the following fac-
tors as provided by the European Venture Philanthropy Association (EVPA).
a. Deadweight: What would have happened anyway, regardless on the
   impact creators’ interventions
b. Attribution: What proportion of the outcomes can be attributed to
   action of other actors.
c. Drop off: How far the original outcome is likely to be reduced over time.
d. Displacement: The extent to which the original situation was displaced
   elsewhere and for unintended consequences.


Awarding of Impact Units
This is the final step in our model and involves the assignment of Impact
Units based on the results of the pilot stage above.
  For every pilot project successfully implemented and assessed, the
impact will be quantified in the metrics outlined below.
a. The actual change achieved in an area as a result of the impact creators’
   interventions will be first metric to be considered.
      For instance, Wylde International could obtain data on the reduc-
   tion in the number of maternal deaths directly attributable to an impact
   creator’s intervention during the pilot phase.
      Other examples of metrics that Wylde International could use for
   the evaluation of interventions include the number of teenage girls that
   successfully evaded teenage marriage, or the number of new primary
   school enrollments resulting from completion of new classrooms or
   schools in a given location.
b. The costs incurred by the impact investors from the creation on the
   interventions for the pilot phase is yet another metric. The costs will be
   computed based on documented evidence provided by the impact
   creators.
   Once the two steps above are completed, Wylde International will award
certificates indicating the value of the interventions in the form of Impact
Units.
   In addition, the certificate awarded will indicate the scores attained by the
impact creator in the three-step scoring process outlined in the creation of
online data base creation and metrics definition step (Step 1 in our model).
   Impact Units are, therefore, are used to monetize the impact of social
interventions by matching the costs of creating and delivering interven-
tions to observed changes in the status of beneficiaries.


70                           Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
  A copy of the certificate awarded will then be posted online to provide
potential impact buyers with an objective way of assessing the potential
impact of their investments by providing information on the quality of the
impact creators, defined here as those creators that deliver interventions
that result in the highest changes where they are most needed.

Illustration
Suppose an impact creator spends US$10,000 to create and deploy an
intervention that improves access to clean water to 1,000 beneficiaries in
the arid parts of Kenya whenever the intervention is deployed.
   Based on our methodology, Wylde International will award a certificate
to the impact creator indicating that every US$10,000 invested with the
impact creator (through the purchase of Impact Units) will translate to
access to water for 1,000 beneficiaries in the arid parts of Kenya.
   In our illustration above, the certificate will also provide a higher rank-
ing (based on our model’s location, sector, and intra-sector scoring meth-
odology) for the clean water interventions since the target is the arid parts
of Kenya where (presumably) access to clean water for residents is the top
sectoral priority.
   It is expected that the certification process will help those impact creators
that generate higher quality interventions to attract more impact buyers and
investors in much the same way a good commercial financial product attracts
the attention of investors because of the prospects of superior returns.
   Lastly, as the impact creators’ interventions achieve their intended objec-
tives over time, and the results (such as lower maternal deaths) are updated
annually in our database, the initial high rankings awarded to some of their
interventions will begin to fall. Wylde International expects that this reduc-
tion in ranking to act as a signal for both impact creators and Impact Units
buyers that the time is ripe to target interventions to other deserving loca-
tions, sectors, or intra-sector priorities, or possibly to develop new inter-
ventions altogether.

Beneﬁts for Impact Creators
a. The online presence provided by our database will provide a global audi-
   ence for both impact creators and buyers, hence increasing the possibili-
   ties of matching impact creators with buyers with similar objectives.
b. The Impact Units system will remove the headache of adjusting project
   objectives to fit those of impact buyers by creating arms’ length trading
   relationships based on the willing buyer (of Impact Units) / willing seller
   (of impact interventions) basis that underlies commercial transactions.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                          71
Beneﬁts to Impact Buyers
a. The Impact Units methodology will simplify decision making on
   impact investment opportunities by providing an easy to understand,
   clear and measurable way of assessing the impact of every dollar
   invested in available interventions.
b. Impact Units will facilitate the impact buyers’ comparison of similar
   impact creators and their interventions, and by so doing empower
   impact buyers to make informed choices about where best to direct
   their investments depending on their objectives.


Beneﬁts to Impact Users
a. The Impacts Units principal gain for target beneficiaries is the much
   improved possibility that any interventions intended to create impact
   will resonate with the beneficiaries’ specific contexts and priorities.


Potential Challenges
a. Interventions targeting human social development usually do not
   measure outcomes on the basis of a unit-based approach. It may take
   some time for our proposed unit-based metrics to be accepted and
   adopted by impact-sector actors.
b. Measurement of impact requires some level of research expertise and
   commitment to continuous field research to attest the veracity of
   impact creators’ claims about their interventions. The research process
   is potentially time consuming and can stretch the resources of firms
   like Wylde International.
c. The Impact Units model may generate conflicts between impact cre-
   ators and certification agents like Wylde International especially with
   regard to what costs or expenses should be captured as valid for the
   purposes of valuing impact, and what actually constitutes valid impact
   in the eyes of beneficiaries.




72                         Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
References
The Global Impact Investing Network and Open Capital Advisors. 2015. The
   Landscape for Impact Investing in East Africa.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2015. Impact Investing in
  Africa; Trends, Constraints and Opportunities. United Nations Development
  Programme Regional Service Centre for Africa; Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
WOCAN (Women Organizing Change in Agriculture and Natural Resource
  Management) and Southpole. 2014. “W+ Feasibility Assessment for ICS
  Program of SNV Lao PDR.”



Additional Reading
Allen, Ruth, et al. 2011. Local Partnerships: A guide for partnering with civil soci-
   ety, business and government groups. Mercy Corps. Portland, OR.
Bajgain, Sundar and Indira (Sthapit) Shakya. 2005. The Nepal Biogas Support
   Program: A Successful Model of Public Private Partnership for Rural Household
   Energy Supply. Ministry of Foreign Affairs, The Netherlands; SNV-Netherlands
   Development Organisation; Biogas Sector Partnership. Nepal.
Branzei, Oana and Mike Valente. 2009. Honey Care Africa: A Tripartite Model for
   Sustainable Bee keeping. Richard Ivey School of Business and University of
   Western Ontario.
Commission on Science and Technology for Sustainable Development in the
  South (COMSATS). 2007. Directory of International Donor and Development
  Organizations.
Fabrizio, Stefania and IMF Staff. 2010. Coping with the Global Financial Crisis:
   Challenges Facing Low-Income Countries. International Monetary Fund.
   Washington, DC.
Giamporcaro, Stephanie and Xolisa Dhlamini. 2014. The African Investing for
   Impact Barometer 2014. Bertha Centre for Social Innovation &
   Entrepreneurship.
Hart, Stuart L., and Ted London. 2005. Developing Native Capability. Stanford
   Social Innovation Review: Summer.
Jayachandran, Seema. 2014. Roots of Gender Inequality in Developing Countries.
   Northwestern University.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2012. Honey Care Africa,
  Kenya. Equator Initiative Case Study Series: New York, NY.
Wheeler, David and Kevin McKague. 2002. The Role of Business in Development.


Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                               73
Wheeler, David, Kevin McKague, Jane Thomson, Rachel Davies, Jacqueline
  Medalye and Marina Prada. 2005. Creating Sustainable Local Enterprise
  Networks MIT Sloan Management Review. Fall 2005.
World Bank and International Monetary Fund. 2015. From Billions to Trillions:
  Transforming Development Finance, Post 2015 Financing for Development:
  Multilateral Development Finance. Development Committee Discussion Note.




74                          Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
APPENDIX
The Appendix presents abstracts of  the submissions among the finalists
that received honorable mentions. They appear below in alphabetical order
of proposal title.


A Novel Practice for Mobile Money
Payments: Using Fingerprints to Enable
Real-Time Transactions in Nelamangala,
India
Team Paysa
Christine Yee, Smith College, Class of 2017
Darpan Bohara, Smith College, Class of 2018
Yashna Sureka, Smith College, Class of 2017


Abstract
In order to improve business environments in developing economies via
innovative private/public partnerships, Paysa will establish cashless pay-
ment systems using fingerprint authentication in rural India. We will con-
nect people’s fingerprints to their bank accounts and enable transfers from
the customer’s bank account to the merchant’s bank account. We believe
there is a large potential for growth because roughly only 50 percent of the
global adult population holds bank accounts and the majority of this finan-
cially unserved adult population live in developing countries. Our pro-
posed payment process can be accessible to illiterate people because it uses
fingerprints as an identification method.
   Our solution to enable acceptance of mobile money payments is to
partner with a local bank to encourage users to switch from cash to cash-
less cell phone based transactions. We will develop a fingerprint authori-
zation system connected with mobile phones or computers integrated
with a biometric database to support cashless transactions between busi-
ness owners and customers. In order to purchase items, the customer will
place his or her finger on the fingerprint scanner, which is connected to a
phone or computer. We will provide the scanner to the merchant. Our
software will then go through a pre-existing database of fingerprints,
Aadhaar, based in India and one of the world’s largest biometric




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                      75
identification systems, to verify the customer’s identity, thereby enabling
the transaction.
   To narrow our focus for the pilot program, we have chosen the region of
Nelamangala, with a population of 37, 232 (Census India 2011).
Furthermore, we included the fingerprint concept because it is a creative
and secure approach and it is unique to one’s identity and difficult to alter.
Using fingerprints as a form of identification meets our goal of ensuring
user-friendliness by taking into account varying levels of literacy and cul-
tural values in rural areas. Through our research, we have seen that using
fingerprints as a form of signature is a norm in India. With the support of
a grant from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, we aim to execute our
pilot at the beginning of next year by targeting the unbanked population to
reduce poverty and increase financial mobility.


Agency Organization System: A Financing
Model for Revolutionizing the e-Waste
Recycling Business in Guiyu, China
Team Chinglish
Sui Fung Walter Tsang, Bachelor of Laws (year 4), City University of Hong Kong,
   Class of 2017
Chung Yin Kwok, Bachelor of Laws (year 4), The University of Hong Kong,
   Class of 2017
Eugene Oscar Yuen, Bachelor of Laws (year 4), City University of Hong Kong,
   Class of 2017
Kai Tim Timothy Chan, BBA Information Systems (year 4), The Hong Kong
   University of Science and Technology, will graduate in 2018
Chun Wai Chung, Bachelor of Laws (year 4), City University of Hong Kong,
   Class of 2017


Abstract
We observed that with the increasing popularity of electronic appliances,
proper disposal has become a global concern. Unlike traditional waste,
including plastics, paper packaging, and leftover food, e-waste usually
includes a broad variety of materials, some of which are extremely valuable
but require advanced technology to extract. Recycling costs for e-waste are
extremely high, causing most producers to opt for a simple way out—ship-
ping them away and disposing of them untreated.
  Guiyu, where we base our research, is one of the final destinations for
untreated e-waste. Pollution caused by e-waste has destroyed farmland, and


76                            Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
people living there have had to find alternative sources of income. By using
crude methods such as burning and manual dismantling, they contribute to
the recycling industry, yet this process creates even more hazards to the
environment and to workers. Breaking this vicious cycle is the motivation
for the Agency Organization (AO) system.
   We determined that the current situation is caused by a deadlock in
financial inefficiency: producers ship e-waste to Guiyu merely for disposal,
without any value gained; established recyclers purchase locally disman-
tled parts through an exploitative “recycling business;” workers purchase
necessities from vendors at an inflated cost. The AO system will address
these problems in a sustainable manner.
   The AO aims to replace all unnecessary “middlemen,” thus reducing
financial inefficiency. It uses a step-by-step approach: first, with help from
the government, it attempts to establish relationships with recyclers and
local workers, better clustering both the supply and demand sides’ needs,
and building a foundation for its further development.
   Secondly, it organizes local workers through a membership scheme—
this replaces the current freelance mode of production, and enables the AO
to collect data concerning the local available workforce, as well as starting
to form a systematic way of channeling e-waste to the local workers.
   Thirdly, building upon the previous foundations, the AO can then work
to increase the efficiency between recyclers and local workers, by provid-
ing training to members, increasing their specific dismantling skills, and
making them capable of specialization. At the same time, the AO would
serve as a center for daily necessities, using a credit system fueled by
members’ active participation in the scheme. This step replaces the mid-
dleman that causes inefficiency, i.e., the vendors who supply necessities to
workers.
   As a final step towards making the AO a sustainable device, we pro-
pose the usage of a “Green Dot” licensing scheme. End-product produc-
ers who use materials recycled through the AO would be granted a
license to use the “Green Dot.” The business incentive to obtain the
“Green Dot” license would differ according to the ratio of materials recy-
cled. If the ratio of expensive materials is higher, the “Green Dot” is
intended to become a hallmark for luxury brands, signifying corporate
social responsibility and awareness towards the e-waste problem; con-
versely, if the ratio of ordinary materials is higher, the “Green Dot” would
serve as an official proof that the producers correspond with the “Go
Green” policy by the government.




Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                        77
Improving the Quality of Life for Artisans
from Rural Communities through
Empowerment of Women
Team Tejiendo Comunidades
Juan Pedro Gómez Virgilio, Class 2012, Technical University of Queretaro
Ana Estefania Molina Arredondo, Class 2012, Technical University of Queretaro
Jesus Rodriguez Coreño, Class 2013, Technical University of Queretaro
Alejandra Ochoa García, Class 2019 Autonomous University of Queretaro
Estela Gomez Virgilio, Class 2010, Autonomous University of Queretaro


Abstract
During the period from 2012 to 2014, the number of poor increased in
Mexico in the from 53.3 to 55.3 million, which represents an increase from
45.5 to 46.2 percent of the country’s population, according to the National
Council for the Evaluation of Social Development Policy (CONEVAL 2014).
  CONVEAL indicates many reasons that the number of people falling
into poverty has risen:
1.   Lower revenues.
2.   Low economic growth.
3.   Population dynamics and inequality.
4.   Insufficient income to provide for basic needs
   Further according to FONART (National Fund for the Development of
Arts and Crafts) in Mexico there are more than 10 million people were
employed in a craft or an activity related to a craft, although currently there
is no national census that allows us to identify the exact number of artisans
in Mexico by state.
   Most of the people engaged in artisanal activity in the first quarter of
2011 had low incomes that put the artisans below the poverty line.
   One of the main problems regarding Mexican crafts is the marketing
process. According to Rafaela Luft Dávalos, few craftsmen export their
products and there is a need to “promote a legal framework for the defense
of handicrafts, mainly to combat piracy.”
   We proposed to create a development program that promotes commu-
nity empowerment through projects that take advantage of the wealth of
communities and enable them to integrate their social fabric, improve
their income, and maintain harmony with the environment.




78                            Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
  Our goals are to:
1. Identify areas of opportunity in communities through ethnographic
   studies, field visits, and identification of community leaders.
2. Work with community leaders in detecting needs and strengths of
   their group to be able to work toward the integration of a productive
   project.
3. Design a plan of implementation where we elaborate technical feasibil-
   ity studies, both marketing and financial, as well as advice on structur-
   ing the project for searching and management of public funding for a
   link with social investors.
4. Support the marketing of products made by these groups, helping to
   connect them to national and international markets through our social
   platform, bringing them closer to potential market niches.
  The program will empower rural communities in states like Yucatán,
Guanajuato, Querétaro and Hidalgo. It can especially help women with
microenterprise development and significantly improve the income of
rural communities.


Reinventing Global Payment Processing
for Migrant Remittances, Microenterprise
Funding Infusions and Nationwide Direct
Benefit Transfers (DBTs)
Team Shibe
Pramod Emjay
Jens Wiechers


Abstract
Centralized financial systems have formed the core of international finance
for decades. The obvious advantage is that a financial institution acting as
counterparty adds trust, and the provision of a singular, institutionally
held transaction “ledger” obviates the need for third-party authentication.
However, this centralization has added costs that are passed on to end-us-
ers: our proposal is an attempt to look at the value that can be added by
switching to a decentralized payment processing system that can be cur-
rency-neutral, scalable, robust, and built on top of a system of publicly ver-
ifiable transactions. In order to understand the actual impact that such



Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action                        79
technology can provide, we look at the benefits of implementing this sys-
tem for international remittances by migrants, Direct Benefit Transfers,
and national subsidy schemes, and in the funding of grassroots projects by
international donors.
  Contextually, staggering losses—as high as 50 percent—are observed in
end-to-end transmission for aid programs. Broadly, there are three sys-
temic causes:
1. Systemic corruption enabled by layered centralization;
2. Consolidation of control/access by middlemen, and distinct informa-
   tion asymmetry; and
3. Inefficiencies of transmission systems for smaller trade quanta.
   The suggested implementation looks at Blockchain technology—the
backbone of cryptocurrencies1 such as Bitcoin, Dogecoin and Ethereum.
The efficiency offered by this technology, together with its fully traceable
nature presents a unique opportunity to tackle systemic corruption, distri-
bution failures, and the onerous fees levied by monopolistic payment pro-
cessors. This implementation is not seen presently in a holistic form, but is
built up of individual components that are well established and whose effi-
cacy has been verified empirically on a local and global scale.
   Beyond our proposal, the exact technical decisions will need to be
explored further. Options include “forking,” which is building a custom
copy of an existing cryptocurrency protocol, or building upon existing
freeform systems such as Ethereum that allow programming smart con-
tracts directly into the software. Since the recommendations in the pro-
posal could essentially be assembled on top of existing and available
platforms, the feasibility of the project is considerably high.
   Given the nature of the gains made by this proposed system, it is observed
that the most potential is for developing nations that often bear the brunt
of institutional financial inefficiencies.
   Considering the novelty of the technology discussed here, a few signifi-
cant challenges pose themselves: low market depth for individual crypto-
currencies mean high volatility; lack of oversight is seen as inherently
threatening by global governments, who also drag their feet when it comes
to unexpected jumps in technologies with far-reaching consequences.




1
  Cryptocurrencies are digital currencies employing encryption techniques to regulate the
generation of units of currency and verify the transfer of funds. They operate independently
of a central bank.


80                                Financing Sustainable Development: Ideas for Action
