2016 Simplified Methodology for
Public Investment Project
Selection and Prioritization in the
Kurdistan Region




                            15th May 2016




                 1
                   List of Acronyms and Abbreviations


CBA        Cost–Benefit Analysis
CEA        Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
EA         Efficiency Approach
EIRR       Economic Internal Rate of Return
ENPV       Economic Net Present Value
FS         Feasibility Study
HSS        Highly-Satisfactory Score
IBP        Integrated Bank of Projects
KPIs       Key Performance Indicators
LAR        Land Acquisition and Resettlement
LFA        Logical Framework Approach
LFM        Log-Frame Matrix
MCA        Multi-Criteria Analysis
M&E        Monitoring and Evaluation
NDP        National Development Plan
NDS        National Development Strategy
DAC-OECD   Development Assistance Committee (Organization for
           Economic Co-operation and Development)
O&M        Operation and Maintenance
PF         Prioritization Framework
PIF        Public Investment Framework
PIM        Public Investment Management
PIMS       Public Investment Management Systems
PFS        Pre-Feasibility Study
PPP        Public–Private Partnerships
PSS        Partly-Satisfactory Score
RF         Report Form
SS         Satisfactory Score
USS        Unsatisfactory Score
WBG        World Bank Group




                                       2
                                                        Table of Contents
1. NOTE ON THE MANUAL ..................................................................................................................... 4
        1.1 What is this manual? ............................................................................................................ 4
        1.2 Who should use this manual? .............................................................................................. 4
        1.3 How should this manual be used? ........................................................................................ 4
        1.4 What is this manual intended to do? .................................................................................... 4
2. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................................... 4
       2.1 Project prioritization overview............................................................................................. 7
       2.2 Project selection and inclusion in the budget ....................................................................... 9
       2.3 Objectives of prioritization methodology .......................................................................... 11
3. ESTABLISHING PROJECT PROFILES .................................................................................................... 12
       3.1 Project lifecycle ................................................................................................................. 12
       3.2 Planning and identification phase ...................................................................................... 13
       3.3 Pre-investment phase ......................................................................................................... 13
4. USING PROJECT APPRAISAL TO STRENGTHEN THE SELECTION CRITERIA......................................... 14
       4.1 What are we appraising? .................................................................................................... 15
       4.2 Appropriate evaluation criteria and indicators ................................................................... 15
       4.3 Evaluation criteria formulation .......................................................................................... 18
       4.4 Establishing a rating scale .................................................................................................. 20
       4.5 Establishing a project weighting scheme ........................................................................... 20
5. PROJECT SELECTION .......................................................................................................................... 23
       5.1 Check list for ex-ante evaluation ....................................................................................... 24
       5.2 Scoring for ex-ante evaluation ........................................................................................... 30
       5.3 Ranking of selected projects .............................................................................................. 30
6. CONSOLIDATED APPLICATION ON PROJECT SELECTION................................................................... 31
        6.1 Score indicators.................................................................................................................. 31
        6.2 Tabulated results ................................................................................................................ 31
        6.3 Prioritization and selection ................................................................................................ 32
7. FINAL COMMENTS ............................................................................................................................ 35
8. REFERENCES ...................................................................................................................................... 36
9. ANNEX N°1 – Practical Worksheet V 1.0. User Manual .................................................................... 37




                                                                          3
1. NOTE ON THE MANUAL
1.1 What is this manual?
This simplified manual is intended over the coming years to serve the government as a guide
to fully developing its methods of selecting and prioritizing investment projects. It contains a
methodology for project selection and prioritization and practical guidance on how to proceed
with an appropriate methodology. This manual supplements all other budget manuals
applicable for the relevant government administrative bodies at both central and governorate
levels.
1.2 Who should use this manual?
This manual on public investment project selection and prioritization criteria is intended for
different types of user. First, it serves as a technical reference for public-sector managers and
other relevant government officials who are responsible for making public-sector investment
decisions at both central and local levels. But it also serves relevant technical staff in the
Ministries of Finance and Planning, line ministries, other public agencies and local
governments involved in the formulation, selection, implementation and evaluation of public
investment projects.
1.3 How should this manual be used?
The manual serves as a baseline tool to assist the government to implement necessary fiscal
management reforms. This manual was developed with the aim of serving both as a desk
reference for government officials already trained in public investment management (PIM), at
both central and decentralized levels, and as a training tool for structured capacity-
strengthening programs.
1.4 What is this manual intended to do?
This manual should assist government officials involved in capital budget preparation to
understand clearly and manage efficiently the use of project selection and prioritization criteria
in the project cycle. A formal system of project selection should provide the basis and
conditions for the government to forward only those initiatives that are demonstrably the most
economically attractive for society.

2. INTRODUCTION
One of the most important challenges for a government is how to allocate scarce resources
between infinite needs and good investment projects. Developing countries, of course, are not
the exception; in those countries, public investment plays an important role in terms of country-
development process. In such cases, the improvement of public investment management
systems (PIMS) should be an important priority for governments. Among other issues, to
introduce better practices for conducting project selection and prioritization processes is a key
matter in this context.
A rigorous PIMS would enable the systematic scoring and ranking of public investment
programs and projects on quality. However, to introduce a new and modern system for dealing
with public investment programs and projects takes time and resources. In this case, in order
to deal with shortcomings in the public investment project process, the governments should put
the focus on developing key evaluation criteria, together with definitions and specific
guidelines on how to apply them.


                                                4
Thus, it is necessary to set up a systematic and comprehensive monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) procedure from (i) investment viewpoints: planning, reviewing and approving
investment proposals; (ii) planning, appraising and approving programs/projects; and (iii)
implementation; to (iv) project operation. M&E has emerged as one of the most critical stages,
which needs to be strengthened by scientific and objective solutions. Also, these criteria should
follow international standards and best practices, in accordance with the project cycle, shown
in Figure N°1.

                Phases      the
                        inN°1
                     Figure   – The Project
                                    Project Cycle Cycle
   •Idea                                                           PROJECT
        •Project Preparation and Feasibility Studies (project cycle)
                       •Project Financing

                                            •Project Implementation
            PRE-INVESTMENT PHASE                      •Operation
                                           INVESTMENT PHASE                    •Ex-Post Evaluation
                                                                  OPERATION PHASE
                                                                                      •Project End


                           •Project Identification

                                   •Appraisal
     FINANCING                          •Negotiation and Loan Disbursement

                                                              •Portfolio Monitoring
                                                                               •Ex-Post Evaluation
Source: Glenn P. Jenkins and Edgardo S. Mimica (2010). The Fundamental Institutional Pillars of an Efficient
Capital Budgeting System. South Africa.
An improved PIMS using M&E tools will lead to better public investment project results in
terms of investment efficiency and effectiveness in achieving intended outcomes and
development impacts. Better PIMS results will contribute to the economic growth of the
country and to the wellbeing of the people.
In a development context, evaluation is defined as a systematic and objective assessment of the
design, implementation and outcome of an ongoing or completed intervention with
socioeconomic development objectives. The main purposes of evaluation are:
 To improve expected results from public investment projects through feedback of lessons
  learned; and
 To provide a basis for accountability, including provision of information to stakeholders.
In this context, the use of evaluation criteria for project selection will help to determine the
relevance and fulfillment of objectives, efficiency, effectiveness, sustainability and impact of
an intervention, using both quantitative and qualitative data.




                                                     5
                               Box 1: Common findings in developing countries
Usually, public officials at central government level (Ministry of Planning, Ministry of Finance, line ministries,
other public agencies, state-owned enterprises, etc.) are highly professional and possess a significant level of
knowledge and practical skills. There is, however, a shortage of economic skills and knowledge.
The current practice is only to remove projects from the pipeline if there is a shortage of public funds to implement
the project. At the project proposal stage, no attention is paid to the estimation of the economic benefits of a
project. The costs of publicly financed projects are considered to be justified simply because the benefits cannot
be measured. Government officials, however, are aware of the capacity gap and are keen to get international
assistance to address the issue.
In second place, there is evidence of inefficiency in public investment management regardless of country income
level in terms of:
1) Poor project selection: wasteful “white elephants” that do not transform into productive assets;
2) Unrealistic time schedules in ex-ante appraisal and consequent delays to completion;
3) Chronic under-execution of capital projects;
4) Cost overruns; and
5) Neglect to operate and maintain created assets.
Thirdly, the common complaint is the absence of a management information system – or integrated bank of
projects (IBP) – to keep track of projects in the pipeline. International experience shows that it is important to
start tracking the project prior to the final approval stage. The project should enter the system when information
is starting to become available. Information is continuously added to the project as it moves through the pipeline.
The analysis at the prefeasibility and feasibility study stages will include an identification of the small number of
key variables that must be monitored to determine the eventual performance of the project. The economic value
of many variables will be the same for many projects. It is critical to capture and archive this information from
the appraisal of all projects if we are to reduce the time and cost of appraising future public investment projects.
If the project is rejected at any stage, it should remain in the database for future access. In the context of a fast-
growing economy, the swift growth in demand for public services may eventually make a project, or a substitute
project that addresses the same need, economically feasible. It is important, therefore, for a country to retain the
knowledge gained about the project.

In addition, from international best practices it is recommended that the following be
considered:
 Economic analysis to assess the project from the point of view of society as a whole:
    o Appraises project’s contribution to the economic welfare of the region or country.
    o It is based on a rationale following the three postulates of Harberger; the first postulate
      establishes that the demand curve represents the maximum willingness to pay for
      successive units of a good; the second postulate establishes that the supply curve
      represents the minimum prices that suppliers are willing to accept for successive units
      of a good or service. These minimum prices represent the opportunity cost of the goods.
      Postulate three concerns the distributional aspects of a project and how they should be
      incorporated into the economic analysis. This third postulate indicates that the costs and
      benefits of the project must be added, regardless of who wins and who loses. In other
      words, "a dollar is a dollar, regardless of who pays and who receives it".
 Positive economic net present value should be a minimum standard. Other factors might be
  considered in order to select projects that pass this minimum criterion.
 Success lies in political commitment and in the incentive for the bureaucracy to make high-
  quality appraisals of project ideas.



                                                          6
 It is important to make a professional economic cost–benefit analysis (CBA), or
  alternatively a cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA), at the start. Such an analysis will quickly
  demonstrate its value through the improved quality of the projects selected for
  implementation.
 The reform process should start with the building up of the skills of government staff
  through basic training and on-the-job experience.
 Standard project approval criteria should result from project appraisal: Economic Net
  Present Value (ENPV) or Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR).
 Projects that provide the largest gains to society should be financed first.
However, establishing an effective PIM system is a process that takes time, since officials need
to develop skills through training and practical experience. In this context, the investment
appraisal system will usually only be fully implemented once policy makers see the benefits of
the application of modern investment appraisal techniques:
 Project appraisal should be based on quantitative measures.
   o CBA is based on economic theory and it has a longer academic pedigree than a multi-
     criterion analysis (MCA).
          A project involves combining resources that are carefully defined and programmed
           over time (costs) in order to bring about an improvement in the well-being of society
           (benefits).
          The aim of financial and economic analysis is to determine and qualify the costs
           and benefits of projects in order to facilitate certain decisions that have to be made
           following the project cycle.
   o However, CBA cannot always quantify all relevant costs and benefits; at such times,
     MCA can incorporate any dimension deemed important and bring together quantitative
     as well as qualitative factors. Its weakness is related to its potential manipulation by
     political authorities (e.g. by weights); to avoid this, it is key to figure out how to decide
     which factors are important and justifiable.
2.1 Project prioritization overview
The prioritization framework involves the application of sequential filters. The first filter
provides project profiling; ergo, the qualitative validation and classification of project
proposals to determine investment profiles eligible to be part of the Executive Development
Plan or the National Development Strategy (or similar document). It means to align project
profiles to strategic priorities and asses their compatibility with national strategic priorities.
The second filter involves the quantitative validation and classification of project proposals as
eligible to receive funds for the conducting of pre-feasibility studies (PFS) and, after that, to
receive funds for the conducting of feasibility studies (FS). This second filter provides a
rigorous quantitative assessment of demand, as well as a technical analysis, legal and
institutional analysis, environmental manpower analysis, financial analysis, economic analysis
and risk analysis of the project.
Once feasibility has been determined, the third filter provides a qualitative analysis to enable
the selection of infrastructure investments between a portfolio of “good prepared projects”. At
this stage it is important to mention that project budget allocation for investment projects is
usually a political decision but in every case should be a well-informed one.


                                                7
These filters, taken together, form a prioritization framework (PF) that contributes to the
operationalization of the public investment plan. The following figure shows a schematic
outline of the framework.
             Figure N°2 – Schematic Overview of the Prioritization Framework


                        Profiling               Appraisal              Selection

                 • Strategic Priorities   • General & Sector       • Ranking
                 • Assess                   specific criteria      • Selects and
                   compatibility to       • Evaluates and            sequences projects
                   national strategic       appraises individual     to be financed
                   priorities               projects against
                                            demand, technical,
                                            legal and
                                            institutional,
                                            environmental
                                            manpower,
                                            financial, economic
                                            and risk criteria

Source: World Bank (2013). MPI Workshop: Session 1 Methodology for Selecting and Prioritizing Critical
Infrastructure Investments.
The PF provides a channel through which to implement the EDP, improving the efficiency of
public investment projects in order to deliver a set of complete and profitable projects, as shown
in Figure N°3.
  Figure N°3 – Improving Public Investment through Project Prioritization Framework




           Multi sectorial, SOE,                1. Profiling
           Local Government                                                      Pipeline
                                                2. Appraisal
                                                3. Selection


                                                                          Selected projects,
               “Wish list”                                                   ready to be
            (project profiles)                                              implemented

Source: World Bank (2013). MPI Workshop: Session 1 Methodology for Selecting and Prioritizing Critical
Infrastructure Investments.
In this context, the PF can be presented as a sequential steps funnel, like the one shown in
Figure N°4.




                                                     8
                 Figure N°4 – Sequential Steps in Prioritization Framework



                                         Strategic Priorities


                                           General & Sector
                                            Specific criteria

                                                 Project Selection

                                                    Infrastructure
                                                        Project
                                                       Pipeline


Source: World Bank (2013). MPI Workshop: Session 1 Methodology for Selecting and Prioritizing Critical
Infrastructure Investments.
Also, this process is totally consistent with the principles of an integrated approach, based on
international best practices (shown in Figure N°5).
                  Figure N°5 – Integrated Approach to Project Prioritization




                                                     Strategic
                                                    Conforms to the
                                                       strategic
                                                    priorities of the
                                                        country



                                                     Evidence
                                                      driven
                                                    Based on quality
                                                       data and
                                                        rigorous
                                                     analytical tools
                                Transparent                               Aligned
                                  Open, clear,
                                                                        Alignment of all
                                   auditable
                                                                         stakeholders
                                   processes


Source: World Bank (2013). MPI Workshop: Session 1 Methodology for Selecting and Prioritizing Critical
Infrastructure Investments.

2.2 Project selection and inclusion in the budget
Project selection involves the approval of a project for financing and its eventual inclusion in
the annual budget. Typically, approval takes place 2–3 times a year when a group of projects
that have passed through the appraisal process are prioritized and considered for financing
against the available investment resource envelope.
Projects that are to be funded often come to the selection stage with the source of funding
already identified. In this case, the role of the selection process is to endorse (or reject) the
project appraisal and confirm that the project remains a priority for funding. The project

                                                           9
selection process is typically overseen by a high-level committee, often chaired by the Minister
of Finance.
Following approval of the project, the financing arrangements are finalized and the project
included in the budget proposal. For international resource-funded projects, this involves
negotiating a financing agreement; for domestically financed projects, it requires earmarking
funding for the full investment cost and over the lifetime of the project. Inclusion in the next
annual budget can then follow.
While the budget approves funding for a single year, the initiation of an investment project also
implies a multi-year funding commitment. For this reason, it is considered good practice for
the annual budget to include an annex providing more detailed information on the capital
investment projects being funded, including their total estimated cost and phasing of
expenditure (Box 2).

                           Box 2: Capital investment project annex to the budget
  The key information that would need to be maintained in the capital investment project annex to the annual
  budget comprises:
     A brief narrative summarizing the objectives of the project, the investment to be undertaken, the location
      of the proposed investment, and the body responsible for implementation of projects.
     The total estimated cost of the project (as approved by the Public Investment Screening and Selection
      Committee).
     The sources of financing for the project,
     A table showing actual expenditures incurred in previous years, a revised estimate of expenditure for the
      current year, budgeted expenditure for the coming fiscal year, and forecasted expenditure for a further
      two years, and the balance of expenditure required to complete the project. It can be useful for this table
      to show a breakdown of expenditure by funding source.
     Estimated annual recurrent costs arising on completion of the project.

In the context of the project cycle, this is shown in Figure N°6. Once again, this procedure is
totally consistent with the analytical structure presented before.
Figure N°6(a) – Integration of Strategic Planning, Budgeting and Project Appraisal

                                                                      Criteria 1 (*)
                                                 Strategic Planning
                                                                       Criteria 2
                             Public Investment




                                                                       Criteria 3
                                Framework




                                                    Budgeting          Criteria 4

                                                                       Criteria 5

                                                                       Criteria 6

                                                 Project Appraisal
                                                                       Criteria 7
                                                  and Execution

                                                                       Criteria 8

Source: CRI Int. (2015). Proposal for Strengthening the Public Investment Management System in Vietnam. (*)
Note: Criteria should be defined according to the specific context of Iraq.


                                                            10
         Figure N°6 (b) – Integration of Strategic Planning, Budgeting and Project Appraisal
                                                                                                                                         Investment Cost and
                                                                                                                                               Schedule

                                                                                                                                          Recurrent Cost and
                                                                                                                                              Schedule
                                                                                                                                          Sources of Funding
                                                                                                               Project Funding
                                                                                                                                           and Schedule for
                                                                                                                   Section
                                                                                                                                             each Source
                                                                    Project Title
                                                                                                                                           Land availability

                       Project Identification                                                                                               Supplementary
                                                               Scope and Objectives
                             Section                                                                                                         Infrastructure
                                                                                                                                               availability




                                                                                                 Budgeting
                                                                 Key Performance
                                                                    Indicators                                                             Cost of Program
  Strategic Planning




                                                                                                              Program Cost and
                                                                 Title of Investment                         Fiscal Effectiveness         Project Revenues
                                                                       Program                                      Section
                                                                                                                                          Tax Collections on
                       Program Identification                                                                                             Project Inputs and
                                                               Scope and Objectives
                             Section                                                                                                           Outputs
                                                                                                                                         Share of the Project
                                                                   Targets (KPIs)                                                        Cost in Program Cost
                                                                                                               Results Section
                                                                                                                                               Net Fiscal
                                                                    Qualitative                                                              Effectiveness
                         Conformity of the
                          Project with the
                         Program Section
                                                                    Quantitative




                                                                                                                                         Construction period
                                                                                               Preliminary Analysis of
                                                                                               Environmental Impacts
                                                                                                                                          Operation period
                                                                                           Preliminary Analysis of Social
                                                                                                     Impacts
                                                           Socio-Economic Effectiveness
                                 Appraisal and Execution




                                                                     Section
                                                                                               Quantitative Demand
                                                                                                    Indicators



                                                                                               Macroeconomic Data



                                                                                                                                        Stakeholders and their
                                                                                                 List of sub projects
                                                                                                                                              reputation
                                                           Project Management Scheme
                                                                                               Proposed management
                                                                                                                                      Roles and responsibilities
                                                                                                     scheme



                                                                                                                                    Hierarchy (reporting structure)



Source: CRI Int. (2015). Proposal for Strengthening the Public Investment Management System in Vietnam.

2.3 Objectives of prioritization methodology
In the context outlined below, in light of the mission to enhance the quality of investment
decision-making, this Technical Note presents an evaluation criterion for public investment
project selection and evaluation, to ensure relevance, efficiency, effectiveness and
sustainability of public policy in developing countries. Furthermore, in simplified terms, it
develops different alternatives to conduct the project selection process, taking into
consideration the difficulties of establishing a complete efficiency approach framework for
                                                                                          11
project preparation and project evaluation in the short term. This tool is based on international
best practices.

3. ESTABLISHING PROJECT PROFILES
A complete model for project prioritization shall be guided for the following principles:
3.1 Project lifecycle
In this context, the project lifecycle is the process by which an idea is transformed into a
concrete solution through the analysis of alternatives and the choice of the most profitable
alternative from the economic point of view. Every project has certain phases in its
development and implementation. These phases are very useful in planning a project, as they
provide a framework for budgeting, resource allocation, the schedule of project milestones in
implementation and the establishment of a monitoring system. The purpose is to provide a basis
for organizing the project in such a way as to establish resource requirements, and to set up the
management system that will finally guide project activities.
Although the exact division of a project’s life into its different phases is somewhat sector
specific, the project lifecycle phases may be broadly placed in different steps. Figure N°7
shows the project development lifecycle.
     Figure N°7 – The Project Development Cycle (Planning Phase and Project Cycle)

                                                               Monitoring &
          Planning              Ex Ante Evaluation                                 Ex Post Evaluation
                                                                Follow Up




          Planning and         • Idea and profile                                  • Operation and
          Identification                                        Investment Phase     execution
              Phase            • Pre feasibility
                               • Feasibility
    • Public Investment                                     • Detailed design
      Needs
                                                            • Implementation            Operation and
                                    Pre Investment
    • National                                                                             Ex Post
                                         Phase
      Development Plan                                                                 Evaluation Phase


                                                    Approval


Source: based on international best practices.
The last figure is completely consistent with Figure N°1, and incorporates the planning phase.
As the project moves through its lifecycle, the focus of managerial activities shifts from
planning to operating and controlling activities. It should be emphasized that these phases only
represent one natural order among several in which projects may be planned and carried out.
Also, none of these phases becomes truly final until the project approaches its termination
stage.
The Planning and Identification Project Phase is the first phase of the cycle and is concerned
with the identification of potential public-sector projects. The purpose of having such a phase
is to establish the basic desirability of a project and to identify high-priority projects that fall
within the responsibility of the public sector. Projects are a valuable tool for directing
investments into the priority sectors of an economy.


                                                       12
3.2 Planning and identification phase
The process of project identification is complex. Projects are brought forward one at a time and
are generally identified with their sponsors rather than as part of an economic strategy. Over
the years, however, many countries have developed their own planning capability and the
process of project identification has become more systematic. In most of the countries, this
process is a reference to the National Development Plan or National Development Strategy. In
these documents, the emphasis is put on “investment efficacy” or on spending on the right
public assets. The strategic fit of projects therefore ensures the strategic alignment of
investment projects with national and sector strategies.
In a strategic planning exercise, the emphasis is on “investment efficacy” or on spending on
the right public assets. Spending should promote the achievement of strategic priorities, and
resources should be allocated only to those areas that are best aligned with the government’s
objectives. In this sense, the strategic planning exercises, performed at different levels, are top-
down processes that produce key deliverables, a buy-in and a given consensus on the NDP,
sector development plans and others documents. The strategic fit of projects therefore ensures
the strategic alignment of investment projects with national and sector strategies. The specific
objectives of each investment project should consequently be designed in such a way that they
support the overall national development agenda.
At this stage it is necessary to consider the demands of different interest groups, community,
public, private and other agencies. It also includes the diagnosis of the current situation, in
order to verify the existence of a problem, need or opportunity, through the collection of
information and data. In order to safeguard the strategic fit of projects, all public investment
initiatives in a country such as Iraq shall be designed according to the log-frame approach
(LFA), so that the strategic objectives of implementing each project are identified early on (i.e.
the efficacy question) and are also measured applying suitable key performance indicators
(KPIs).
The strategic planning exercises and economic planning are both necessary and
complementary, and they should not be disconnected from one another. If these two do not
overlap and match, there will be severe inconsistencies in public policy priorities and
corresponding investment decisions for the future of the nation. One way of matching the two
planning exercises is for all investment projects to submit their log-frame matrix (LFM) at the
very beginning of the project cycle; that is, at the project profile stage.
3.3 Pre-investment phase
This analysis introduces the project into the pre-investment phase. As a result of this stage, the
sponsoring agency should be able to:
   •   Discard infeasible alternatives.
   •   Select a feasible alternative and possibly advance to the next stage.
   •   Wait or postpone applying the solution to the problem while the authority makes a
       decision.




                                                13
4. USING PROJECT APPRAISAL TO STRENGTHEN THE SELECTION
CRITERIA
Evaluation tools are essential for making decisions related to the selection of projects to ensure
the highest return. Comparing the total costs (investment and operation) of a project with its
benefits allows a decision to be made over whether the project will make a true contribution to
the wealth of the country. Thus, project evaluation allows:
1) The identification of those criteria for investment policies that maximize social welfare.
2) The termination of "bad projects" and the promotion of those that are "good".
3) The definition of whether the public or private sector should implement the project.
4) An estimation of the fiscal impact of the project.
5) Agreements on desirable cost recovery to be established.
6) An assessment of their impact on the environment and on regional development and
   poverty, among others.
The utilitarian approach and applied welfare economics provide an analysis framework to
estimate the goodness of public policies in terms of social welfare and thus to answer the above
questions. To estimate the contribution of projects, it is necessary to identify, measure and
assess their costs and benefits. The identification of costs and benefits entails qualitatively
determining the positive and negative impacts generated by the project. The assessment of
benefits and costs entails transforming financial cash flows into economic resource flows, using
economic prices (efficiency or shadow prices) of goods and services produced and resources
used. Of course, there will be some costs and benefits that can be identified but are unlikely to
be quantified and valued. However, it shall be the duty of the evaluator to conduct the process
rigorously, to identify all the effects and impacts of projects and to reasonably quantify and
value as many as possible of them.
In the context of applied welfare economics, using the Efficiency Approach (EA) and the tools
related to CBA and CEA is the preferred approach to prioritizing and sorting multiple public
expenditure proposals. However, many developing countries do not have an ongoing system
for appraising the economic efficiency of the proposed investment projects. The situation is
further complicated by the fact that in many cases investment proposals arise from a condition
of limited information regarding economic costs and benefits.
The EA is the only path that can lead to sustainable long-term economic growth; also, it creates
a solid platform for the successful introduction of public–private partnerships (PPP) to a
country, and assists in the identification of those projects that can be undertaken by the private
sector. However, the application of CBA and CEA to insure economic efficiency (or “value for
money”) takes time, resources and effort to establish and disseminate among stakeholders.
It is important to note that core evaluation criteria should be applied to all public investment
programs and projects in their evaluation during implementation, at completion or during
operation, regardless of the size of their capital investment or classifications. However, sub-
criteria and indicators may be selected as appropriate so long as they are plausible and
measurable.




                                               14
4.1 What are we appraising?
Ex-ante project evaluation is a prerequisite to making sound investment decisions. To
determine whether the benefits are higher than the costs, is recommended that CBA or CEA be
used. Benefits and costs can be quantified and measured by assigning adequate measures and
units to benefits, after which, ideally, they are given a monetary value. Project appraisal
activities may be outsourced, depending upon the capacity resident in any given line ministry
or public independent unit. In any case, these institutions must provide for project planning and
studies within their current budget baselines, including, as necessary, funding for outsourced
capital project appraisals.
This analysis introduces the project into the pre-investment phase. As a result of this stage, the
analyst should be able to:
    •   Discard infeasible alternatives.
    •   Select a feasible alternative and possibly advance to the next stage.
    •   Wait or postpone applying a solution to the problem while the authority makes a
        decision.
The project format is a kind of analytical tool in its own right that facilitates the task of planning
for economic growth and development in the country or region. The main advantage of casting
investment decisions in a project format is that it enables the planner or the analyst to establish
a framework for analyzing information in a systematic way.
Rigorous project identification and selection systems act as a screening mechanism to prevent
inappropriate and inefficient projects from getting into the project cycle, gaining political
support and momentum that make them difficult to stop at later stages. An integrated project
management system allows the investment decision process to be slowed down by introducing
gradualism via a mandatory project lifecycle. This concept is clearly represented in the PIM
diagrams Pre-investment, Investment and Operation Phase of Projects.
4.2 Appropriate evaluation criteria and indicators
This proposal is based on an integrated project selection analysis that is useful for performance
measurement in terms of the development performance of public investment programs and
projects, through the linking between project planning and budgetary allocation. In this context,
the most used criteria for development evaluation are: relevance, efficiency, effectiveness and
sustainability.
Relevance. Refers to the assessment of programs and projects to measure design and time of
evaluation in relation to the consistency of project and program objectives against the
beneficiaries’ requirements, country needs, and global priorities. In other words, it is a measure
of the consistency of project objectives, associated with the needs of project beneficiaries and
the relevance of the project to the policies and priorities of the sector and its alignment with
the National Development Plan or National Development Strategy.
Short-term assumptions performance. Once a project has been implemented (i.e. its
construction phase is finished), the results are revised and cost deviations are analyzed on the
assumption that the benefits are achieved (the focus is on project management indicators such
as schedule, time of construction, overall construction costs, quality and technical
specifications). Changes in the expected economic criteria are explained according to higher
investment costs, timing, size, etc. This short-term ex-post evaluation is focused solely on
project costs, schedule and checking the assumptions made during the project pre-investment
stage.

                                                 15
Efficiency is concerned with how in economic terms the project or program resources are
converted into results (outcomes, impacts). It assesses process efficiency (including
timeliness), investment efficiency (returns on investment or cost effectiveness) and social and
environmental efficiency, among others. In other words, this indicator measures the resource
use associated with the generation of products or services to be provided by the project, their
execution timing and investment costs. It is ultimately a measure of the efficiency of the entire
project, relating the achievement of its aims and objectives with the use of resources linked to
this achievement.
Effectiveness assesses the extent of the likely or observed achievement of intended
objectives/outcomes or results as specified in the project/program documents. In other words,
it is a measure of the achievement of the aims and objectives of the project, associated with the
operation and use of the results.
Sustainability examines all risks to the continuity of the program and project outputs and
outcomes that could have long-term development impacts. It assesses sustainability in terms of
finance, management capacity, environment and society/community. Therefore, it is associated
with the maintenance of the project's capacity to provide goods and services as defined in its
original conceptualization and according to the initial standard that was set; also, it is associated
with the technical and management capacities of the implementing agency to properly maintain
the operation of the project in terms of the goods and services defined in the initial design
(measured in terms of service standard). It is very important to focus the analysis on financial
sustainability so as to ensure the existence of enough resources (required budgetary support) to
continue generating the flow of outputs and outcomes from the programs and projects.
These five core criteria are consistent with the evaluation criteria and standards of the
Development Assistance Committee for the Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (DAC – OECD).
In second place, the indicators criteria linked with any singular criterion should be defined, as
shown in Table N°1.
                     Table N°1 – Core Evaluation Criteria and Indicators

     Core Criteria                                   Sub-Criteria / Indicators
 Relevance, design       Project rationale and justification.
 and quality
                         Consistency with national-, sector- and governorate-level development
                          goals/strategies/territorial/sector master plans.
                         Urgency and priority (e.g. disaster relief, national security…).
                         Compliance with relevant technical standards and qualifications.
                         Funding plan.
                         Realism about implementation arrangements.
                         Alignment of project design and estimated total budget as stated in the project
                          approval decision.
                         Plans for developing the necessary capacity for project management and
                          operation.
                         Use of a report form (RF), database and reporting systems for monitoring
                          progress/achievement.




                                                    16
     Core Criteria                                      Sub-Criteria / Indicators
 Short-term                Depending on the type of information they provide, indicators are distinguished
 assumptions               among:
 performance
                            User satisfaction and quality: measure compliance with specifications and
                             evaluate attributes against standards, external references or the satisfaction of
                             beneficiaries (users). For example, reliability of hydro-meteorological forecasts,
                             percentage of patients who received attention and were satisfied with the care
                             received, percentage of participants who demonstrate an understanding of
                             techniques.
                            Economics: Reflect ability to attract and mobilize financial resources. For
                             example, percentage of budget executed per year, percentage of credit recovery,
                             etc.
                            Indicators of cost: Related costs (budgeted / actual). For example, percentage
                             deviation of the cost of equipment.
                            Indicators of time (schedule): Measure the level of compliance with
                             schedule/timing. For example, number of days of delay in given activity, time of
                             execution planned/real.
                            Indicators of quantity: Measure the level of compliance with the planned
                             amount of goods or services to be generated by the program/project. For
                             example, percentage of actual trainees compared to the percentage that was
                             intended.
 Efficiency in the use      Associate costs or resources with products. For example, average annual cost of
 of resources                hydro-meteorological data, total cost per km of road maintained, number of
                             patients seen per physician.
                            Process efficiency: extent of mobilization of funding sources compared to the
                             plan as per project approval decision, investment to output ratio, cash-flow
                             scheme against total funding estimation (against those stated at approval
                             decision), elapsed time/time overrun, disbursement rate against cash-flow
                             projection, funds use rate, cost overrun (actual/approved project cost).
                            Investment efficiency: adjustment of project scale/scope compared to the
                             approved design (if expected benefits are relevant to master plans and/or other
                             kinds of plans, likely or observed rate of returns on total investment, production
                             and supply of goods and services, in financial as well as economic terms or cost
                             effectiveness [where benefits are not quantifiable, e.g. comparison of unit cost
                             within the sector and governorate or cost of alternatives]).
                            Social and environment efficiency: likely or observed effects in relation to
                             gender, environment, resettlement, employment, and household income.
 Effectiveness in           Measure the level of achievement of objectives. For example, percentage
 achieving outcomes          changes in the number of users who consult hydrological data by year and type
                             of information requested, percentage of road network that sustains their designed
                             service level (or is close to it).
                            Extent of achievement of the investment objective/s or intended intermediate
                             outcomes (e.g. cost reduction, disease control, improved child health).
 Sustainability – risks,    Nature and extent of risks, resilience, and their mitigation measures.
 identification and
 mitigation measures        Provision for financing of operation and maintenance, O&M (revenue or state
                             budget)?
                            Extent of capacity development (staff training, equipment, spare parts, etc.).
                            Likelihood of continuity of outputs and outcomes?
Source: World Bank (2014). TA 7725–VIE: Support for the Preparation and Implementation of the Results-Based
Socioeconomic Development Plan, 2011–2015 (Vietnam).

                                                      17
4.3 Evaluation criteria formulation
As was mentioned before, public investment programs and projects need to be addressed and
evaluated before being chosen for investment decision-making. The first step must always be
the definition problem (which needs to be resolved) and the subsequent project proposal
solution, in accordance with potential beneficiaries and stakeholders.
The second step is the options analysis through a preliminary review, the purpose of which is
to confirm the consistency of the project proposal solution with the National Development Plan
(Iraq), sector and sub-sector strategies and the program that includes the project.
After passing the consistency test, pre-feasibility studies are being carried out, using the EA.
This means the module approach: demand, technical, human resources, legal and
environmental analysis, as well as financial, economic, stakeholders and risk analysis. Detailed
feasibility analysis (the same as pre-feasibility analysis but with more detail and depth) can
only be implemented after the pre-feasibility analyses if the investment decision is to be fully
considered.
Figure N°8 below shows integration between the project selection criteria and the project cycle.




                                              18
                                              Figure N°8 – Project Selection Criteria and the Project Cycle

                               National Development Plan or National Development Strategy

                                                                                              Design quality            Implementation         Overall project
   Relevance, design and                                                                      and readiness             performance            implementation and
   quality                                                                                                                                     operation performance
                                                                                      ST Quality performance
                                                                                      ST Economics performance
   ST assumptions                                                                     ST Costs performance
   performance                                                                        ST Schedule performance
                                                                                      ST Quantity performance

   Efficiency in the use of                                                                                             Continued viability    Continuity in economic
   resources                                                                                  Viability                                        viability


                                                                                              Baseline and              Satisfactory           Continuity in achieving
   Effectiveness in
                                                                                              Target outputs            achievement of         intended outputs and
   achieving outcomes
                                                                                              and outcomes              outputs/outcomes       outcomes

   Sustainability – risks                                                                     Risk                      Measures to            Risks mitigated
   identification and                                                                         identification            ensure sustain. of     Likelihood of achieving
   mitigation measures                                                                        and mitigation            outputs/outcomes       long-term impacts
                                                   Project
                                                   profiles
                            Initial project
                             registration                     Pre-Feasibility
                                                                                Feasibility   Investment                             End of
                                                                                                Decision                                                             End of
                                                                                                                                     project
                                                                                                                                                                   evaluation
                                                              1             2                 3
                                                                  Public Investment Management System (PIMS)


                         National                                                                                                        Operation and Ex-Post
                      Planning Phase                          Investment Phase                             Investment Phase|               Evaluation Phase


Source: International best practices
                                                                                              19
4.4 Establishing a rating scale
After the definition of indicators, it is necessary to select scores related to each criterion. This
score should be based on evidence and justification, and an evaluation result band will be
assigned based on this. Following the example included in World Bank (2014). TA 7725–VIE:
Support for the Preparation and Implementation of the Results-Based Socioeconomic Development
Plan, 2011–2015 (Vietnam), it may be assigned one of four different scores: Highly Satisfactory
Score (HSS) if the evaluation score is higher than 80%; Satisfactory Score (SS) if the evaluation
score is higher than 60% and lower than or equal to 80%; Partly Satisfactory Score (PSS) if the
evaluation score is between not less than 50% and not more than 60%, and Unsatisfactory
Score (USS) if the evaluation score is less than 50%. See Table N°2.
                                    Table N°2 – Score Definition

                                                           Partly or Less
   Highly Satisfactory           Satisfactory                                         Unsatisfactory
                                                            Satisfactory
 The overall average       The overall average        The overall average        The overall average
 rating score is greater   rating score is greater    rating score is not less   rating score is less than
 than (>) 80% for          than (>) 60% and less      than (≥) 50% and not       (<) 50% achievement or
 achievement or            than or equal to (≤) 80%   more than (≤) 60%          compliance, as
 compliance, as            achievement or             achievement or             appropriate.
 appropriate.              compliance, as             compliance, as
                           appropriate.               appropriate.
Source: World Bank (2014). TA 7725-VIE: Support for the Preparation and Implementation of the Results-Based
Socioeconomic Development Plan, 2011–2015 (Vietnam).
The scores are given by evaluators based on how projects met those criteria, providing evidence
and justification (and means of verification). Appraised or evaluated projects are then ranked
by their average score.
4.5 Establishing a project weighting scheme
After the score definition, it is necessary to define a project weighting scheme. Following the
example included in World Bank (2014). TA 7725–VIE: Support for the Preparation and
Implementation of the Results-Based Socioeconomic Development Plan, 2011–2015
(Vietnam), the scoring scheme is provided, shown here in Table N°3. The maximum score is
assigned to each core criteria with varying weights. In this case, the highest weight (40%) is
assigned to the criterion of efficiency in resource use for all types of evaluation to emphasize
its importance in public investment decision-making. Relevance, Effectiveness and
Sustainability are assigned variable weights depending on their importance in relation to the
stage in the project cycle and to types of evaluation.




                                                                                                             20
                     Table N°3 – Scoring Scheme and Distribution of Weights
                                   for Different Types of Evaluation

                               Ex-ante                Midterm                Terminal                  Ex-post
     Core Criteria
                              Appraisal              Evaluation             Evaluation                Evaluation

   Relevance            20                      25                     10                       10
   Short-term
   assumptions          20                      0                      0                        0
   performance
   Efficiency           30                      40                     40                       40
   Effectiveness        10                      15                     25                       25
   Sustainability       20                      20                     25                       25
   Total                100                     100                    100                      100
Source: World Bank (2014). TA 7725–VIE: Support for the Preparation and Implementation of the Results-Based
Socioeconomic Development Plan, 2011–2015 (Vietnam).
Finally, Table N°4 provides an illustration as an example of each type of project investment
evaluation.
                                    Table N°4 – Evaluation Focus

      Core Criterion/
         Types of                 Ex-ante                Mid-term               Terminal                 Ex-post
        Evaluation
                          Design Quality              Change in              Implementation          Overall project
                                                      market, design         performance.            implementation
                                                      or scope.                                      and operation
                                                                                                     performance.
                          Implementation              Any change in
                          arrangements                implementation
                                                      arrangements
    Relevance                                         and performance
                                                      so far.
                          Readiness: actual as        Progress in            Extent of               Continued
                          well as planned             compliance with        compliance with         compliance with
                          compliance with             various laws and       various laws and        various laws and
                          relevant laws,              approval terms         approval terms          approval terms
                          regulations and             and conditions.        and conditions.         and conditions.
                          technical standards.
                          Quality: evaluate
                          attributes against
                          standards, external
                          references or
                          satisfaction of the
    Short-term            beneficiaries (users).
    assumptions
                          Economics: Reflect
    performance
                          ability to attract and
                          mobilize financial
                          resources.
                          Cost: Related costs
                          (budgeted/actual).


                                                                                                                        21
                          Indicators of time
                          (schedule): Measure
                          the level of
                          compliance with
                          schedule/timing.
                          Indicators of quantity:
                          Measures the level of
                          compliance with the
                          planned amount of
                          goods or services to
                          be generated by the
                          project/program.
                          Indicators of quality:
                          Measures compliance
                          with the
                          specifications. For
                          example, percentage
                          of participants who
                          demonstrate an
                          understanding of the
                          techniques.
                          Time & cost               Time overrun;        Overall             Continuity in
                          efficiency;                                    efficiency and      financial and/or
                                                    cost overrun;
                                                                         financial and/or    economic
    Efficiency            financial and/or
                                                    financial and/or     economic            viability.
                          economic viability.
                                                    economic             viability at
                                                    viability.           completion.
                          Baseline and target       Progress toward      Satisfactory        Continuity in
                          outputs and               achieving            achievement of      achieving
                          outcomes.                 intended outputs     outputs and         intended outputs
    Effectiveness
                                                    and outcomes.        outcomes            and outcomes.
                                                                         compared to the
                                                                         target/baseline.
                          Risk identification       Progress in          Measures            Risks to
                          and proposed              addressing risks     undertaken to       sustainability
                          mitigation measures.      to sustainability:   ensure              mitigated
                                                                         sustainability of   (social,
                                                    social,
                                                                         project outputs     environment,
                                                    environment,
                                                                         and outcomes by     human
                                                    human resource
    Sustainability                                                       mitigating the      resources, O&M
                                                    development,
                                                                         identified risks.   finance).
                                                    and financing of
                                                    O&M cost.            Adequate            Likelihood of
                                                                         technical skills.   achieving long-
                                                                                             term
                                                                         Financing of
                                                                                             development
                                                                         O&M.
                                                                                             impact.
Source: World Bank (2014). TA 7725–VIE: Support for the Preparation and Implementation of the Results-Based
Socioeconomic Development Plan, 2011–2015 (Vietnam).




                                                                                                                22
5. PROJECT SELECTION
Following WB (2013) report1, this section shows an example of tool application to ex-ante
project evaluation. The purpose of appraisal is to enable decision-makers to decide whether the
activity represents an appropriate use of resources. Table N°5 shows a framework of
application of ex-ante evaluation criteria, sub-criteria, indicators and scoring scheme.




1
   Source: World Bank (2013). MPI Workshop: Session 1 Methodology for Selection and Prioritizing Critical
Infrastructure Investments.

                                                                                                      23
5.1 Check list for ex-ante evaluation
               Table N°5 – Check List for the Application of Ex-ante Evaluation (Criteria, Sub-criteria, Indicators and Scoring)

Project details: to be completed.



    Key Criteria &                                                                                                                           Remark
     Sub-criteria                      Key Indicators                          Scoring Basis/Justification                     Score   (Further Justification
    for Evaluation                                                                                                                        for the Score)
Relevance, design, strategic consistency & readiness (maximum 30 points)

                               Statement of project objectives
                                                                      Objectives and outcomes are clearly defined, linked
                               and expected development
                                                                      to provincial, sector and national socioeconomic      .../2
                               outcomes and outputs in relation
                                                                      development plans, and targets realistically set.
                               to the needs of the locality/sector.
1.1. Assess the rationale
                               A report form stating inputs,          Outcomes and outputs are clearly defined and
and justification for the
                               outputs, outcomes, and impacts,        measurable, and data sources and responsibility for   .../2
project/program (6
                               and monitoring plan.                   monitoring identified.
points).
                                                                      To what extent the design of the project complies
                               Compliance with relevant laws          with major laws, regulations and technical
                                                                                                                            .../2
                               and regulations.                       standards (e.g. investment, budget, procurement,
                                                                      and environment).

1.2. Assess the realism of                                            Quality of the approach and content of the
                               Project implementation
the implementation plan                                               implementation plan (including logistics, budget      .../4
                               arrangements/readiness.
(4 points).                                                           and staffing).

1.3. Assess the                Stakeholder and beneficiary            Coverage and quality of the consultations with
                                                                                                                            .../3
appropriateness of choice.     consultations.                         stakeholders and beneficiaries.
of location, land                                                     Justification for the location.                       .../1



                                                                                                                                                           24
acquisition, and technical
                               Location, land acquisition and
option (9 points).                                                 Coverage and appropriateness of the LAR plan for
                               resettlement (LAR) plan, where                                                              .../2
                                                                   the project.
                               relevant.
                               Choice of technology, basic         How realistic are the technical justifications given
                               engineering design, and analysis    in the project document and the justification for the   ../3
                               of technical feasibility.           choice of technology?
                                                                   How realistic is the estimation of the total
                               Total investment requirement and
                                                                   investment requirement and financing plan (sources      .../3
1.4. Assess how realistic      financing plan.
                                                                   of funding)?
and feasible the financing
plan is.                                                           Normal mark for state capital funding                   .../2
                               Funding sources (own, state,        Extra mark for governorate’s off-budget resources
(7 points).
                               borrowing as relevant).             and PPP planned (2 as maximum on top of normal          .../2
                                                                   mark).
1.5. Any other governorate
or sector-specific sub-
                               To be defined case by case.         To be defined case by case.                             .../4
criteria that may be added
(4 points).
Average Score for relevance.
                                                                                                                           .../30

Short-term assumptions performance (maximum 20 points)
                                                                   The range of variation of forecast was not higher
                               Reliability of forecasts.                                                                   .../2
2.1. Assess the user                                               than 20%.
satisfaction and quality       Beneficiaries who received
indicator (2 points).                                              More than 80% of beneficiaries were satisfied with
                               attention and were satisfied with                                                           .../2
                                                                   the goods and services provided by the project.
                               the goods and services received.
                               Percentage of budget executed per
2.2. Assess the economic                                           The percentage of the budget executed per year was
                               year; percentage of credit                                                                  .../4
indicator (4 points).                                              above 80%.
                               recovery.



                                                                                                                                    25
2.3. Assess the costs                                             The percentage of deviation from the total cost was
                            Percentage deviation of total cost.                                                          .../4
indicator (4 points).                                             below 80%.
2.4. Assess the timing      Percentage deviation of total         The number of days of delay in given activity was
                                                                                                                         .../4
indicator (4 points).       timing.                               below 25%.
                            Percentage of beneficiaries that
2.5. Assess the quantity    receive the goods and services,       The percentage of total beneficiaries that received
                                                                                                                         .../4
indicator (4 points).       compared to the percentage that       the goods and services per year was above 80%.
                            was intended.
Average score for short-term assumptions performance.



Efficiency in resource use (maximum 30 points)
                                                                  Schedule for project implementation, including
3.1. Assess the plan to     Project implementation schedule.                                                             .../3
                                                                  construction, where appropriate.
ensure process efficiency
(timelines) (5 points).     Procurement plan and fund             Whether approach, timelines and milestones for
                                                                                                                         .../2
                            utilization schedule.                 procurement and fund utilization are realistic.
                                                                  Financial viability based on estimated returns on
                            Financial internal rate of return
                                                                  investment (the higher the EIRR the better, the
                            (to be viable it should be higher
                                                                  minimum should be not less than the cost of
                            than the weighted average cost of
3.2. Assess financial                                             borrowing).
                            capital).                                                                                    .../6
viability (6 points).                                             Or, where it is not possible to estimate EIRR,
                            Or, project unit cost comparisons
                                                                  comparison of unit cost with similar projects in the
                            for non-revenue generating
                                                                  governorate or nearby locations and construction
                            projects.
                                                                  standards.
                            Identification and quantification     How realistically has the economic cost and benefit
                                                                                                                         .../4
                            of economic costs and benefits.       been identified and estimated?
3.3. Assess economic
viability (8 points).                                             Economic viability based on the estimates of
                            Estimation of economic internal
                                                                  EIRR, higher then better but minimum should not        .../4
                            rate of return (IRR) (higher than
                                                                  be less than the opportunity cost of capital.



                                                                                                                                 26
                              the economic opportunity cost of
                                                                    Or, where it is not possible to measure EIRR (e.g.
                              capital).
                                                                    in small-scale projects, social sector projects), cost
                              Or, cost effectiveness (compared      effectiveness analysis may be used or unit cost
                              with cost of alternatives and unit    comparison within the governorate or within the
                              costs in the sector) in the case of   sector, or cost of alternative may be used.
                              projects/programs where
                              economic benefits are not
                              quantifiable).
                                                                    How realistic are the plans for ensuring social
                                                                    efficiency and safeguards?
                                                                    Total jobs likely to be created.
                                                                    Of which, jobs created for women and girls, where
                                                                    applicable (gender: % of women/girls among the
                              Positive impact on employment
                                                                    total beneficiaries of the program/project as
                              creation and gender equity – jobs                                                              .../4
                                                                    determined by a social impact assessment).
                              for girls and women.
                                                                    Other benefits to women and girls (e.g. health,
                                                                    education, anti-trafficking, where relevant).
3.4. Assess plan for social                                         Or, where the above is not relevant due to the
efficiency (10 points).                                             specific nature of the project, assessment may be
                                                                    based on the estimate for total jobs creation.
                              Resettlement of project-affected
                                                                    Whether all the number of affected households are
                              households and likely
                                                                    going to be resettled and their welfare (income,         .../2
                              improvement in their welfare
                                                                    health, education) improved.
                              (income, health, education).
                              Improvement in household              Increase in household income in the project-
                                                                                                                             .../2
                              income.                               influenced area(s).
                              National defence and social           Realistic plan for ensuring national defence and
                                                                                                                             …/2
                              security, as appropriate.             social security.
3.5 Environmental             Plan for addressing environmental     How realistic is the plan to: (a) Address positive or
                                                                                                                             …/4
efficiency (4 points).        issues (if relevant).                 negative effect in local environment as identified in



                                                                                                                                     27
                                                                   environmental impact analysis? (b) Reduce % CO2
                                                                   emissions (where applicable) (c) Comply with
                                                                   green standards and others (where applicable)?


3.6. Any other
governorate- or sector-
                               To be defined case by case.         To be defined case by case.                          .../3
specific sub-criteria that
may be added (3 points).
Average score for efficiency
                                                                                                                        .../30

Effectiveness (achieving outcomes) (maximum 10 points)
                               Targets for achieving project
                                                                   How realistic are targets and timelines for
4.1. Assess how                outputs and outcomes (consistent                                                         .../4
                                                                   achieving project outputs and outcomes?
realistically targets and      with that stated in the RF).
indicators for outputs and     Baseline target (beginning) and
outcomes are set (8 points).                                       How well are the baselines and targets for outputs
                               end-lines (final) for outputs and                                                        .../4
                                                                   and outcomes defined?
                               outcomes.
4.2. Any other
governorate- or sector-
                               To be defined case by case.         To be defined case by case.                          .../2
specific sub-criteria that
may be added (2 points).
Average score for Effectiveness
                                                                                                                        .../10

Sustainability (maximum 20 points)
5.1. Assess the plan for the                                       Assess nature and extent of risks to continuity of
sustainability of outputs      Risk identification.                outputs and outcomes, and their mitigation           .../10
and outcomes of the                                                measures.



                                                                                                                                 28
 proposed project (16
                                                                How realistic is the financing plan for O&M? What
 points).
                              Financing of O&M.                 are the main sources of funding O&M cost?               .../3


                                                                How plausible are the plans for staff training,
                              Capacity development plan.                                                                .../3
                                                                equipment, spare parts, as applicable to the project?
 4.2. Any other
 governorate-specific sub-
                              To be defined case by case.       To be defined case by case.                             .../4
 criteria that may be added
 (4 points).
 Average score for sustainability                                                                                       .../20
Source: World Bank (2014). TA 7725–VIE: Support for the Preparation and Implementation of the Results-Based Socioeconomic Development Plan, 2011–2015.
(*) Note on scores: the notation “.../x” indicates the assigned value at the sub-indicator of the total amount of “x” points. For example, indicator
1.1. “Assess the Rationale and justification for the project/ program” has a total of 6 points with 3 sub-indicators of at most 2 points each; then,
the evaluator can assign 0, 1 or 2 points to sub-indicator “Statement of project objectives and expected development outcomes and outputs in
relation to the need of the locality/sector”. In this example, the notation 1/2 means that the evaluator assigned 1 point out of 2 for this sub-indicator.




                                                                                                                                                         29
5.2 Scoring for ex-ante evaluation
After the definition on criteria, sub-criteria, indicators and scoring, it is necessary to define the
level aggregation of scores, as is shown in Table N°6.
             Table N°6 – Project-level Aggregation of the Ex-ante Evaluation Score

Project details: to be completed.


                                                                                  Ex-Ante Evaluation
                           Full Score     Average Score       Score %
  Evaluation Criteria                                                                Result Band
                               (A)         Value (B)*       [(B/A)*100]
                                                                                   (HS, S, PS , US)
             (a)               (b)             (c)              (d)                      (e)
Relevance
Short-term assumptions
performance
Efficiency
Effectiveness
Sustainability
Project Average
Project Result Band
Source: World Bank (2014). TA 7725–VIE: Support for the Preparation and Implementation of the Results-Based
Socioeconomic Development Plan, 2011–2015 (Vietnam).

5.3 Ranking of selected projects
After the project-level evaluation results aggregation, projects should be ranked in their
specific level (for example, sector at provincial level) according to their respective score and
result band, as is shown in Table N°7.


        Table N°7 – Ranking of Projects in their Specific Sector by their Percentage
             Average Score (and Corresponding Results Band at Governorate Level)

                                                                          Total                       Result
                                           Name and        Total                                      Band
        Name and Address        Project                                 State         Average
 No                                        Address of     Project
           of Project            Code                                  Funding         Score       (HS, S,
                                            Investor    Cost (USD)
                                                                          (USD)                    PS, US)
Transport Sector:
1
2
3
Education Sector:
4
5
6
Health Sector:
7
8
9

                                                                                                          30
Agriculture/Irrigation:
10
11
12
13
Water Supply:
15
16
      Etc.
Source: World Bank (2014). TA 7725–VIE: Support for the Preparation and Implementation of the Results-Based
Socioeconomic Development Plan, 2011–2015 (Vietnam).
Proposed projects for state funding should be ranked by their evaluation score and result band,
and the decision taken for their selection in accordance with the availability of budgetary
resources. The higher the evaluation score, the better the anticipated or actual project
performance (relevance, short-term assumption performance, efficiency, effectiveness and
sustainability).

6. CONSOLIDATED APPLICATION ON PROJECT SELECTION
6.1 Score indicators
Following the World Bank (2013). MPI Workshop: Session 1 Methodology for Selection and
Prioritizing Critical Infrastructure Investments report, the developed matrix can be consolidated
in two main indicators; sometimes this type of consolidation provides a more intuitive
understanding of the tool, helping to introduce the concept into the public system. Table N°8
shows the aggregation of scores presented in Table N°6 under two main indicators with
respective average weights.
                            Table N°8 – Aggregation of Score Indicators
      Aggregated Indicator     Evaluation Criteria      Sub-indicator Weight     Indicator Score
      Relevance indicator      Relevance                      1 = 20/20                  50
      Performance indicator    Short-term                    0,25 = 20/80
                               assumptions
                               performance
                               Efficiency                   0,375 = 30/80                50

                               Effectiveness                0,125 = 10/80
                               Sustainability                0,25 = 20/80
                                                              Project Average            100
Source: MENA PIM Technical Practice, based on “World Bank (2013). MPI Workshop: Session 1
Methodology for Selecting and Prioritizing Critical Infrastructure Investments” and “World Bank
(2014). TA 7725–VIE: Support for the Preparation and Implementation of the Results-Based
Socioeconomic Development Plan, 2011–2015 (Vietnam)”.
6.2 Tabulated results
In this example, political authorities assume an equal weight for both relevance and
performance indicators. However, this combination depends on the policy-maker criterion.
Given the criteria weights and the value attributed to the project, Table N°9 presents tabulated
results for a hypothetical example.




                                                                                                        31
                    Table N°9 – Tabulated Results (Hypothetical Example)

      Aggregated Indicator                                Sub-indicator
                               Evaluation Criteria                              Indicator Score
           Project A                                     Score Weighted
      Relevance indicator     Relevance                       4x1             Relevance indicator
                                                                                      is
                                                                                  2 = 0,50 x 4
      Performance indicator   Short-term                     5 x 0,25
                              assumptions
                              performance                                         Performance
                              Efficiency                    4 x 0,375          indicator is 2,0625
                                                                                 = 0,50 x 4,125
                              Effectiveness                 3 x 0,125
                              Sustainability                 4 x 0,25
Source: MENA PIM Technical Practice, based on “World Bank (2013). MPI Workshop: Session 1 Methodology
for Selecting and Prioritizing Critical Infrastructure Investments” and “World Bank (2014). TA 7725–VIE:
Support for the Preparation and Implementation of the Results-Based Socioeconomic Development Plan, 2011–
2015 (Vietnam)”.
This methodology can be applied to different sectors, which will require their own specific
criteria and benchmarks. Some criteria may be similar across different sectors, and different
strategies can be applied to establish the weights to the criteria; in general, some judgment and
discussion may be required to fine-tune them. This standardized framework then facilitates the
analysis and comparison of project proposals.
6.3 Prioritization and selection
After that, and following on from the report entitled “World Bank (2013). MPI Workshop: Session
1 Methodology for Selection and Prioritizing Critical Infrastructure Investments”, two possible
methods for prioritization and selection of specific sectors can be applied: 1) Graphical
representation through a populated matrix; and 2) A quantification of social–environmental
and economic scores. However, neither of these methods addresses interdependencies or inter-
relationships among projects. Method 1 is shown in Figures N°9, 10, 11 and 12 below.




                                                                                                      32
                                                            Figure N°9 – Populated Matrix
                                        5

                                      4,5

                                        4
                                                The results of the evaluation done previously in
                                      3,5       the table can be plotted to further illustrate
                Relevance indicator



                                                their positioning in terms of meeting the above
                                        3
                                                requirements.
                                      2,5

                                        2                                    Project A:
                                                                            (2.0, 2.0625)
                                      1,5

                                        1

                                      0,5

                                        0
                                            1        1,5        2        2,5      3        3,5     4   4,5   5
                                                                         Performance indicator

Source: MENA PIM Technical Practice, based on “World Bank (2013). MPI Workshop: Session 1 Methodology
for Selecting and Prioritizing Critical Infrastructure Investments” and “World Bank (2014). TA 7725–VIE:
Support for the Preparation and Implementation of the Results-Based Socioeconomic Development Plan, 2011–
2015 (Vietnam)”.
The relative positioning of each project can be represented and thus compared against its
relevance and performance indicators. See Figure N°10.
                                                           Figure N°10 – Populated Matrix
                                       5

                                      4,5

                                       4
              Relevance indicator




                                      3,5

                                       3

                                      2,5

                                       2

                                      1,5

                                       1
                                            1        1,5        2        2,5      3        3,5     4   4,5   5
                                                                         Performance indicator

Source: MENA PIM Technical Practice, based on “World Bank (2013). MPI Workshop: Session 1 Methodology
for Selecting and Prioritizing Critical Infrastructure Investments” and “World Bank (2014). TA 7725–VIE:
Support for the Preparation and Implementation of the Results-Based Socioeconomic Development Plan, 2011–
2015 (Vietnam)”.



                                                                                                                 33
                                                                         Figure N°11 – Populated Matrix
                                              5             High relevance
                                                                                                 High relevance &
                                                            indicator
                                4,5
                                                                                                 performance indicators

                                              4
          Relevance indicator




                                3,5

                                              3

                                2,5
                                                            Low relevance &
                                              2             performance indicators
                                                                                             High performance
                                                                                             indcicator
                                1,5

                                              1
                                                        1        1,5         2       2,5      3        3,5        4     4,5       5
                                                                                     Performance indicator

Source: MENA PIM Technical Practice, based on “World Bank (2013). MPI Workshop: Session 1 Methodology
for Selecting and Prioritizing Critical Infrastructure Investments” and “World Bank (2014). TA 7725–VIE:
Support for the Preparation and Implementation of the Results-Based Socioeconomic Development Plan, 2011–
2015 (Vietnam)”.
Focus on the projects that have high relevance and performance impact (indicators). Further
study can be done on how to finance shortlisted projects. See Figure N°12.
                                                                         Figure N°12 – Populated Matrix
                                                       5

                                                      4,5

                                                       4
                                Relevance indicator




                                                      3,5

                                                       3

                                                      2,5

                                                       2

                                                      1,5

                                                       1
                                                            1      1,5       2       2,5      3        3,5    4       4,5     5
                                                                                     Performance indicator

Source: MENA PIM Technical Practice, based on “World Bank (2013). MPI Workshop: Session 1 Methodology
for Selecting and Prioritizing Critical Infrastructure Investments” and “World Bank (2014) TA 7725–VIE:


                                                                                                                                      34
Support for the Preparation and Implementation of the Results-Based Socioeconomic Development Plan, 2011–
2015 (Vietnam)”.
Another method of comparison could be done by ranking the results of the evaluation of all
project proposals. In this case, different weights could be set to favor relevance or performance
dimensions. In the example, relevance and performance dimensions have equal weight; in such
cases, 5:5 ratio is used. Table N°10 shows the results.
                    Table N°10 – Tabulated Results (Hypothetical Example)

      Aggregated indicator                                Sub-indicator
                               Evaluation criteria                               Indicator score
           Project A                                     score weighted
      Relevance indicator     Relevance                       4x1             Relevance indicator
                                                                                      is
                                                                                  2 = 0,50 x 4
      Performance indicator   Short-term                     5 x 0,25
                              assumptions
                              performance                                         Performance
                              Efficiency                    4 x 0,375          indicator is 2,0625
                                                                                 = 0,50 x 4,125
                              Effectiveness                 3 x 0,125
                              Sustainability                 4 x 0,25
                                                                                  Aggregated
      Project A Weighted Average
                                                                               indicator is 4,0625
Source: MENA PIM Technical Practice, based on “World Bank (2013). MPI Workshop: Session 1 Methodology
for Selecting and Prioritizing Critical Infrastructure Investments” and “World Bank (2014). TA 7725–VIE:
Support for the Preparation and Implementation of the Results-Based Socioeconomic Development Plan, 2011–
2015 (Vietnam)”.

7. FINAL COMMENTS
It is important to begin the process of improving the PIM system (PIMS) in Iraq as soon as
possible. The new and growing needs of local populations put pressure on the public project
portfolio and consequently on budget. The recommended solution is to start improving the
processes of project preparation and evaluation immediately.
The efficiency approach is the preferred framework to drive this process. However, it takes
time and resources. Therefore, it is recommended that a gradual process be started, developing
and progressively incorporating different tools into the PIMS, until in the coming years a
complete system of preparation, evaluation and selection of projects is achieved. This paper
presents some ideas and alternatives for starting the discussion related to project selection.
Project selection and monitoring is a continuing function that uses systematic collection of data
on specified indicators to provide management and the main stakeholders of an ongoing
development intervention (i.e. project or program) with indications of the extent of progress in
achieving objectives and of progress in the use of allocated funds.




                                                                                                      35
8. REFERENCES
   Belli, P., Anderson, J., Barnum, H., Dixon, J., Tan, J. (2001). Economic Analysis of
    Investment Operations: Analytical Tools and Practical Applications. The World Bank,
    Washington D.C.
   CRI Int. (2015). Proposal for Strengthening the Public Investment Management System in
    Vietnam.
   Harberger, A. (1996). The Economic Evaluation of Projects, Papers from a Curriculum
    Development Workshop. Economic Development Institute of the World Bank, The World
    Bank, Washington, D. C.
   Jenkins, G., Harberger, A., Kuo, Ch. (2013). Cost–benefit Analysis for Investment
    Decisions, the Integrated Analysis of Investment Projects. Queen’s University, Kingston,
    Canada.
   World Bank (2013). MPI Workshop: Session 1 Methodology for Selecting and Prioritizing
    Critical Infrastructure Investments.
   World Bank (2014). TA 7725–VIE: Support for the Preparation and Implementation of the
    Results-Based Socioeconomic Development Plan, 2011–2015. Evaluation Criteria for
    Public Investment Projects/Programs. Technical Paper, V.5. TA Project Office, Hanoi.




                                                                                         36
9. ANNEX N°1 – Practical Worksheet V 1.0. User Manual
2016 Simplified Methodology for Public Investment Project Selection and Prioritization
in Kurdistan Region
The present section develop a short user manual for the “Prioritization Practical Worksheet V
1.0”, that is intended to work along with the “2015 SIMPLIFIED MANUAL FOR PUBLIC
INVESTMENT PROJECT SELECTION AND PRIORITIZATION” methodology.
This tool have been developed using Microsoft Excel 2010, and works with Microsoft Office
98 suit or newer version. This tool works with Visual Basic programming tools inside, so the
user have to first allow Microsoft Excel to work with Macros. The first time that the user opens
the workbook, a warning message will pop up from the application.




The user has to click “Enable Content” in order to correctly use this tool.
The steps to successfully perform a project prioritization are the followings:
   1. Start a new Prioritization
   2. Fill Table 1, Project Descriptors.
   3. Fill Table 2, Project Scoring.
   4. Press “Save Results” when the information of a project is done.
   5. Press “Clear information” to add a new project.
   6. Fill Table 1 and Table 2 Information for each new project.
   7. Click “Finish” when done.
The detail of every step is described as follow.
Step One: Start a new Prioritization.
When the “Prioritization Practical Worksheet V 1.0”, Excel Workbook is opened for the first
time, the “Cover Page” worksheet will appear.




                                                                                             37
In order to start a new project prioritization, the user has to click in the “Start new
Prioritization” button. In order to confirm, the application will ask the user: “Do you want to
start a new Analysis?”, and if the user click “Yes”, the step is done. This button will clean all
previous information that was charged in the workbook. Finally, the “New Project Scoring”
worksheet will be selected.
Step Two: Fill Table 1, Project Descriptors.
In “New Project Scoring” worksheet, please fill the information of Table 1. Not all information
has to be filled, but at least Project Sector and Project Code are mandatory. Project Sector has
to be selected from a dropdown list in the respective cell.




Step 3: Project Scoring, saving and clearing.
This is the main step in this methodology. The user has to assign a score to every Key Criteria
and Sub-criteria, and every Key Indicator. The score have to be an integer between zero and
the max score indicated next to the score. For more information about the indicator, please
refer to the main body of the methodology.




                                                                                              38
For each Key Indicator, the user should fill the “Remark” box, adding the justification of the
assigned score.
When all information is filled, and every score have been assigned, the user must press
               in order to save all the information in a new worksheet. All the information
generated will be saved in the worksheet that will generate automatically, a sheet named
“Project _Project Code”. For instance, if the saved project has the assigned code 300102030,
the new worksheet will be called “Project 300102030”.
When project information is ready and saved, the user can go back to the “New Project Scoring
Worksheet” and press                 in order to clear all the previous information, and start
adding new projects information.
As an example, we will show some projects that a user might have filled for prioritization in
Agriculture and Transport Sector.
1. Project Descriptors
Project Name                                             T-A
Project Code                                             123
Project Sector                                     Transport Sector
Institution                                           Transport
Geographic Location                                     North
Total Project Cost (USD)    $                                                      300.000,0
Total State Funding (USD)   $                                                      250.000,0

1. Project Descriptors
Project Name                                             T-B
Project Code                                             124
Project Sector                                     Transport Sector
Institution                                           Transport
Geographic Location                                     North
Total Project Cost (USD)    $                                                      250.000,0
Total State Funding (USD)   $                                                      200.000,0




                                                                                               39
1. Project Descriptors
Project Name                                                T-C
Project Code                                                125
Project Sector                                       Transport Sector
Institution                                              Transport
Geographic Location                                        North
Total Project Cost (USD)    $                                                            440.000,0
Total State Funding (USD)   $                                                            440.000,0


1. Project Descriptors
Project Name                                                A-2
Project Code                                                223
Project Sector                                Agriculture and Irrigation Sector
Institution                                             Agriculture
Geographic Location                                        North
Total Project Cost (USD)    $                                                            120.000,0
Total State Funding (USD)   $                                                            120.000,0

1. Project Descriptors
Project Name                                                A-1
Project Code                                                222
Project Sector                                Agriculture and Irrigation Sector
Institution                                             Agriculture
Geographic Location                                        North
Total Project Cost (USD)    $                                                            440.000,0
Total State Funding (USD)   $                                                            440.000,0

1. Project Descriptors
Project Name                                                A-3
Project Code                                                225
Project Sector                                Agriculture and Irrigation Sector
Institution                                             Agriculture
Geographic Location                                        North
Total Project Cost (USD)    $                                                            120.000,0
Total State Funding (USD)   $                                                            120.000,0

1. Project Descriptors
Project Name                                                A-4
Project Code                                                226
Project Sector                                Agriculture and Irrigation Sector
Institution                                             Agriculture
Geographic Location                                        North
Total Project Cost (USD)    $                                                            254.000,0
Total State Funding (USD)   $                                                            220.000,0

When the user is done adding projects, he or must to press                        in order to deploy
the final results.
The final product will be a list of all the projects, ordered by Sector and SCORE. The score is
calculated in the basis of the individual score for each Key Indicator, and the proportional
weight of each Key Criteria Group-



                                                                                                     40
There will also display a bubble chart showing the selected projects, representing both
Performance and Relevance Indicator. The size of the bubble represents the Total Project Cost,
and the label will show the Project Code.
                           70%
                                                           225
   Performance Indicator




                           60%
                                                       $ 120,000.00
                                                         226
                           50%                                                            223
                                                     $ 254,000.00          123
                                                                                      $ 120,000.00
                           40%            222                          $ 300,000.00
                           30%        $ 440,000.00                                                124            125
                           20%                                                                $ 250,000.00   $ 440,000.00
                           10%
                           0%
                                 0%          10%       20%            30%             40%            50%           60%
                                                               Relevance Indicator




                                                                                                                            41
