                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic




  FY16 the Kyrgyz Republic
Country Opinion Survey Report

   THE WORLD BANK GROUP
      Public Opinion Research Group




                    1
                                                                 September 2016
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic




Acknowledgements

The Kyrgyz Republic Country Opinion Survey is part of the County Opinion Survey Program
series of the World Bank Group. This report was prepared by the Public Opinion Research
Group team (PORG), led by Sharon Felzer (Senior Communications Officer, Head of PORG).
Svetlana Markova, Jing Guo, and Jessica Cameron oversee design, reporting and analysis. Calita
Woods, Isabel Tepedino, Dania Mendoza and Noreen Wambui provided data support. The report
was prepared under the overall guidance and supervision of Sumir Lal (Director, ECRGP).
PORG acknowledges the significant contribution from the Kyrgyz Republic country team and
the local fielding agency M-Vector. In particular, PORG is grateful for the support from Natalya
Iosipenko (Communications Assistant) who coordinated the survey related activities from
Bishkek, Kyrgyz Republic.




                                                1
                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic




Table of Contents

     I. Objectives ...................................................................................3

     II. Methodology ...............................................................................3

    III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................4

    IV. General Issues Facing the Kyrgyz Republic ..................................8

    V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group .......................13

    VI. Sectoral Effectiveness................................................................21

   VII. How the World Bank Group Operates .......................................26

   VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments .....................32

    IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group
        in the Kyrgyz Republic ...............................................................38

     X. Communication and Outreach ..................................................42

    XI. Appendices ................................................................................47


                 THE KYRGYZ REPUBLIC




                                                    2
                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



I. Objectives
This survey was designed to assist the World Bank Group (WBG) in gaining a better understanding
of how stakeholders in the Kyrgyz Republic perceive the WBG. The survey explored:
     General Issues Facing the Kyrgyz Republic
     Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
     World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results
     The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
     Working with the World Bank Group
     The Future Role of the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz Republic
     Communication and Information Sharing
     Background Information


II. Methodology
From March to May 2016, 479 stakeholders of the WBG in the Kyrgyz Republic were invited to
provide their opinions on the WBG’s work in the country by participating in a Country Opinion
Survey. Participants were drawn from the office of the President/Prime Minister, office of a
Minister, office of a Parliamentarian, employees of ministries/ministerial departments/
implementation agencies, Project Management Units (PMUs) overseeing implementation of
WBG projects or consultants/contractors working on WBG-supported projects/programs, local
government office or staff, bilateral/multilateral agencies, private sector organizations, private
foundations, the financial sector/private banks, NGOs/community-based organizations (CBOs),
the media, independent government institutions, trade unions, faith-based groups, youth groups,
academia/research institutes/think tanks, and the judiciary branch.

A total of 322 stakeholders participated in the survey (67% response rate). Respondents either
received an invitation to complete the questionnaire via email or completed the questionnaire
with a representative from the fielding agency.

Every country that engages in the Country Opinion Survey must include specific indicator
questions that will be aggregated for the WBG’s annual Corporate Scorecard. These questions
are identified throughout the survey report.

The results of this year’s Country Survey were compared to those in the Country Survey
conducted in FY ’13 (response rate was 55%, N = 166). The data were weighted to reach similar
stakeholder compositions across the two survey years, allowing for more statistically reliable
comparisons. Also, stakeholders who identified themselves as “Other” in the stakeholder
category options were not included in these comparisons. As a result, mean ratings, percentages
of respondents, and the total number of respondents in both years are slightly different from
those of the original data reported in the FY ’13 COS report and the non-weighted data presented
in this report. For the weighted stakeholder breakdown and year comparison results, please refer
to Appendix E (see page 96).



                                                 3
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



III. Demographics of the Sample
Current Position
      For all further analyses, the small number of respondents from the office of a Minister
       were combined with those from the office of the President/Prime Minister. The few
       respondents from private foundations, youth groups, and trade unions were included in
       the “Other” category.




                                                4
                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Area of Primary Specialization




                                       5
                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Geographic Locations

     For all further analyses, the small number of respondents from Oblast centers and small
      towns were combined with those who indicated “Other” to create an “Other Areas”
      category.




Exposure to Agencies within the World Bank Group




                                               6
                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Familiarity with the World Bank Group
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey indicated significantly
         lower levels of familiarity with the WBG compared to respondents from the FY ’13
         Country Survey (weighted mean in FY ’16 = 5.7; weighted mean in FY ’13 = 6.2)1.
        Collaboration: Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher
         ratings of familiarity with the WBG (mean rating = 6.8) than respondents who do not
         collaborate with the WBG (mean rating = 4.9).
        Impact of Familiarity: Respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the WBG were strongly,
         significantly correlated with their ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness in the
         Kyrgyz Republic, and moderately, significantly correlated with their ratings of the extent
         to which the WBG’s work helps to achieve development results and the extent to which
         the WBG plays a relevant role in development in the Kyrgyz Republic.




 1
  Please refer to Appendix E (page 96) for more details on weighting. The means in the chart were calculated
 based on un-weighted data.

                                                       7
                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



IV. General Issues Facing the Kyrgyz Republic
Headed in the Right Direction
      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey were asked to indicate
       where the Kyrgyz Republic’s economy was headed, and a plurality indicated it was
       headed in the right direction (percentage of respondents = 45%); however, more than a
       third of the FY ’13 respondents indicated that they were not sure (34%).




                                               8
                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



IV. General Issues Facing the Kyrgyz Republic (continued)
Development Priority
   Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that the most
    important development priorities in the Kyrgyz Republic were public sector governance/
    reform (percentage of respondents = 38%) and anti-corruption (35%), followed by education
    (28%) and energy (21%).




                                               9
                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



IV. General Issues Facing the Kyrgyz Republic (continued)
Factors Contributing to Poverty Reduction
    Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that the areas that
     would contribute most to poverty reduction in the Kyrgyz Republic were economic growth
     (percentage of respondents = 40%), job creation/employment (35%), and rural development
     (32%), followed by anti-corruption (23%) and agricultural development (20%).




                                             10
                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



IV. General Issues Facing the Kyrgyz Republic (continued)
Factors Contributing to “Shared Prosperity”




                                        11
                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



IV. General Issues Facing the Kyrgyz Republic (continued)
Gap between the Rich and the Poor




Global Climate Change




                                     12
                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
Attributing Failed/Slow Reform Efforts

      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that they most
       often attributed failed or slow WBG assisted reform efforts to the government working
       inefficiently (percentage of respondents = 39%), followed by the World Bank not being
       sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground (26%), an inadequate level of
       civil society participation (24%), lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
       (23%), and reforms not being well thought out in light of country challenges (23%).




                                                13
                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
As noted in the “Methodology” section, the indicator questions referred to throughout the survey
report are questions that are asked in every country that engages in the Country Opinion Survey.
These will be aggregated for the World Bank Group’s annual Corporate Scorecard.


The World Bank Group’s Overall Effectiveness (Indicator Question)
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
         ratings for the WBG’s overall effectiveness in the Kyrgyz Republic (weighted mean =
         6.3) compared to respondents from the FY ’13 Country Survey (weighted mean = 6.1)2.
        Stakeholders: Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister and
         PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects gave the highest ratings for the WBG’s
         overall effectiveness whereas respondents from the financial sector/private banks and
         NGOs/CBOs gave significantly lower ratings.
        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG gave significantly
         higher ratings for the WBG’s overall effectiveness in the Kyrgyz Republic (mean rating =
         7.0) compared to respondents who are not collaborating (mean rating = 5.7).




2
 Please refer to Appendix E (page 96) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The mean in the chart was calculated
based on un-weighted data.

                                                              14
                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Achieving Development Results (Indicator Question)
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey gave significantly higher
         ratings for the extent to which the WBG achieves development results (weighted mean =
         6.5) compared to respondents from the FY ’13 Country Survey (weighted mean = 6.1) 3.
        Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects and
         local government gave the highest ratings for the extent to which the WBG achieves
         development results whereas respondents from the financial sector/private banks, the
         media, NGOs/CBOs, and bilateral/multilateral agencies gave significantly lower ratings.
        Locations: Respondents from Other Areas gave significantly higher ratings for the
         WBG’s overall effectiveness in the Kyrgyz Republic (mean rating = 7.0) compared to
         respondents from Bishkek (mean rating = 6.3).
        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG gave significantly
         higher ratings for the extent to which the WBG achieves development results (mean
         rating = 7.0) compared to respondents who are not collaborating (mean rating = 6.1).




3
 Please refer to Appendix E (page 96) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The mean in the chart was calculated
based on un-weighted data.

                                                              15
                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
WBG Staff Preparedness
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey gave statistically similar
         ratings for the WBG’s staff being well prepared (weighted mean = 6.8) compared to
         respondents from the FY ’13 Country Survey (weighted mean = 6.6)4.
        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG gave significantly
         higher ratings for the WBG’s staff preparedness (mean rating = 7.4) compared to
         respondents who are not collaborating (mean rating = 6.3).




4
 Please refer to Appendix E (page 96) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The mean in the chart was calculated
based on un-weighted data.

                                                              16
                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Overall Ratings for Indicator Questions by Stakeholder Groups
      Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects had the
       highest mean ratings for the aggregated responses to the twenty-seven COS indicator
       questions whereas respondents from independent government institutions and
       NGOs/CBOs had significantly lower mean ratings. Responses for individual indicator
       questions by stakeholder groups can be found in Appendix B (see page 65).
      Collaboration: Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had a significantly higher
       mean rating for the aggregated responses to the twenty-seven COS indicator questions
       (mean rating = 7.1) compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG
       (mean rating = 5.9). Responses for individual indicator questions by exposure to the
       WBG can be found in Appendix F (see page 102).




                                              17
                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Greatest Value
     Year comparison: The vast majority of respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey
      indicated that the WBG’s greatest value to the Kyrgyz Republic was its financial
      resources for investment lending (percentage of respondents = 71%), followed by its
      financial resources for policy based lending/budget support to the Government (30%),
      training/capacity building (28%), and technical assistance (24%).




                                             18
                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Effectiveness of WBG’s Instruments in Reducing Poverty
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that the WBG’s
      most effective instrument at reducing poverty in the Kyrgyz Republic was its investment
      lending (percentage of respondents = 68%), followed by its capacity development (45%)
      and technical assistance (33%).




                                             19
                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Greatest Weakness
   Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that the WBG’s
    greatest weakness in its work in the Kyrgyz Republic was not enough public disclosure of its
    work (percentage of respondents = 34%), followed by not being adequately sensitive to
    political/social realities (19%), its processes being too slow and complex (18%), not
    collaborating enough with non-state actors (17%), and its staff being too inaccessible (15%).




                                                20
                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness
Effectiveness of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas5




5
 Note, primarily informed stakeholders responded to these questions. Respondents were given the option of “Don’t Know” if they
did not have exposure to the WBG’s work in certain development areas. See Appendix A (page 50) for details.

                                                             21
                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas (continued)




                                       22
                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas: Year Comparison6




6
    All means presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix E (page 96) for details.

                                                                  23
                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)
The WBG Promoting Private Public Partnerships




Helping the Poorest




                                      24
                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)
Drivers of Effectiveness
To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the World Bank Group’s overall
effectiveness and ratings of its ability to help achieve development results in the Kyrgyz
Republic, bivariate correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the
twenty-seven specific areas of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the World Bank Group’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve
development results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area
increase, respondents’ ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of
effectiveness in one area increase, ratings of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development
results increase. Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of effectiveness in one
specific area are related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness
or perceptions of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results.

      Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
       correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the WBG’s
       overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
       drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness in the Kyrgyz Republic. The
       areas determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
              The WBG’s effectiveness at economic growth;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at education;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at food security;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at information and communications technology;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at public administration and public service delivery;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at environmental sustainability; and
              The WBG’s effectiveness at poverty reduction.

      Achieving Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-
       Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the
       WBG’s ability to help achieve development results in the Kyrgyz Republic, suggesting
       that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of perceptions of the
       WBG’s ability to help achieve development results. The areas determined to be key
       drivers from these analyses were:
              The WBG’s effectiveness at poverty reduction;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at business environment and investment climate;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at private sector development;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at public administration and public service delivery;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at law and justice; and
              The WBG’s effectiveness at food security.

                                                25
                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates
The World Bank Group’s Work in the Kyrgyz Republic
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
         levels of agreement that “Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role
         in development in the Kyrgyz Republic” (weighted mean rating = 6.7) and that “The
         WBG’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities for the Kyrgyz
         Republic” (weighted mean rating = 6.4) compared to respondents from the FY ’13
         Country Survey (mean ratings = 6.7 and 6.0, respectively)7.




7
 Please refer to Appendix E (page 96) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The means in the chart were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                              26
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
Overall Perceptions
   Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across several of these
    aspects of how the WBG operates in the Kyrgyz Republic. For the most part, respondents
    from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects and other organizations tended to have
    the highest levels of agreement whereas respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies
    tended to have significantly lower levels of agreement (refer to Appendix B, page 65, for a
    complete breakdown).
   Location: Respondents from Other Areas had significantly higher levels of agreement that
    “The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in the Kyrgyz Republic” (mean rating = 7.3)
    compared to respondents from Bishkek (mean rating = 6.2).




                                               27
                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
Overall Perceptions: Year Comparison8




8
    All means presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix E (page 96) for details.

                                                                  28
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
The WBG as an Effective Development Partner
   Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across several of these
    aspects of how the WBG operates in the Kyrgyz Republic (see Appendix B, page 65). For the
    most part, respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects tended to have
    the highest ratings whereas respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies, NGOs/CBOs,
    and academia tended to have significantly lower ratings.




                                               29
                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
The WBG as an Effective Development Partner (continued)
       Locations: Respondents from Other Areas had significantly higher ratings for
        “Responsiveness to needs” (mean rating = 6.6), “Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s
        products and services)” (mean rating = 6.7), “Flexibility (in terms of changing country
        circumstances)” (mean rating = 6.7), and “The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
        the ground” (mean rating = 7.3) compared to respondents from Bishkek (mean ratings = 5.5,
        5.8, 5.6, and 6.1, respectively).


The WBG as an Effective Development Partner: Year Comparison9




9
    All means presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix E (page 96) for details.

                                                                  30
                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
Internal Measuring and Monitoring
     Stakeholders: Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister and
      PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects gave the highest ratings for the extent to
      which the WBG measures and corrects its work in real time in the Kyrgyz Republic
      whereas respondents from independent government institutions gave significantly lower
      ratings.
     Collaboration: Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher
      ratings for the extent to which the WBG measures and corrects its work in real time
      (mean rating = 6.8) compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG
      (mean rating = 5.7).




                                             31
                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments
Frequency of Consulting WBG Knowledge Work and Activities
       Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects indicated
        the most frequent usage of the WBG’s knowledge work (percentage of respondents = 38%
        weekly/monthly) whereas respondents from the private sector and other organizations
        indicated significantly less frequent usage (81% and 80% rarely/never, respectively).




Frequency of Consulting WBG Knowledge Work and Activities: Year Comparison10




10
     All percentages presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix E (page 96) for details.

                                                                  32
                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Meeting the Kyrgyz Republic’s Knowledge Needs (Indicator Question)
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
         levels of agreement that the WBG meets the Kyrgyz Republic’s needs for knowledge
         services (weighted mean = 6.4) compared to respondents from the FY ’13 Country
         Survey (weighted mean = 6.4)11.
        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG had significantly
         higher levels of agreement that the WBG meets the Kyrgyz Republic’s needs for
         knowledge services (mean rating = 7.0) compared to respondents who are not
         collaborating with the WBG (mean rating = 5.8).




Contribution of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had significantly higher
         ratings for the significance of the contribution of the WBG’s knowledge work and
         activities (weighted mean = 7.7) compared to respondents from the FY ’13 Country
         Survey (weighted mean = 6.6)11.




11
  Please refer to Appendix E (page 96) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The means in these charts were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                              33
                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Technical Quality of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities
(Indicator Question)

        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey gave statistically similar
         ratings for the technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities (weighted
         mean = 7.2) compared to respondents from the FY ’13 Country Survey (weighted mean =
         7.0)12

        Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects, the
         private sector, and other organizations gave the highest ratings for the technical quality of
         the WBG’s knowledge work and activities whereas employees of ministries and
         respondents from NGOs/CBOs, the financial sector/private banks, the media, academia,
         and independent government institutions gave significantly lower ratings.

        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG gave significantly
         higher ratings for the technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities
         (mean rating = 7.6) compared to respondents who are not collaborating with the WBG
         (mean rating = 6.8).




12
  Please refer to Appendix E (page 96) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The mean in this chart was
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                              34
                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Qualities of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities
     Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across several of
      these aspects of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities (refer to Appendix B, page
      65, for a complete breakdown). For the most part, respondents from PMUs/Consultants
      on WBG-supported projects tended to give the highest ratings whereas respondents from
      NGOs/CBOs and academia tended to give significantly lower ratings.




                                            35
                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Qualities of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities: Year Comparison13




13
     All means presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix E (page 96) for details.

                                                                  36
                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Meeting the Kyrgyz Republic’s Needs for Financial Instruments (Indicator Question)
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
         levels of agreement that the WBG’s financial instruments meet the Kyrgyz Republic’s
         needs (weighted mean = 6.3) compared to respondents from the FY ’13 Country Survey
         (weighted mean = 6.2)14.

        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG had significantly
         higher levels of agreement that the WBG’s financial instruments meet the Kyrgyz
         Republic’s needs (mean rating = 6.9) compared to respondents who are not collaborating
         with the WBG (mean rating = 5.9).




14
 Please refer to Appendix E (page 96) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The mean in the chart was calculated
based on un-weighted data.

                                                             37
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in the Kyrgyz Republic
Making the World Bank Group of Greater Value
   Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that, to make itself
    of greater value, the WBG should reduce the complexity of obtaining WBG financing
    (percentage of respondents = 41%) and reach out more to groups outside of Government
    (33%), followed by offering more innovative financial products (23%), improving the quality
    of its experts as related to the Kyrgyz Republic’s specific challenges (21%), and offering
    more innovative knowledge services (18%).




                                               38
                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in the Kyrgyz Republic (continued)
World Bank Group Should Collaborate More with…
   Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that the WBG
    should collaborate more with local government (percentage of respondents = 56%), followed
    by NGOs (35%) and private sector (28%).




                                              39
                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in the Kyrgyz Republic (continued)
Where the World Bank Group Should Focus its Resources
     Year comparison: Respondents from the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that the WBG
      should focus its resources on public sector governance/reform (percentage of respondents
      = 28%), rural development (24%), economic growth (24%), education (23%), energy
      (21%), domestic private sector development (19%), and job creation/employment (19%).




                                             40
                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in the Kyrgyz Republic (continued)
Future Combination of the WBG services




                                      41
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



X. Communication and Outreach
When considering the World Bank Group’s future outreach with key constituencies, please see
Appendix B (page 65) for all responses by stakeholder groups.

Information Sources
      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that they got
       most of their information about economic and social development issues from the
       Internet (percentage of respondents = 70%), followed by local television (43%) and local
       newspapers (33%).




                                               42
                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)
Preferred Information Sources
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that they
      preferred to get their information from the WBG’s website (percentage of respondents =
      49%), followed by the WBG’s seminars/workshops/conferences (38%), WBG
      publications and other written materials (32%), direct contact with the WBG (22%), and
      e-Newsletters (21%).




                                             43
                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)
Access to Information




                                44
                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)
Access to the Internet




WBG Website Usage




WBG Website Internet Access




                                   45
                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)
WBG Social Media Usage




                                46
                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



XI. Appendices

     A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents...................... 48

     B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ...................... 63

     C. Responses to Indicator Questions by Geographic Location........... 83

     D. Responses to Select Questions by Collaboration with WBG ......... 86

     E. Responses to Select Questions by Year......................................... 94

     F. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the WBG ........ 100

     G. WBG Country Opinion Survey FY16 – the Kyrgyz Republic .......... 101




                                  THE KYRGYZ REPUBLIC




                                            47
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=322)
All rating scale questions are presented with the total number of respondents that provided a rating (N), the
number of respondents who indicated that they “Don’t know” (DK), the mean rating across all respondents (Mean),
and the standard deviation of this mean (SD). Indicator questions are noted with an asterisk (*).

A. General Issues Facing the Kyrgyz Republic

                                                                                       Percentage of Respondents
 1. In general would you say that the Kyrgyz Republic is headed in ...?                          (N=317)
 The right direction                                                                              68.8%
 The wrong direction                                                                              7.6%
 Not sure                                                                                         23.7%

 2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in the Kyrgyz Republic.
 Please identify which of the following you consider the most important                Percentage of Respondents
 development priorities in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than THREE)            (Responses Combined; N=318)
 Public administration and public service delivery (i.e., anti-corruption, public
 financial management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform, health and                       51.9%
 education services)
 Education                                                                                        21.7%
 Economic growth                                                                                  19.5%
 Agricultural development                                                                         17.0%
 Rural development                                                                                16.4%
 Job creation/employment                                                                          15.4%
 Business environment and investment climate                                                      14.2%
 Private sector development                                                                       12.6%
 Global/regional integration                                                                      11.0%
 Food security                                                                                    10.7%
 Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                   10.7%
 Health                                                                                           10.7%
 Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                          10.4%
 Poverty reduction                                                                                 9.4%
 Management of natural resources and physical infrastructure (e.g., oil, gas,
                                                                                                   9.4%
 mining)
 Energy                                                                                            8.8%
 Foreign direct investment                                                                         8.5%
 Trade and exports                                                                                 5.3%
 Information and communications technology                                                         5.0%
 Urban development                                                                                 4.4%
 Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                     4.4%
 Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                                  4.4%
 Environmental sustainability                                                                      3.8%
 Financial markets                                                                                 2.8%
 Water and sanitation                                                                              2.8%
 Gender equity and equality of opportunity                                                         2.8%
 Disaster management                                                                               1.6%




                                                        48
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


A. General Issues Facing the Kyrgyz Republic (continued)

 3. The World Bank Group has committed itself to twin goals: ending extreme
 poverty by 2030 and boosting shared prosperity. Poverty reduction is a broad
 term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of
 development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing             Percentage of Respondents
 poverty in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than THREE)                           (Responses Combined; N=317)
 Rural development                                                                                39.1%
 Public administration and public service delivery (i.e., anti-corruption, public
 financial management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform, health and                       31.2%
 education services)
 Economic growth                                                                                  29.7%
 Job creation/employment                                                                          26.5%
 Agricultural development                                                                         23.0%
 Education                                                                                        20.2%
 Private sector development                                                                       18.6%
 Business environment and investment climate                                                      15.8%
 Foreign direct investment                                                                        15.5%
 Management of natural resources and physical infrastructure (e.g., oil, gas,
                                                                                                   8.8%
 mining)
 Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                    8.5%
 Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                           8.5%
 Trade and exports                                                                                 7.3%
 Water and sanitation                                                                              6.0%
 Food security                                                                                     5.7%
 Energy                                                                                            5.4%
 Global/regional integration                                                                       4.4%
 Urban development                                                                                 4.4%
 Health                                                                                            3.8%
 Gender equity and equality of opportunity                                                         2.8%
 Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                                  2.2%
 Information and communications technology                                                         2.2%
 Financial markets                                                                                 2.2%
 Environmental sustainability                                                                      1.6%
 Disaster management                                                                               1.6%
 Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                     1.3%




                                                        49
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


A. General Issues Facing the Kyrgyz Republic (continued)

 4. The World Bank Group’s “Shared Prosperity” goal captures two key elements,
 economic growth and equity. It will seek to foster income growth among the
 bottom 40 percent of a country’s population. Improvement in the Shared
 Prosperity Indicator requires growth and well-being of the less well-off. When
 thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity” in your country, which of the
 following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in the Kyrgyz                Percentage of Respondents
 Republic? (Choose no more than TWO)                                                   (Responses Combined; N=302)
 Consistent economic growth                                                                        51.7%
 Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized
                                                                                                   34.4%
 businesses)
 Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                                         26.8%
 Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                                           16.9%
 Better employment opportunities for young people                                                  12.9%
 A growing middle class                                                                            12.6%
 Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                                      8.9%
 Better quality public services                                                                    8.3%
 Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability                6.6%
 More reliable social safety net                                                                   6.3%
 Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                                   6.3%
 Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                               2.6%
 Better employment opportunities for women                                                         2.6%
 Other                                                                                             1.0%
 Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                           0.7%

 5. Do you think the gap between the rich and the poor is a very big problem,
 a moderately big problem, a small problem or not a problem at all in the Kyrgyz       Percentage of Respondents
 Republic? (Select only ONE response)                                                             (N=300)
 A very big problem                                                                                31.7%
 A moderately big problem                                                                          51.0%
 A small problem                                                                                   13.7%
 Not a problem at all                                                                              2.0%
 Don’t know                                                                                        1.7%

 6. In your view, is global climate change a very serious problem, somewhat            Percentage of Respondents
 serious, not too serious, or not a problem? (Select only ONE response)                           (N=302)
 A very serious problem                                                                            50.0%
 A somewhat serious problem                                                                        35.8%
 Not too serious problem                                                                           11.9%
 Not a problem                                                                                     2.0%
 Don’t know                                                                                         .3%




                                                        50
                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

 (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)                                              N        DK      Mean        SD
1.   How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in the
                                                                                            307        1       5.80      2.50
     Kyrgyz Republic?

(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                                  N        DK      Mean        SD
2.   Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                            256        44      6.40      2.29
     effectiveness in the Kyrgyz Republic.*

 (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                                    N        DK      Mean        SD
3.   To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well
     prepared to help the Kyrgyz Republic solve its most complicated                        237        66      6.89      2.36
     development challenges?

 4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact
 on development results in the Kyrgyz Republic, in which sectoral areas do you
 believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and                   Percentage of Respondents
 knowledge services) in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than THREE)                          (Responses Combined; N=306)
 Agricultural development                                                                                   31.7%
 Public administration and public service delivery (i.e., anti-corruption, public
 financial management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform, health and                                 29.7%
 education services)
 Job creation/employment                                                                                    24.8%
 Economic growth                                                                                            24.8%
 Education                                                                                                  19.3%
 Rural development                                                                                          19.0%
 Private sector development                                                                                 14.4%
 Health                                                                                                     14.1%
 Business environment and investment climate                                                                13.4%
 Poverty reduction                                                                                          10.5%
 Foreign direct investment                                                                                  9.5%
 Water and sanitation                                                                                       7.8%
 Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                                           6.9%
 Trade and exports                                                                                          6.5%
 Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                                    6.5%
 Management of natural resources and physical infrastructure (e.g., oil, gas,
                                                                                                             6.5%
 mining)
 Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                              6.2%
 Food security                                                                                               6.2%
 Information and communications technology                                                                   5.9%
 Global/regional integration                                                                                 5.2%
 Energy                                                                                                      5.2%
 Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                               4.6%
 Gender equity and equality of opportunity                                                                   4.6%
 Environmental sustainability                                                                                3.9%
 Urban development                                                                                           3.6%
 Financial markets                                                                                           1.6%
 Disaster management                                                                                         1.3%




                                                                 51
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

 5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which                 Percentage of Respondents (N=296)
 activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is       Greatest      2nd Greatest
 of second greatest value in the Kyrgyz Republic?                          Value            Value     Combined
 Financial resources                                                       28.4%           14.4%        42.8%
 Capacity development                                                      20.3%           16.5%        36.8%
 Technical assistance                                                      7.4%            19.6%        27.0%
 Help to bring discipline/supervision to implementation of
                                                                           15.9%              9.6%           25.5%
 investment projects
 Policy advice, studies, analyses                                           9.8%             12.7%           22.5%
 Donor coordination                                                         4.7%             7.6%            12.3%
 Data and statistics                                                        3.7%             5.8%            9.6%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                 1.4%             6.5%            7.9%
 Convening/Facilitating                                                     4.4%             3.4%            7.8%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                              2.7%             3.1%            5.8%
 Other                                                                      1.4%             0.7%            2.0%

6. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest           Percentage of Respondents
   WEAKNESSES in its work in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than TWO)            (Responses Combined; N=291)
Too influenced by developed countries                                                              19.2%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in the Kyrgyz Republic                      17.9%
Don’t know                                                                                         16.8%
Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the Government                                  15.1%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                                           15.1%
Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving                      14.8%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                           13.4%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                       11.3%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow (e.g., too bureaucratic in its operational
                                                                                                     8.2%
policies and procedures)
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                             6.2%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                                5.2%
Staff too inaccessible at the Local Country Office in the Kyrgyz Republic                            4.5%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                                  4.1%
Other                                                                                                4.1%
Not client-focused                                                                                   3.8%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                                  2.4%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                             1.7%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                                1.0%
Staff too inaccessible at the Headquarters in Washington                                             0.0%




                                                        52
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

7. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the most effective          Percentage of Respondents
   in reducing poverty in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than TWO)               (Responses Combined; N=299)
Investment lending                                                                                   53.8%
Capacity development                                                                                 31.8%
Technical assistance                                                                                 29.8%
Multi-sectoral approaches                                                                            24.4%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government                                              16.4%
Knowledge products/services                                                                          15.7%
Don’t know                                                                                           5.0%
Trust Fund management                                                                                2.7%
Other                                                                                                1.0%

8. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support          Percentage of Respondents
   help the poorest in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Select only ONE response)                            (N=292)
To a fully sufficient degree                                                                         4.1%
To a somewhat sufficient degree                                                                      17.1%
To a somewhat insufficient degree                                                                    47.9%
To a very insufficient degree                                                                        12.3%
Don't know                                                                                           18.5%

9. In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which TWO
    of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in       Percentage of Respondents
    your country? (Choose no more than TWO)                                            (Responses Combined; N=296)
Local Government                                                                                     43.2%
Private sector                                                                                       28.0%
NGOs/Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                            25.7%
Parliament                                                                                           20.9%
Beneficiaries                                                                                        19.3%
Donor community                                                                                      15.2%
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                             15.2%
Media                                                                                                12.2%
Youth/university groups                                                                              9.1%
Other                                                                                                2.4%
Don’t know                                                                                           1.4%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World                   Level of Agreement
Bank Group’s work in the Kyrgyz Republic? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)      N       DK Mean        SD
10. Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development
                                                                                       273      20      6.77   2.43
    in the Kyrgyz Republic*
11. The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                                       261      28      6.50   2.25
    development priorities for the Kyrgyz Republic*




                                                        53
                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

 To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in                          Level of Agreement
 the Kyrgyz Republic, in terms of each of the following?
 (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                                         N      DK      Mean     SD
12. Responsiveness to needs*                                                                     228     51      5.79    2.27
13. Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*                           215     61      6.00    2.11
14. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                                    222     54      5.92    2.12
15.   Being inclusive*                                                                           237      40      6.31   2.32
16.   Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                             235      37      6.74   2.38
17.   Collaboration with the Government*                                                         244      32      7.53   2.14
18.   The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                              221      50      6.45   2.35
19. Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                                 222      52      6.65   2.64
    decisions important to my work*
20. Collaboration with civil society*                                                            219      58      6.12   2.50
21. Staff accessibility at the Local Country Office in the Kyrgyz Republic*                      230      45      6.64   2.59
22. Staff accessibility at the Headquarters in Washington*                                       141     129      5.50   2.85
23.   Collaboration with other donors and development partners*                                  195      74      6.58   2.53
24.   Collaboration with the private sector*                                                     192      80      5.65   2.34
25.   Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                           219      57      6.84   2.71
26.   Treating clients and stakeholders in the Kyrgyz Republic with respect*                     231      46      7.58   2.47
27.   Being a long-term partner*                                                                 220      53      7.82   2.39

 28. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take                      Percentage of Respondents
 place, which of the following would you attribute to? (Choose no more than TWO)                 (Responses Combined; N=287)
 The Government works inefficiently                                                                            31.4%
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                                           27.5%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                               24.7%
 The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the
                                                                                                               24.0%
 ground
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                                         23.7%
 The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                                            18.8%
 Poor donor coordination                                                                                       15.3%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                                                             14.3%
 The World Bank Group works too slowly                                                                         4.5%
 Other                                                                                                         3.5%




                                                                 54
                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

1.     The World Bank Group has emphasized the main objective to improve governance in its strategy with the
       Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, focusing on the following areas of economic development. How would
       you rate the EFFECTIVENESS of the World Bank Group’s support in these areas over the past two years
       (2014-2015)?

                                                                                                           Effectiveness
 Please rate the EFFECTIVENESS of the three key clusters of interventions of the
 World Bank Group’s strategy. (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                            N      DK    Mean      SD
 1. Public administration and public service delivery (i.e., anti-corruption, public
     financial management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform, health and                     173    101     5.64     2.52
     education services)
 2. Business environment and investment climate                                                     158    109     5.95     2.30
 3. Management of natural resources and physical infrastructure (e.g., oil, gas,
                                                                                                    140    125     5.49     2.36
     mining)

                                                                                                           Effectiveness
 Please rate the EFFECTIVENESS of the World Bank Group’s work in the following
 areas of development. (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                   N     DK     Mean       SD
 4. Information and communications technology                                                       137    127    5.89      2.42
 5. Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                                153    115    6.39      2.44
 6. Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                         132    133    5.17      2.36
 7. Urban development                                                                               147    119    5.73      2.38
 8. Environmental sustainability                                                                    157    106    6.08      2.49
 9. Poverty reduction                                                                               185     79    6.32      2.48
 10.   Private sector development                                                                   163    103     5.81     2.39
 11.   Foreign direct investment                                                                    158    107     6.32     2.51
 12.   Water and sanitation                                                                         172     94     6.35     2.53
 13.   Trade and exports                                                                            134    133     5.67     2.41
 14.   Economic growth                                                                              158    106     6.03     2.46
 15.   Health                                                                                       165     94     6.22     2.37
 16.   Disaster management                                                                          134    127     6.09     2.44
 17.   Job creation/employment                                                                      151    111     5.32     2.28
 18.   Financial markets                                                                            132    133     5.89     2.29
 19.   Gender equity and equality of opportunity                                                    147    113     6.49     2.43
 20.   Energy                                                                                       152    111     6.22     2.39
 21.   Rural development                                                                            161    100     6.20     2.56
 22.   Global/regional integration                                                                  127    134     5.81     2.52
 23.   Food security                                                                                144    121     6.06     2.36
 24.   Education                                                                                    174     87     6.22     2.50
 25.   Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                               145    116     5.60     2.52
 26.   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                131    129     5.89     2.47
 27.   Agricultural development                                                                     171     94     6.48     2.52

 (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                                            N      DK    Mean      SD
 2.    To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development
                                                                                                    227     45     6.52     2.13
       results in the Kyrgyz Republic?*


                                                                 55
                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank
Group in the Kyrgyz Republic? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                               N      DK     Mean     SD
3. The World Bank Group’s financial instruments (i.e., investment lending,
    Development Policy Loan, Trust Funds, etc.) meet the needs of the Kyrgyz                        229     49      6.46    2.32
    Republic*
4. The World Bank Group meets the Kyrgyz Republic’s needs for knowledge
                                                                                                    231     43      6.37    2.32
    services (e.g., research, analysis, data, technical assistance)*

 (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                                            N      DK     Mean     SD
5.   To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its
                                                                                                    193     80      6.32    2.03
     work in real time in the Kyrgyz Republic?



D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

 1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and                            Percentage of Respondents
 activities in the work you do?                                                                               (N=275)
 Weekly                                                                                                          3.6%
 Monthly                                                                                                         11.6%
 A few times a year                                                                                              33.8%
 Rarely                                                                                                          34.9%
 Never                                                                                                           16.0%

In the Kyrgyz Republic, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s                             Degree
knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)              N      DK Mean          SD
2. Are timely                                                                                       198     61    6.55      2.31
3. Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation                          202     61    6.59      2.21
4.   Lead to practical solutions                                                                    193     68      6.49    2.38
5.   Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                           217     42      6.72    2.33
6.   Are source of relevant information on global good practices                                    209     51      7.00    2.36
7.   Are adequately disseminated                                                                    208     53      6.38    2.47
8.   Are translated enough into local language                                                      195     67      6.13    2.76
9.   Are adaptable to the Kyrgyz Republic’s specific development challenges and
                                                                                                    196     67      6.63    2.31
     country circumstances*

Overall Evaluations                                                                                  N      DK     Mean     SD
10. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group’s
    knowledge work and activities make to development results in your country?*                     246     27      7.82    2.13
     (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
11. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group’s
    knowledge work and activities?*                                                                 219     53      7.19    2.21
     (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




                                                                 56
                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


E. Working with the World Bank Group

 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?                                   Level of Agreement
 (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                                            N     DK Mean        SD
 1.   The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                                 159 107       6.99   2.58
 2.   The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                                    208     60      7.02    2.53
      programs it supports
 3.   The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                     187     79      7.09    2.38
 4.   The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy” requirements are reasonab le                        120    143      7.16    2.20
 5.   The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable                               150    112      7.05    2.52
 6.   The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in the Kyrgyz Republic*                          161    104      6.57    2.45
 7.   Working with the World Bank Group increases the Kyrgyz Republic’s institutional
                                                                                                    211     53      7.45    2.38
      capacity
 8.   Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes appropriate
                                                                                                    171     92      7.32    2.43
      use of them*
 9.   The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support                                206     59      7.17    2.44

 (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                                            N      DK     Mean         SD
 10. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find
                                                                                                    186     84      6.43    2.54
     solutions that promote private public partnerships in the Kyrgyz Republic?

11. Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in the                    Percentage of Respondents
  Kyrgyz Republic? (Select only one response)                                                                 (N=267)
The WBG is sufficiently selective and focuses on the most important development
                                                                                                                 47.2%
challenges in the Kyrgyz Republic
The WBG is not sufficiently selective in the Kyrgyz Republic, and it is involved in too
                                                                                                                 24.7%
many areas of development
Don’t know                                                                                                       28.1%



F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz Republic

1.    Looking forward, and taking into account limited resources, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group
      to EMPHASIZE the following areas of development with the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic in the near
      future (2016-2017)?

                                                                                                            Importance
 Please rate the IMPORTANCE of the three key clusters of interventions of the
 World Bank Group’s strategy. (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                            N      DK     Mean     SD
 1. Public administration and public service delivery (i.e., anti-corruption, public
     financial management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform, health and                     223     36      7.99    2.33
     education services)
 2. Business environment and investment climate                                                     218     36      7.75    2.26
 3. Management of natural resources and physical infrastructure (e.g., oil, gas,
                                                                                                    216     41      7.47    2.30
     mining)




                                                                 57
                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz Republic (continued)

                                                                                                     Importance
Please rate the IMPORTANCE of the World Bank Group’s involvement in the
following areas of development. (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                   N      DK    Mean       SD
4. Information and communications technology                                                 206     45    7.22      2.48
5. Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                          213     36    7.49      2.42
6. Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                   208     38    7.44      2.48
7. Urban development                                                                         205     43    7.32      2.44
8. Environmental sustainability                                                              217     35    7.47      2.24
9.    Poverty reduction                                                                      223     28       8.01   2.24
10.   Private sector development                                                             217     33       7.80   2.33
11.   Foreign direct investment                                                              218     33       8.07   2.23
12.   Water and sanitation                                                                   216     33       7.72   2.31
13.   Trade and exports                                                                      204     43       7.30   2.36
14.   Economic growth                                                                        211     36       7.96   2.37
15.   Health                                                                                 213     32       7.99   2.22
16.   Disaster management                                                                    201     47       7.12   2.49
17.   Job creation/employment                                                                212     41       7.83   2.33
18.   Financial markets                                                                      197     50       7.30   2.30
19.   Gender equity and equality of opportunity                                              206     45       6.66   2.62
20.   Energy                                                                                 209     38       7.63   2.36
21.   Rural development                                                                      221     32       7.76   2.55
22.   Global/regional integration                                                            196     54       7.08   2.41
23.   Food security                                                                          214     40       7.32   2.47
24.   Education                                                                              228     24       7.96   2.26
25.   Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                         209     43       7.29   2.46
26.   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                          203     46       7.11   2.49
27. Agricultural development                                                                 228     30       7.87   2.41

 2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of               Percentage of Respondents
     greater value in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than TWO)                      (Responses Combined; N=273)
 Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                                       31.5%
 Increase the level of capacity development in the country                                            30.0%
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                                        26.4%
 Offer more innovative financial products (e.g., cost, timeliness, other terms)                       23.4%
 Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., national, state, local)                  22.0%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                             12.1%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                                     11.4%
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                               11.0%
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to the Kyrgyz Republic’s specific
                                                                                                      8.4%
 challenges
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on the Kyrgyz Republic’s
                                                                                                      7.0%
 economy
 Work faster                                                                                          5.5%
 Other                                                                                                3.3%



                                                           58
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz Republic (continued)

 3. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group
 offers in the Kyrgyz Republic, and taking into account its limited level of
 resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group             Percentage of Respondents
 should offer more of in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Select only ONE response)                          (N=271)
 Financial services                                                                                27.7%
 Convening services                                                                                27.7%
 Knowledge products                                                                                15.1%
 Don't know                                                                                        15.1%
 The combination is appropriate for the Kyrgyz Republic                                            12.2%
 None of the above                                                                                 2.2%



G. Communication and Information Sharing

 1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social                  Percentage of Respondents
   development issues in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than TWO)                (Responses Combined; N=274)
 Internet                                                                                          72.6%
 Local television                                                                                  36.5%
 Social media (e.g., Facebook, blogs, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                    28.8%
 Periodicals                                                                                       11.7%
 Local newspapers                                                                                  8.8%
 Other                                                                                             6.9%
 International television                                                                          5.8%
 International newspapers                                                                          3.6%
 Local radio                                                                                       3.3%
 International radio                                                                               1.8%

 2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?             Percentage of Respondents
 (Choose no more than TWO)                                                             (Responses Combined; N=274)
 World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences                                                 52.6%
 Direct contact with World Bank Group (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)                    40.1%
 World Bank Group’s website                                                                        27.0%
 e-Newsletters                                                                                     25.5%
 World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials                                       21.2%
 Social media (e.g., Facebook, blogs, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                    20.4%
 Other                                                                                             1.8%

 3. Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under
 which the WBG will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on      Percentage of Respondents
 a list of exceptions?                                                                            (N=242)
 Yes                                                                                               30.6%
 No                                                                                                69.4%




                                                        59
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

 4. If yes, from which of the following sources did you learn about the World          Percentage of Respondents
   Bank Group's Access to Information Policies? (Select only ONE response)              (Responses Combined; N=90)
 World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences                                                   31.1%
 World Bank Group’s website                                                                          21.1%
 Colleagues/Friends/Peer organizations                                                               21.1%
 News/Media                                                                                          12.2%
 World Bank Group’s e-Newsletters                                                                    8.9%
 Other                                                                                               5.6%

 5. Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities         Percentage of Respondents
     in the past year?                                                                               (N=252)
 Yes                                                                                                 15.9%
 No                                                                                                  84.1%

                                                                                       Percentage of Respondents
 6. Were you able to obtain this information?                                                        (N=41)
 Yes                                                                                                 85.4%
 No                                                                                                  14.6%

                                                                                       Percentage of Respondents
 7. Do you have access to the Internet?                                                              (N=260)
 Yes                                                                                                 96.2%
 No                                                                                                  3.8%

                                                                                       Percentage of Respondents
 8. Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group website?                                           (N=250)
 Yes                                                                                                 54.4%
 No                                                                                                  45.6%

 9. Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites (e.g., blogs,     Percentage of Respondents
     Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)?                                                            (N=251)
 Yes                                                                                                 32.7%
 No                                                                                                  67.3%

 10. Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank         Percentage of Respondents
     Group website?                                                                                  (N=237)
 High speed/WiFi                                                                                     85.7%
 Dial-up                                                                                             14.3%

 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.                               Level of Agreement
 (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                               N       DK     Mean     SD
11. I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.                           161      69      6.94  2.28
12. I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.                  162      60      7.31  2.34
13. The World Bank Group’s social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                                       138      94       6.72   2.59
    information about the institution
14. When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it            192      55       7.01   2.72
15. The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and inquiries        141      94       7.18   2.64



                                                       60
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


H. Background Information

 1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                       Percentage of Respondents
 (Select only ONE response)                                                                       (N=314)
 NGO/Community-Based Organization                                                                  15.3%
 Local Government Office or Staff                                                                  11.8%
 Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency                           11.1%
 PMU overseeing implementation of project/Consultant/Contractor working on
                                                                                                   8.9%
 WBG supported project/program
 Private Sector Organization                                                                       7.0%
 Bilateral/ Multilateral Agency                                                                    6.7%
 Office of Parliamentarian                                                                         6.4%
 Media                                                                                             6.1%
 Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                                            5.7%
 Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                                     5.4%
 Independent Government Institution                                                                3.8%
 Office of Minister                                                                                2.9%
 Office of the President/Prime Minister                                                            2.5%
 Other                                                                                             2.5%
 Trade Union                                                                                       1.6%
 Youth Group                                                                                       1.3%
 Judiciary Branch                                                                                  .6%
 Private Foundation                                                                                .3%

 2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                           Percentage of Respondents
 (Select only ONE response)                                                                       (N=312)
 Education                                                                                         13.8%
 Governance                                                                                        12.8%
 Finance and markets                                                                               12.2%
 Generalist (specialized in multiple sectors)                                                      6.7%
 Other                                                                                             6.4%
 Agriculture                                                                                       6.1%
 Transport and ICT                                                                                 4.8%
 Social protection and labor                                                                       4.5%
 Environment and natural resources                                                                 4.5%
 Macroeconomics and fiscal management                                                              4.5%
 Health, nutrition, and population                                                                 4.2%
 Urban, rural, and social development                                                              4.2%
 Water                                                                                             3.5%
 Energy and extractives                                                                            3.2%
 Gender                                                                                            2.2%
 Fragility, conflict and violence                                                                  1.6%
 Trade and competitiveness                                                                         1.6%
 Public-private partnerships                                                                       1.0%
 Jobs                                                                                              1.0%
 Climate change                                                                                    1.0%
 Poverty                                                                                            .3%




                                                        61
                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


H. Background Information (continued)

 3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group       Percentage of Respondents
 (IBRD, IFC, or MIGA) in your country? (Select only ONE response)                                (N=308)
 Yes                                                                                              49.0%
 No                                                                                               51.0%

 4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily          Percentage of Respondents
   engage with in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Select only ONE response)                                (N=271)
 The World Bank (IDA)                                                                             70.1%
 Other                                                                                            16.2%
 The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                      10.3%
 The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                              3.3%

                                                                                      Percentage of Respondents
 5. Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?                                    (N=296)
 Yes                                                                                             53.7%
 No                                                                                              46.3%

 6. If yes, what was your view of how the two institutions work together in the       Percentage of Respondents
   Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than TWO)                                                    (N=168)
 Don't know                                                                                       42.3%
 The two institutions work well together                                                          34.5%
 The way the two institutions work together needs improvement                                     18.5%
 The two institutions do not work well together                                                   4.8%

 7. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank          Percentage of Respondents
   Group in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than TWO)                            (Responses Combined; N=296)
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                                    40.9%
 Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                                   34.8%
 Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                                25.3%
 Observer                                                                                         24.3%
 Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                               16.6%

                                                                                      Percentage of Respondents
 8. What’s your gender?                                                                          (N=315)
 Female                                                                                           42.9%
 Male                                                                                             57.1%

                                                                                      Percentage of Respondents
 9. Which best represents your geographic location?                                              (N=317)
 Bishkek                                                                                          71.0%
 Other                                                                                            13.6%
 Oblast centers                                                                                   9.8%
 Small towns                                                                                      5.7%




                                                      62
                                                                                                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups15
Office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister N=17  Office of Parliamentarian N=20  Employee of a Ministry N=35  PMU/Consultant on WBG-supported project N=28 
Local Government N=37  Bilateral/Multilateral Agency N=21  Private Sector N=22  Financial Sector/Private Bank N=17  NGO/CBO N=48  Media N=19 
Independent Government Institution N=12  Academia N=18  Other N=20


A. General Issues facing the Kyrgyz Republic

In general, would you say that the Kyrgyz Republic is headed in...?*

                                            Office of the                                  PMU/                Bilateral/                           Financial                              Independent
                                          President/Prime       Office of   Employee of Consultant on Local   Multilateral                 Private   Sector/           NGO/                Government
Percentage of Respondents                 Minister/Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry WBG project Government   Agency                     Sector Private Bank          CBO      Media      Institution Academia         Other
The ri ght di recti on                          93.8%             95.0%           82.9%          66.7%             73.0%         85.7%      45.5%       58.8%          50.0%     68.4%         81.8%        38.9%        70.0%
The wrong di recti on                                                                             3.7%             5.4%                     9.1%        29.4%          16.7%     10.5%                      22.2%
Not s ure                                   6.3%                   5.0%           17.1%          29.6%             21.6%         14.3%      45.5%       11.8%          33.3%     21.1%         18.2%        38.9%        30.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
                                        Office of     Office of                  PMU/                         Bilateral/                   Financial                              Independent
                                      President/PM   Parliamen-  Employee of Consultant on   Local           Multilateral                   Sector/                               Government
                                        /Minister       tarian    a Ministry WBG project Government            Agency     Private Sector Private Bank    NGO/CBO          Media    Institution         Academia         Other
                                        N    Mean     N     Mean  N    Mean    N    Mean   N    Mean          N     Mean    N     Mean    N     Mean     N   Mean       N    Mean   N     Mean         N    Mean    N      Mean
How fami l i ar are you wi th the
work of the Worl d Bank Group i n      16    6.69    19    6.26    33     6.48    27    7.48    33    5.39    21     6.33   21     5.24   16     6.94   48      4.44    19     4.89   12      6.00     18   5.72    17     4.65
the Kyrgyz Republ i c?*
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                        Office of     Office of                  PMU/                         Bilateral/                   Financial                              Independent
                                      President/PM   Parliamen-  Employee of Consultant on   Local           Multilateral                   Sector/                               Government
                                        /Minister       tarian    a Ministry WBG project Government            Agency     Private Sector Private Bank    NGO/CBO          Media    Institution         Academia         Other
                                        N    Mean     N     Mean  N    Mean    N    Mean   N    Mean          N     Mean    N     Mean    N     Mean     N   Mean       N    Mean   N     Mean         N    Mean    N      Mean
Overall, please rate your
impression of the World Bank
                                       14    7.79    15    6.33    30     6.73    26    7.92    28    7.00    19     5.79   14     6.86   15     5.20   33      5.30    17     5.65   10      5.70     17   5.59    15     6.60
Group’s effectiveness in the
Kyrgyz Republic.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




15
     Only 314 respondents provided the information about their current positions. Thus, only these respondents were included in the across-stakeholder analysis presented in this Appendix.

                                                                                                              63
                                                                                                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

                                       Office of     Office of                    PMU/                     Bilateral/                     Financial                                Independent
                                     President/PM   Parliamen-   Employee of   Consultant on  Local       Multilateral                     Sector/                                 Government
                                       /Minister      tarian      a Ministry   WBG project Government       Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO          Media       Institution   Academia         Other
                                      N    Mea n    N    Mea n    N    Mea n    N    Mea n   N    Mea n    N    Mea n      N    Mea n    N     Mea n   N    Mea n   N      Mea n    N    Mea n    N    Mea n   N      Mea n
To what extent do you believe the
WBG's staff is well prepared to
help the Kyrgyz Republic solve its    12    7.92    14    7.00   26    6.96     26   8.08    28   7.25    17     6.59     12    6.33     12     6.75   31   6.10    17     6.53     9     5.89    16   6.31    11     7.36
most complicated development
challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                          64
                                                                                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in the Kyrgyz Republic, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group
should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than THREE)

                                               Office of the                                  PMU/                Bilateral/             Financial                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime       Office of   Employee of Consultant on Local   Multilateral   Private   Sector/     NGO/            Government
(Responses combined)                         Minister/Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry WBG project Government   Agency       Sector Private Bank    CBO    Media    Institution Academia   Other
Hea l th                                          17.6%          10.5%         15.6%        7.4%         11.8%       19.0%      23.8%      12.5%      19.1%   11.1%      9.1%       5.6%      16.7%
Tra ns port                                       5.9%           10.5%         9.4%         7.4%         11.8%       14.3%      0.0%       0.0%        2.1%   5.6%       0.0%       5.6%      16.7%
Agri cul tura l devel opment*                     29.4%          26.3%         28.1%        40.7%        58.8%       14.3%      42.9%      31.3%      21.3%   38.9%      0.0%       38.9%     22.2%
Gl oba l /regi ona l i ntegra tion                0.0%           10.5%         6.3%         7.4%         5.9%        4.8%       4.8%       6.3%        4.3%   5.6%       0.0%       5.6%      0.0%
Job crea tion/empl oyment                         11.8%          36.8%         21.9%        25.9%        32.4%       33.3%      28.6%      12.5%      27.7%   22.2%      9.1%       27.8%     22.2%
Publ i c a dmi ni s tra tion a nd publ i c
                                                  47.1%          31.6%         25.0%        25.9%        32.4%       42.9%      38.1%      18.8%      34.0%   38.9%      9.1%       22.2%     11.1%
s ervi ce del i very
Soci a l protection                               0.0%           5.3%          0.0%         3.7%         5.9%        4.8%       0.0%       0.0%       14.9%   16.7%     0.0%        11.1%     11.1%
Rura l devel opment                               5.9%           31.6%         21.9%        14.8%        26.5%       9.5%       23.8%      31.3%      17.0%   5.6%      18.2%       11.1%     27.8%
Forei gn di rect i nves tment                     11.8%          0.0%          3.1%         11.1%        11.8%       14.3%      4.8%       18.8%       6.4%   11.1%     18.2%       11.1%     11.1%
Educa tion                                        11.8%          21.1%         18.8%        14.8%        20.6%       9.5%       14.3%      37.5%      23.4%   22.2%     36.4%       22.2%     5.6%
Energy                                            5.9%           0.0%          6.3%         14.8%        0.0%        4.8%       9.5%       0.0%        4.3%   0.0%      9.1%        5.6%      11.1%
Fi na nci a l ma rkets *                          0.0%           0.0%          3.1%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       12.5%       0.0%   0.0%      18.2%       0.0%      0.0%
Urba n devel opment                               0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         5.9%        4.8%       9.5%       0.0%        6.4%   0.0%      0.0%        11.1%     5.6%
Envi ronmental s us tai na bi l i ty              11.8%          5.3%          3.1%         0.0%         2.9%        9.5%       0.0%       0.0%        6.4%   5.6%      0.0%        5.6%      0.0%
Economi c growth                                  58.8%          15.8%         34.4%        29.6%        20.6%       23.8%      23.8%      18.8%      21.3%   16.7%     18.2%       22.2%     16.7%
Pri va te s ector devel opment                    11.8%          10.5%         9.4%         7.4%         5.9%        19.0%      19.0%      37.5%      10.6%   16.7%     18.2%       11.1%     27.8%
Wa ter a nd s a ni tation                         0.0%           0.0%          12.5%        7.4%         11.8%       9.5%       0.0%       0.0%        8.5%   11.1%     0.0%        11.1%     5.6%
Food s ecuri ty                                   11.8%          15.8%         9.4%         3.7%         0.0%        0.0%       4.8%       6.3%        2.1%   5.6%      0.0%        11.1%     16.7%
Cl i ma te cha nge                                5.9%           0.0%          12.5%        7.4%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       0.0%        6.4%   0.0%      0.0%        5.6%      11.1%
Informa tion a nd communi ca tions
                                                  17.6%           0.0%          6.3%        3.7%           0.0%      4.8%        9.5%      0.0%       4.3%    11.1%     18.2%       5.6%      11.1%
technol ogy
Tra de a nd exports                               11.8%           5.3%          9.4%        7.4%           5.9%      14.3%       4.8%      12.5%      0.0%    11.1%      0.0%       5.6%      5.6%
Gender equi ty a nd equa l i ty of
                                                  0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        7.4%           5.9%      4.8%        0.0%      0.0%       14.9%   0.0%       9.1%       0.0%      5.6%
opportuni ty
La w a nd jus tice                                11.8%          10.5%          6.3%        0.0%           2.9%      9.5%        4.8%      0.0%       10.6%   0.0%      27.3%       5.6%      5.6%
Bus i nes s envi ronment a nd
                                                  5.9%           26.3%          6.3%        11.1%          5.9%      19.0%      23.8%      31.3%      6.4%    11.1%     36.4%       11.1%     11.1%
i nves tment cl i ma te*
Ma na gement of na tura l
                                                  0.0%           10.5%          3.1%        14.8%          5.9%      9.5%        4.8%      0.0%       10.6%   5.6%       0.0%       11.1%     0.0%
res ources a nd phys i ca l
Poverty reduction                                 0.0%           15.8%         12.5%        18.5%          8.8%      0.0%        4.8%      6.3%       12.8%   16.7%     27.3%       5.6%      5.6%
Di s a s ter ma na gement                         0.0%           0.0%          3.1%         0.0%           0.0%      0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        2.1%   0.0%      0.0%        11.1%     0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                                                                                      65
                                                                                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in the Kyrgyz Republic?

                                                  Office of the                                  PMU/                Bilateral/                Financial                    Independent
Greatest Value                                  President/Prime       Office of   Employee of Consultant on Local   Multilateral   Private      Sector/     NGO/            Government
Percentage of Respondents                       Minister/Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry WBG project Government   Agency       Sector    Private Bank    CBO    Media    Institution Academia   Other
Pol i cy a dvi ce, s tudi es , a na l ys es          11.8%          11.1%         13.3%        11.5%          6.5%      23.8%       4.8%        6.7%        4.3%    5.6%       9.1%       16.7%     12.5%
Da ta a nd s tatis tics                              5.9%            0.0%          3.3%        0.0%           3.2%      4.8%        4.8%        0.0%        2.1%    11.1%      9.1%       11.1%     0.0%
Conveni ng/Fa ci l i tating                          0.0%            5.6%          3.3%        3.8%         16.1%       0.0%        9.5%        0.0%        0.0%    5.6%       0.0%       0.0%      6.3%
Fi na nci a l res ources                             35.3%          27.8%         33.3%        23.1%        22.6%       38.1%      33.3%        40.0%       27.7%   22.2%     27.3%       11.1%     37.5%
Ca pa ci ty devel opment                             23.5%          16.7%         26.7%        19.2%          6.5%      9.5%       28.6%        0.0%        31.9%   22.2%      0.0%       27.8%     18.7%
Techni ca l a s s i s tance                          11.8%           0.0%          6.7%        15.4%          9.7%      4.8%        9.5%        0.0%        4.3%    5.6%      27.3%       11.1%     0.0%
Hel p to bri ng di s ci pl i ne/effective
s upervi s i on to i mpl ementation                  11.8%          16.7%          3.3%        23.1%        22.6%       14.3%       9.5%        40.0%       10.6%   22.2%     18.2%       11.1%     12.5%
of i nves tment projects
Mobi l i zi ng thi rd pa rty fi na nci a l
                                                     0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        3.8%           0.0%      0.0%        0.0%        6.7%        2.1%    5.6%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%
res ources
Donor coordi na tion                                 0.0%           16.7%         10.0%        0.0%           6.5%      4.8%        0.0%        0.0%        6.4%    0.0%       0.0%       11.1%     0.0%
Li nka ge to non-Ba nk expertis e                    0.0%            5.6%          0.0%        0.0%           6.5%      0.0%        0.0%        6.7%        6.4%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      6.3%
Other                                                0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        0.0%           0.0%      0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        4.3%    0.0%       9.1%       0.0%      6.3%


                                                  Office of the                                  PMU/                Bilateral/                Financial                    Independent
2nd Greatest Value                              President/Prime       Office of   Employee of Consultant on Local   Multilateral   Private      Sector/     NGO/            Government
Percentage of Respondents                       Minister/Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry WBG project Government   Agency       Sector    Private Bank    CBO    Media    Institution Academia   Other
Pol i cy a dvi ce, s tudi es , a na l ys es *        35.3%           0.0%          3.4%        8.0%         23.3%       9.5%       23.8%        6.7%        10.4%   27.8%     10.0%       5.6%      6.7%
Da ta a nd s tatis tics                              0.0%            5.6%          3.4%        4.0%           3.3%      19.0%       4.8%        6.7%        4.2%    5.6%      10.0%       11.1%     6.7%
Conveni ng/Fa ci l i tating                          0.0%            5.6%          0.0%        0.0%         10.0%       0.0%        4.8%        6.7%        2.1%    5.6%       0.0%       11.1%     0.0%
Fi na nci a l res ources                             17.6%          22.2%         20.7%        20.0%        10.0%       19.0%       9.5%        20.0%       6.2%    16.7%     10.0%       16.7%     6.7%
Ca pa ci ty devel opment                             23.5%          22.2%         20.7%        12.0%        13.3%       23.8%       0.0%        33.3%       14.6%   11.1%     10.0%       16.7%     13.3%
Techni ca l a s s i s tance                          11.8%          22.2%         31.0%        24.0%        10.0%       14.3%      23.8%        6.7%        25.0%   11.1%     30.0%       16.7%     26.7%
Hel p to bri ng di s ci pl i ne/effective
s upervi s i on to i mpl ementation                  0.0%           11.1%         10.3%        8.0%         10.0%       14.3%       4.8%        0.0%        12.5%   5.6%      20.0%       5.6%      20.0%
of i nves tment projects
Mobi l i zi ng thi rd pa rty fi na nci a l
                                                     11.8%           5.6%         10.3%        4.0%           6.7%      0.0%       19.0%        6.7%        4.2%    0.0%      10.0%       5.6%      0.0%
res ources
Donor coordi na tion                                 0.0%            5.6%          0.0%        16.0%        10.0%       0.0%        9.5%        13.3%       12.5%   5.6%       0.0%       5.6%      6.7%
Li nka ge to non-Ba nk expertis e                    0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        4.0%           3.3%      0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        6.3%    11.1%      0.0%       5.6%      6.7%
Other                                       0.0%                     0.0%          0.0%        0.0%           0.0%      0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        2.1%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      6.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                         66
                                                                                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than TWO)

                                                 Office of the                                  PMU/                Bilateral/                Financial                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents                      President/Prime       Office of   Employee of Consultant on Local   Multilateral   Private      Sector/     NGO/            Government
(Responses combined)                           Minister/Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry WBG project Government   Agency       Sector    Private Bank    CBO    Media    Institution Academia   Other
Too i nfl uenced by devel oped
                                                    12.5%          33.3%         28.6%        8.0%         21.2%       4.8%       25.0%        26.7%       19.1%   5.9%      36.4%       5.6%      31.3%
countri es
Not expl ori ng a l terna tive pol i cy
                                                    18.8%           5.6%          7.1%        4.0%           9.1%      9.5%        5.0%        0.0%        4.3%    0.0%       9.1%       5.6%      6.3%
options
Not col l a bora ting enough wi th
s takehol ders outs i de the                        12.5%          11.1%          7.1%        12.0%          6.1%      4.8%       25.0%        13.3%       29.8%   17.6%      9.1%       16.7%     25.0%
Government
Its a dvi ce a nd s tra tegi es do not
l end thems el ves to pra ctica l                   18.8%          16.7%         10.7%        16.0%          3.0%      28.6%      10.0%        33.3%       14.9%   17.6%      9.1%       16.7%     12.5%
probl em s ol vi ng
Not enough publ i c di s cl os ure of
                                                    12.5%          16.7%          7.1%        24.0%        21.2%       4.8%       20.0%        13.3%       19.1%   5.9%       0.0%       5.6%      6.3%
i ts work
Arroga nt i n i ts a pproa ch                       0.0%            0.0%          3.6%        0.0%           0.0%      4.8%        5.0%        0.0%        2.1%    0.0%       0.0%       5.6%      0.0%
Not cl i ent-focus ed                               12.5%           0.0%          3.6%        0.0%           0.0%      0.0%       10.0%        13.3%       6.4%    5.9%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%
The credi bi l i ty of i ts
                                                    0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        4.0%           0.0%      0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        2.1%    0.0%       0.0%       5.6%      0.0%
knowl edge/da ta
WBG’s proces s es too compl ex                      25.0%           5.6%         21.4%        28.0%        15.2%       0.0%       15.0%        20.0%       8.5%    11.8%      9.1%       16.7%     18.7%
Not wi l l i ng to hones tly cri tici ze
pol i ci es a nd reform efforts i n the             12.5%          16.7%          3.6%        12.0%          3.0%      23.8%       5.0%        20.0%       12.8%   11.8%      9.1%       22.2%     0.0%
country
Staff too i na cces s i bl e a t the
Loca l Country Offi ce i n the Kyrgyz               0.0%           11.1%          3.6%        4.0%           9.1%      4.8%        0.0%        0.0%        6.4%    0.0%       0.0%       11.1%     0.0%
Republ i c
Staff too i na cces s i bl e a t the
                                                    0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        0.0%           0.0%      0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%
Hea dqua rters i n Wa s hi ngton
Impos i ng technocra tic s ol utions
wi thout rega rd to pol i tica l                    0.0%            5.6%          3.6%        0.0%           6.1%      4.8%        5.0%        13.3%       2.1%    5.9%       0.0%       5.6%      25.0%
rea l i ties
WBG’s proces s es too s l ow                        0.0%           11.1%          7.1%        20.0%          3.0%      9.5%        5.0%        6.7%        4.3%    5.9%       9.1%       22.2%     6.3%
Not a l i gned wi th other donors ’
                                                    0.0%            0.0%          3.6%        0.0%           0.0%      23.8%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%    5.9%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%
work*
Not a l i gned wi th country
                                                    6.3%            0.0%         10.7%        0.0%           0.0%      14.3%       0.0%        6.7%        4.3%    5.9%       0.0%       5.6%      0.0%
pri ori ties
Not a dequa tel y s ens i tive to
pol i tica l /s oci a l rea l i ties i n the        12.5%          22.2%         25.0%        20.0%        12.1%       14.3%      10.0%        6.7%        14.9%   35.3%      9.1%       16.7%     31.3%
Kyrgyz Republ i c
Other*                                              12.5%           0.0%          3.6%        0.0%           3.0%      4.8%        0.0%        0.0%        4.3%    0.0%      27.3%       11.1%     0.0%
Don’t know                                 6.3%                    11.1%         21.4%        12.0%        33.3%       14.3%      25.0%        6.7%        17.0%   11.8%     18.2%       5.6%      12.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                        67
                                                                                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than TWO)

                                         Office of the                                  PMU/                Bilateral/                Financial                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents              President/Prime       Office of   Employee of Consultant on Local   Multilateral   Private      Sector/     NGO/            Government
(Responses combined)                   Minister/Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry WBG project Government   Agency       Sector    Private Bank    CBO    Media    Institution Academia   Other
Trus t Fund ma na gement                    0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        8.0%           0.0%      10.0%       9.5%        0.0%        2.1%    0.0%       0.0%       5.6%      0.0%
Knowl edge products /s ervi ces             18.8%          29.4%         22.6%        8.0%           9.1%      25.0%       9.5%        18.8%       18.7%   16.7%      8.3%       5.6%      17.6%
Ca pa ci ty devel opment                    37.5%           5.9%         38.7%        36.0%        27.3%       30.0%      33.3%        43.8%       35.4%   55.6%      8.3%       27.8%     17.6%
Techni ca l a s s i s tance                 12.5%          29.4%         38.7%        28.0%        42.4%       30.0%      33.3%        18.8%       33.3%   27.8%     33.3%       22.2%     17.6%
Inves tment l endi ng*                      87.5%          47.1%         35.5%        56.0%        63.6%       20.0%      61.9%        62.5%       47.9%   50.0%     58.3%       61.1%     58.8%
Pol i cy ba s ed l endi ng / budget
                                            6.3%           23.5%         22.6%        12.0%        30.3%       20.0%       9.5%        18.8%       6.3%    16.7%     25.0%       16.7%     11.8%
s upport to the Government
Mul ti-s ectora l a pproa ches              18.8%          23.5%         29.0%        32.0%        12.1%       30.0%      28.6%        12.5%       25.0%   11.1%      8.3%       27.8%     52.9%
Other                                       0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        0.0%           0.0%      0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        2.1%    0.0%       0.0%       11.1%     0.0%
Don’t know                                  0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        0.0%           3.0%      10.0%       4.8%        6.3%        10.4%   5.6%      16.7%       5.6%      5.9%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country?
(Choose no more than TWO)

                                         Office of the                                  PMU/                Bilateral/                Financial                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents              President/Prime       Office of   Employee of Consultant on Local   Multilateral   Private      Sector/     NGO/            Government
(Responses combined)                   Minister/Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry WBG project Government   Agency       Sector    Private Bank    CBO    Media    Institution Academia   Other
Pa rl i a ment*                             12.5%          47.1%         20.0%        40.0%        24.2%       20.0%      28.6%        12.5%       10.4%   5.6%      27.3%       0.0%      37.5%
Donor communi ty                            31.3%          11.8%         23.3%        4.0%         12.1%       40.0%       4.8%        18.8%       12.5%   16.7%      9.1%       11.1%     12.5%
Medi a                                      18.8%          11.8%         13.3%        0.0%         12.1%       5.0%       33.3%        12.5%       8.3%    27.8%      9.1%       11.1%     6.3%
Loca l Government*                          43.8%          58.8%         26.7%        44.0%        81.8%       20.0%      23.8%        50.0%       41.7%   50.0%     18.2%       27.8%     56.3%
Pri va te s ector*                          37.5%          29.4%         20.0%        28.0%        12.1%       35.0%      52.4%        43.8%       14.6%   33.3%     63.6%       22.2%     31.3%
Aca demi a /thi nk tanks /res ea rch
                                            18.8%           0.0%         23.3%        16.0%          6.1%      15.0%       9.5%        12.5%       6.2%    5.6%      27.3%       66.7%     12.5%
i ns titutes *
NGOs /Communi ty-Ba s ed
                                            18.8%           0.0%         10.0%        12.0%        12.1%       25.0%      19.0%        6.3%        79.2%   33.3%      9.1%       16.7%     18.8%
Orga ni za tions (CBOs )*
Youth/uni vers i ty groups                  0.0%           17.6%         10.0%        4.0%           3.0%      5.0%       14.3%        25.0%       8.3%    16.7%      0.0%       11.1%     12.5%
Benefi ci a ri es                           12.5%          11.8%         33.3%        24.0%        18.2%       25.0%       9.5%        12.5%       14.6%   5.6%      18.2%       33.3%     6.3%
Other                                       0.0%            5.9%          0.0%        8.0%           3.0%      5.0%        0.0%        6.3%        0.0%    0.0%       9.1%       0.0%      0.0%
Don’t know                                  0.0%            0.0%          3.3%        0.0%           3.0%      5.0%        0.0%        0.0%        2.1%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups



                                                                                                68
                                                                                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in the Kyrgyz Republic? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                      Office of     Office of                   PMU/                    Bilateral/                   Financial                           Independent
                                    President/PM   Parliamen-   Employee of Consultant on   Local      Multilateral                   Sector/                            Government
                                      /Minister       tarian     a Ministry WBG project Government       Agency     Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO       Media     Institution    Academia         Other
                                      N    Mea n    N     Mea n  N    Mea n   N    Mea n  N    Mea n    N     Mea n   N     Mea n    N    Mea n   N   Mea n   N    Mea n   N     Mea n   N    Mea n   N      Mea n
Overall the WBG currently plays
a relevant role in development in    14    7.07    16   7.06    30   7.13   24    7.63   31    7.32    19    6.68    18    6.50    16     6.44    40   6.20   18   6.11    9     5.67    17   6.47    15     6.87
the Kyrgyz Republic
The WBG’s work is aligned with
what I consider the development
                                     15    6.07    16   6.69    28   7.32   24    8.17   26    7.04    19    6.16    18    5.89    16     5.69    34   5.79   17   6.41    9     5.78    17   5.76    15     6.53
priorities for the Kyrgyz
Republic*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                       69
                                                                                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in the Kyrgyz Republic, in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                      Office of     Office of                   PMU/                    Bilateral/                   Financial                           Independent
                                    President/PM   Parliamen-   Employee of Consultant on   Local      Multilateral                   Sector/                            Government
                                      /Minister       tarian     a Ministry WBG project Government       Agency     Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO       Media     Institution    Academia         Other
                                      N    Mea n    N     Mea n  N    Mea n   N    Mea n  N    Mea n    N     Mea n   N     Mea n   N     Mea n   N   Mea n   N    Mea n   N     Mea n   N    Mea n   N      Mea n
Responsiveness to needs              12    6.58    14   5.07    26   6.23   21    6.62   27    6.63    16    5.56    15    5.53    12     4.67    31   5.39   14   5.64    7     5.57    15   5.13    11     6.00
Flexibility (in terms of the
institution’s products and           11    6.91    12   6.00    25   6.48   21    7.05   25    6.96    16    4.88    16    5.94    13     5.31    30   4.80   13   6.38    7     6.14    13   5.08    8      6.75
services)*
Flexibility (in terms of changing
                                     11    6.73    13   6.77    25   5.84   21    6.67   25    7.44    16    5.06    16    6.00    14     5.29    32   4.94   13   5.62    7     6.00    15   4.60    9      6.78
country circumstances)*
Being inclusive*                     11    7.64    14   7.29    26   6.42   23    7.78   25    6.92    18    4.89    16    6.13    13     5.69    35   5.26   14   6.14    7     6.71    17   5.35    12     6.83
Openness (sharing data and
                                     11    7.55    15   7.33    28   7.00   23    8.00   24    7.29    18    5.22    14    6.57    15     6.33    33   5.64   14   6.79    7     6.86    17   6.24    10     7.40
other information)*
Collaboration with the
                                     13    8.23    14   8.07    28   7.46   23    8.04   26    8.12    18    7.06    18    6.78    15     7.13    34   7.00   14   7.57    7     6.86    16   7.81    12     7.75
Government
The speed in which it gets things
                                     11    6.91    13   7.31    24   6.58   23    7.39   22    8.05    17    5.06    16    6.25    14     5.57    32   5.22   12   6.58    6     6.33    15   5.20    10     8.00
accomplished on the ground*
Ease of access to people at WBG
who are making decisions             11    7.45    14   6.21    25   6.80   24    8.17   22    7.45    17    6.24    14    5.64    14     5.79    33   5.36   13   7.23    6     7.00    15   5.60    9      8.44
important to my work*
Collaboration with civil society*    9     7.22    10   6.50    20   6.75   19    7.11   27    6.93    17    4.88    14    6.29    12     4.92    41   5.24   13   6.23    6     6.17    16   5.88    10     6.30
Staff accessibility at the Local
Country Office in the Kyrgyz         12    7.58    14   6.71    26   6.92   21    8.05   23    6.65    17    6.12    17    5.59    14     6.71    36   5.28   13   7.23    8     6.88    16   6.63    8      7.88
Republic*
Staff accessibility at the
                                     7     4.86    8    3.88    17   5.35   16    7.81   12    6.33    11    5.82    11    4.55     8     4.63    26   4.42   2    4.50    4     6.00    10   5.70    5      8.00
Headquarters in Washington*
Collaboration with other donors
                                     10    6.30    11   6.64    22   6.77   20    8.30   20    7.55    18    6.11    13    6.23    10     5.50    28   5.61   10   6.90    5     6.80    15   6.53    8      6.25
and development partners
Collaboration with the private
                                     10    6.20    12   6.50    19   5.47   19    6.32   21    6.33    15    6.13    14    5.21    13     5.08    29   4.69   11   5.64    3     5.33    11   4.64    9      6.00
sector
Straightforwardness and
                                     11    8.00    15   8.40    25   6.20   22    8.14   22    7.73    18    6.00    12    7.67    11     6.55    31   5.48   13   6.85    7     6.00    17   5.76    9      7.22
honesty*
Treating clients and
stakeholders in the Kyrgyz           12    8.00    16   8.19    27   7.22   22    8.68   23    8.48    16    6.88    16    7.06    14     6.79    33   6.55   14   7.93    7     7.00    16   7.12    9      9.00
Republic with respect*
Being a long-term partner*           12    8.42    15   9.20    26   7.73   20    8.90   20    8.60    18    6.89    13    7.15    13     8.38    31   6.65   13   7.85    7     7.86    15   7.00    12     7.67
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                       70
                                                                                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)

                                               Office of the                                  PMU/                Bilateral/             Financial                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime       Office of   Employee of Consultant on Local   Multilateral   Private   Sector/     NGO/            Government
(Responses combined)                         Minister/Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry WBG project Government   Agency       Sector Private Bank    CBO    Media    Institution Academia   Other
The Government works
                                                  46.7%          37.5%         16.7%        16.7%        28.1%       25.0%      38.1%      25.0%      31.3%   40.0%     20.0%       61.1%     53.3%
i neffi ci ently
Poor donor coordi na tion                         13.3%          25.0%         16.7%        8.3%           9.4%      25.0%      14.3%      12.5%      22.9%   6.7%      20.0%       5.6%      13.3%
The WBG i s not s ens i tive enough
to pol i tica l /s oci a l rea l i ties on        20.0%          25.0%         30.0%        16.7%        12.5%       25.0%      33.3%      37.5%      18.8%   46.7%     20.0%       11.1%     26.7%
the ground
La ck of/i na dequa te l evel s of
                                                  13.3%          18.7%         33.3%        50.0%        25.0%       25.0%      19.0%      25.0%      27.1%   26.7%     20.0%       38.9%     20.0%
ca pa ci ty i n Government
There i s not a n a dequa te l evel of
ci tizen/ci vi l s oci ety                        20.0%          25.0%         13.3%        16.7%        43.7%       10.0%      14.3%      25.0%      37.5%   20.0%     30.0%       5.6%      6.7%
pa rtici pa tion*
The Worl d Ba nk Group works too
                                                  6.7%            0.0%          6.7%        0.0%           0.0%      25.0%       4.8%      0.0%       6.3%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      6.7%
s l owl y*
The Worl d Ba nk Group does not
do a dequa te fol l ow                            26.7%          31.3%         23.3%        12.5%          9.4%      35.0%      14.3%      18.7%      20.8%   6.7%      10.0%       22.2%     20.0%
through/fol l ow-up
Pol i tica l pres s ures a nd
                                                  6.7%            0.0%         10.0%        41.7%          9.4%      10.0%      28.6%      31.3%      4.2%    6.7%      30.0%       22.2%     6.7%
obs tacl es *
Reforms a re not wel l thought out
                                                  33.3%          25.0%         30.0%        16.7%        28.1%       20.0%      28.6%      25.0%      16.7%   26.7%     30.0%       22.2%     26.7%
i n l i ght of country cha l l enges
Other                                       0.0%                  0.0%          0.0%        8.3%           9.4%      0.0%        4.8%      0.0%       6.2%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      6.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                      71
                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

The World Bank Group has emphasized the main objective to improve governance in its strategy with the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, focusing on the following areas of economic
development. How would you rate the EFFECTIVENESS of the World Bank Group’s support in these areas over the past two years (2014-2015)?

Please rate the EFFECTIVENESS of the three key clusters of interventions of the World Bank Group’s strategy. (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                  Office of     Office of                    PMU/                     Bilateral/                     Financial                                Independent
                                President/PM   Parliamen-   Employee of   Consultant on  Local       Multilateral                     Sector/                                 Government
                                  /Minister      tarian      a Ministry   WBG project Government       Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO          Media       Institution   Academia         Other
                                 N    Mea n    N    Mea n    N    Mea n    N    Mea n   N    Mea n    N    Mea n      N    Mea n    N     Mea n   N    Mea n   N      Mea n    N    Mea n    N    Mea n   N      Mea n
Public administration and
                                 12    5.92    11    5.18   19    6.21     17   6.53    17   6.71    14     5.50      9    4.22     13     4.92   26   4.69    7      5.57     4     5.75    14   5.57    6      7.00
public service delivery
Business environment and
                                 11    6.64    11    6.27   12    5.92     16   6.75    16   6.63    15     5.80     10    5.70     13     5.00   20   4.50    8      5.38     4     7.00    14   6.57    4      7.75
investment climate
Management of natural
resources and physical            9    5.44    10    5.00   14    5.07     15   6.60    13   6.62    12     5.08      9    4.22     10     4.90   22   5.00    7      6.43     2     4.50    11   5.82    3      7.00
infrastructure




                                                                                                     72
                                                                                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

Please rate the EFFECTIVENESS of the World Bank Group’s work in the following areas of development. (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                   Office of     Office of                   PMU/                    Bilateral/                   Financial                           Independent
                                 President/PM   Parliamen-   Employee of Consultant on   Local      Multilateral                   Sector/                            Government
                                   /Minister       tarian     a Ministry WBG project Government       Agency     Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO       Media     Institution    Academia         Other
                                   N    Mea n    N     Mea n  N    Mea n   N    Mea n  N    Mea n    N     Mea n   N     Mea n   N     Mea n   N   Mea n   N    Mea n   N     Mea n   N    Mea n   N      Mea n
Information and
                                   9    6.33    10    5.60   11   5.73   12    6.83   16    7.00    11    4.73    13    6.54     8     5.00    19   5.84   9    5.11    3     5.67    7    5.14    5      6.40
communications technology
Transport                          9    7.00    11    5.82   14   6.00   16    6.81   17    7.53    14    6.93    13    5.85     7     4.29    20   6.20   12   5.83    3     6.33    7    6.29    5      7.00
Law and justice*                   8    5.25    10    6.70   9    4.22   11    6.09   12    6.33    12    5.75    11    4.55    10     3.80    19   4.32   10   5.30    2     3.50    8    4.88    6      6.67
Urban development                 10    5.50    12    6.17   14   6.14   10    5.40   14    6.57    10    5.60    12    5.17     8     4.25    23   5.26   10   5.50    3     6.67    10   6.20    6      6.83
Environmental sustainability*     11    6.73    12    6.33   17   6.18   17    8.12   19    6.74    11    5.45    11    6.09     8     4.75    20   4.40   9    5.33    3     6.00    7    6.00    6      5.67
Poverty reduction                 11    7.00    14    7.21   17   6.12   17    7.41   22    6.64    14    6.50    14    6.00    11     5.18    26   5.15   11   6.91    5     6.60    13   6.38    5      6.20
Private sector development        11    6.09    13    6.62   12   5.17   14    6.21   19    7.42    14    5.57    12    5.58    10     5.30    24   4.71   11   4.73    3     6.00    13   6.23    5      6.60
Foreign direct investment*         9    7.56    12    7.42   16   5.75   13    7.08   19    7.89    12    5.42    14    5.43    10     6.10    20   4.55   11   6.82    2     4.00    10   6.30    6      7.17
Water and sanitation               9    6.89    13    7.08   17   6.65   13    7.54   24    7.17    12    5.83    13    5.77     9     4.78    26   5.65   11   6.09    2     5.00    12   6.50    6      5.33
Trade and exports                  8    5.75    12    6.42   10   4.70   13    6.08   15    5.87    12    6.25    14    6.07     8     4.00    16   4.69   11   5.45    2     5.50    7    6.71    5      6.80
Economic growth                   11    6.55    13    6.54   12   5.67   12    7.33   16    6.94    14    6.14    13    5.77    10     5.20    25   4.92   10   5.80    5     6.20    10   5.80    5      6.40
Health                            10    6.50    13    6.08   12   5.33   14    7.07   16    6.94    14    7.00    13    6.15     9     5.56    27   5.44   11   6.18    4     7.00    12   6.58    5      5.80
Disaster management                6    6.00    12    6.25   15   6.47   14    6.57   17    6.41     9    6.56    10    5.20     8     5.50    17   4.71   8    5.88    3     6.67    8    7.13    4      7.25
Job creation/employment           10    5.90    11    5.09   14   4.57    9    6.11   15    6.27    13    5.38    11    5.36     9     4.11    20   4.70   11   5.00    4     6.50    13   5.46    5      6.20
Financial markets                  8    5.75    11    6.18   9    4.78   12    6.25   16    6.88    10    6.00    12    6.67    10     6.10    18   4.83   9    4.78    2     4.50    8    6.87    4      7.25
Gender equity and equality of
                                   8    6.75    12    7.17   13   6.15   15    7.47   19    7.16    11    5.36    11    5.73     8     7.00    22   5.50   11   6.18    3     7.33    6    6.67    4      7.25
opportunity
Energy                             6    5.83    13    6.92   14   5.93   14    7.50   16    6.63    13    7.15    13    5.38     8     5.38    20   5.85   11   5.09    4     7.00    11   5.64    5      6.60
Rural development                  7    7.14    12    6.67   15   5.93   14    7.00   22    7.27    11    5.82    13    5.77    10     5.60    19   5.05   12   5.50    4     7.25    11   6.18    6      6.00
Global/regional integration        9    6.33    10    6.50   11   5.27   11    6.91   13    7.08    12    5.83    10    5.70     8     4.63    14   3.79   11   5.36    3     6.00    7    6.14    5      7.00
Food security                     10    7.20    13    6.77   12   5.33   13    7.15   16    6.63    10    6.00    11    5.73     8     4.63    19   5.05   10   6.20    2     4.50    10   6.20    7      5.86
Education*                         8    6.50    14    7.50   16   6.13   16    7.13   19    7.11    11    6.36    13    5.92     9     4.56    26   5.04   11   5.64    5     6.00    15   6.07    6      7.67
Social protection                  6    6.17    11    6.18   12   5.25   13    6.38   18    6.50    10    6.30    12    5.75     9     4.33    23   4.39   10   5.10    3     6.00    11   5.73    4      6.50
Climate change*                    9    7.44    11    6.09   13   5.54   12    7.00   17    6.53     9    5.11    10    6.30     7     4.29    15   4.20   8    4.75    3     7.00    9    6.11    4      8.25
Agricultural development          10    7.10    12    6.58   17   6.29   15    7.67   21    6.95    13    6.77    13    6.23    10     5.30    20   5.85   10   5.60    4     7.50    15   6.20    5      6.60
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                    73
                                                                                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

                                      Office of     Office of                  PMU/                     Bilateral/                   Financial                          Independent
                                    President/PM   Parliamen-  Employee of Consultant on   Local       Multilateral                   Sector/                           Government
                                      /Minister       tarian    a Ministry WBG project Government        Agency     Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO       Media    Institution     Academia         Other
                                      N    Mean     N     Mean  N    Mean    N    Mean   N    Mean      N     Mean    N     Mean    N     Mean    N   Mean    N    Mean   N     Mean     N    Mean    N      Mean
To what extent does the WBG’s
work help to achieve
                                     14    7.07    16   7.06    20   6.40   20    7.55    27    7.48   16      5.94   18   6.00    15     5.73    27   5.93   16   5.87    6     6.17    17   6.35    9      7.11
development results in the
Kyrgyz Republic?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz Republic? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                      Office of     Office of                   PMU/                    Bilateral/                   Financial                           Independent
                                    President/PM   Parliamen-   Employee of Consultant on   Local      Multilateral                   Sector/                            Government
                                      /Minister       tarian     a Ministry WBG project Government       Agency     Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO       Media     Institution    Academia         Other
                                      N    Mea n    N     Mea n  N    Mea n   N    Mea n  N    Mea n    N     Mea n   N     Mea n    N    Mea n   N   Mea n   N    Mea n   N     Mea n   N    Mea n   N      Mea n
The WBG's financial instruments
meet the needs of the Kyrgyz         15    6.40    16   6.81    21   6.95   20    7.60    26    6.77   17      6.18   19   6.58    14     5.57    27   5.74   15   6.53    7     6.14    17   5.29    10     7.20
Republic
The WBG meets the Kyrgyz
Republic’s needs for knowledge       13    6.31    15   6.87    22   6.59   19    7.63    24    6.50   17      6.35   19   6.37    14     5.71    30   5.97   15   6.13    7     6.14    18   6.44    11     5.64
services


                                      Office of     Office of                  PMU/                     Bilateral/                   Financial                          Independent
                                    President/PM   Parliamen-  Employee of Consultant on   Local       Multilateral                   Sector/                           Government
                                      /Minister       tarian    a Ministry WBG project Government        Agency     Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO       Media    Institution     Academia         Other
                                      N    Mean     N     Mean  N    Mean    N    Mean   N    Mean      N     Mean    N     Mean    N     Mean    N   Mean    N    Mean   N     Mean     N    Mean    N      Mean
To what extent do you believe the
WBG measures and corrects its
                                     13    7.62    14   6.93    17   5.82   18    7.33    23    7.09   14      5.64   10   6.30    10     5.60    25   5.60   12   6.67    6     4.67    13   6.00    11     6.00
work in real time in the Kyrgyz
Republic?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                        74
                                                                                                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?* (Select only ONE response)

                                           Office of the                                  PMU/                Bilateral/                                    Financial                            Independent
                                         President/Prime       Office of   Employee of Consultant on Local   Multilateral                   Private          Sector/        NGO/                 Government
Percentage of Respondents                Minister/Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry WBG project Government   Agency                       Sector        Private Bank       CBO         Media    Institution Academia        Other
Weekl y                                       6.3%                11.8%             3.8%         19.0%                                                       6.3%                                                 5.9%
Monthl y                                      12.5%               5.9%             19.2%         19.0%            13.8%           27.8%         9.5%                        2.1%         18.8%                   23.5%
A few ti mes a yea r                          25.0%               29.4%            23.1%         42.9%            34.5%           38.9%         9.5%         37.5%          44.7%        43.8%      55.6%        35.3%        20.0%
Ra rel y                                      50.0%               41.2%            46.2%         19.0%            41.4%           27.8%      42.9%           50.0%          25.5%        25.0%      33.3%        17.6%        33.3%
Never                                         6.3%                11.8%             7.7%                          10.3%           5.6%       38.1%           6.3%           27.7%        12.5%      11.1%        17.6%        46.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In the Kyrgyz Republic, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                     Office of      Office of                        PMU/                     Bilateral/                     Financial                                      Independent
                                   President/PM    Parliamen-     Employee of     Consultant on  Local       Multilateral                     Sector/                                       Government
                                     /Minister       tarian        a Ministry     WBG project Government       Agency       Private Sector Private Bank      NGO/CBO             Media       Institution    Academia         Other
                                    N      Mea n     N    Mea n    N      Mea n    N    Mea n   N    Mea n    N     Mea n     N    Mea n    N     Mea n      N      Mea n    N      Mea n    N    Mea n     N    Mea n   N      Mea n
Are timely                          12      7.00     13   6.77    20      6.75     17   7.12    21   7.71    13     6.15     14     5.86    13     5.38      27      6.37    14     6.29     6     5.67     13   5.69    12     7.17
Include appropriate level of
stakeholder involvement during      13      6.92     12   6.92    20      6.75     19   8.21    22   7.32    13     5.69     13     6.46    11     6.18      32      5.56    12     6.67     6     6.00     15   5.80    10     7.60
preparation*
Lead to practical solutions*        11      7.45     12   6.75    20      6.60     18   8.22    22   7.82    12     5.58     14     6.43    10     6.10      29      5.10    12     5.83     6     5.83     12   5.17    11     7.36
Are accessible (well written and
                                    13      6.92     13   6.69    20      6.90     20   7.75    24   7.33    14     6.79     14     6.71    12     7.50      34      5.35    13     6.77     7     6.14     17   6.53    11     7.36
easy to understand)
Are source of relevant
information on global good          13      7.15     12   7.33    21      6.90     19   7.95    21   7.52    14     7.21     12     6.58    12     7.25      31      6.19    15     7.33     7     6.29     17   6.53    11     7.09
practices
Are adequately disseminated*        12      6.42     12   6.92    19      6.26     20   7.65    24   7.21    16     6.38     10     6.70    12     6.17      31      4.61    15     6.80     7     5.71     15   6.13    10     6.80
Are translated enough into local
                                    13      6.54     13   5.85    19      6.00     18   6.94    22   7.41    12     6.75     12     6.33    10     5.50      30      4.53    10     7.00     6     5.00     15   5.80    10     6.80
language
Are adaptable to the Kyrgyz
Republic’s specific development
                                    13      7.23     13   6.54    21      6.86     18   7.83    24   7.25    14     6.57     13     7.00    9      5.56      26      5.62    12     7.42     6     4.83     14   5.64    10     6.80
challenges and country
circumstances*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                             75
                                                                                                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

                                    Office of     Office of                     PMU/                     Bilateral/                     Financial                                Independent
                                  President/PM   Parliamen-    Employee of   Consultant on  Local       Multilateral                     Sector/                                 Government
                                    /Minister      tarian       a Ministry   WBG project Government       Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO          Media       Institution   Academia         Other
                                    N    Mea n    N    Mea n    N    Mea n    N    Mea n   N    Mea n    N    Mea n      N    Mea n    N     Mea n   N    Mea n   N      Mea n    N    Mea n    N    Mea n   N      Mea n
Overall, how significant a
contribution do you believe the
WBG's knowledge work and            15    7.93   16    7.75    25    7.68     20   8.65    28    7.86   17     7.12     18    8.39     16     8.38   33   7.76    15     6.93     8     7.13    17   7.18    13     8.54
activities make to development
results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the
technical quality of the World
                                    13    7.38   14    7.29    23    6.52     19   8.63    26    7.58   17     7.35     12    8.08     14     6.57   31   6.65    11     6.73     6     6.33    17   6.47    11     8.27
Bank Group's knowledge work
and activities?*
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                         76
                                                                                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                      Office of     Office of                   PMU/                    Bilateral/                   Financial                           Independent
                                    President/PM   Parliamen-   Employee of Consultant on   Local      Multilateral                   Sector/                            Government
                                      /Minister       tarian     a Ministry WBG project Government       Agency     Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO       Media     Institution    Academia         Other
                                      N    Mea n    N     Mea n  N    Mea n   N    Mea n  N    Mea n    N     Mea n   N     Mea n   N     Mea n   N   Mea n   N    Mea n   N     Mea n   N    Mea n   N      Mea n
The World Bank Group disburses
                                     9     7.44    9       6.00   18   7.44   20   8.65   23   7.35    11    5.82     9    6.67    10     5.30    21   5.86   7    7.43    3     6.00    7    6.14    7      8.57
funds promptly*
The WBG effectively monitors
and evaluates the projects and       11    7.18    15      6.73   22   6.95   21   8.19   24   8.13    14    5.57    12    6.58    13     6.69    28   6.04   12   7.17    6     6.33    15   6.53    9      8.22
programs it supports*
The World Bank Group’s
approvals and reviews are done       12    7.50    14      7.36   22   6.55   21   7.90   23   8.09    13    5.85     9    5.78    15     6.00    21   6.14   8    7.88    5     6.80    11   7.36    8      8.50
in a timely fashion*
The WBG’s “Safeguard Policy”
                                     9     7.00    10      7.30   13   7.00   15   8.40   15   7.07     8    6.50     7    6.43     9     6.33    15   7.07   5    7.00    4     6.75    3    6.67    4      9.25
requirements are reasonable
The World Bank Group’s
                                     11    7.36    11      7.00   19   6.74   16   8.13   15   7.73     9    6.00    11    6.55    13     6.77    15   6.33   9    6.67    4     6.75    9    7.00    5      8.40
conditions on its lending are
The WBG takes decisions quickly
                                     10    7.30    13      6.54   16   6.25   21   7.24   19   7.53    12    5.58     8    6.38     9     5.00    16   5.75   11   6.36    4     5.25    10   6.40    7      7.86
in the Kyrgyz Republic
Working with the World Bank
Group increases the Kyrgyz           12    8.08    14      8.36   22   7.23   20   8.60   25   7.96    14    6.43    14    7.57    13     7.31    29   6.38   12   7.33    5     6.20    16   7.44    9      7.67
Republic’s institutional capacity
Where country systems are
adequate, the World Bank Group       10    7.00    13      7.54   19   6.74   19   8.16   21   8.14     9    6.89    13    7.15    11     6.55    21   6.67   9    6.44    4     6.75    11   7.45    6      8.67
makes appropriate use of them
The WBG provides effective
                                     13    7.62    14      6.86   21   6.57   21   8.71   24   8.13    12    5.67    13    6.77    12     6.58    27   7.00   12   5.92    6     6.67    16   6.69    9      8.00
implementation support*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                      Office of     Office of                   PMU/                    Bilateral/                   Financial                           Independent
                                    President/PM   Parliamen-   Employee of Consultant on   Local      Multilateral                   Sector/                            Government
                                      /Minister       tarian     a Ministry WBG project Government       Agency     Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO       Media     Institution    Academia         Other
                                      N    Mea n    N     Mea n  N    Mea n   N    Mea n  N    Mea n    N     Mea n   N     Mea n    N    Mea n   N   Mea n   N    Mea n   N     Mea n   N    Mea n   N      Mea n
To what extent do you believe
that the WBG’s work helps to
find solutions that promote          11    6.55    14      5.29   17   6.35   16   7.38   27   7.56    13    5.46    14    6.93    11     5.45    23   5.78   13   6.23    5     6.00    8    6.63    9      7.44
private public partnerships in
the Kyrgyz Republic?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                       77
                                                                                                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Select only ONE response)*
                                                                      PMU/                        Bilateral/                                     Financial
                                                    Employee of Consultant on         Local      Multilateral    Private                          Sector/           Civil
 Percentage of Respondents                           a Ministry   WBG project Government           Agency        Sector                        Private Bank        Society         Media         Academia      Other
 The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective
 and focuses on the most important development         50.0%          48.1%          50.0%          14.3%        33.3%                              43.8%          43.9%           50.0%          54.2%        37.0%
 challenges in the Kyrgyz Republic
 The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective
 in the Kyrgyz Republic, and it is involved in too     43.2%          25.9%          30.0%          50.0%        38.1%                              43.8%          31.7%           37.5%          33.3%        33.3%
 many areas of development
 Don’t know                                            6.8%           25.9%          20.0%          35.7%        28.6%                              12.5%          24.4%           12.5%          12.5%        29.6%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz Republic
Looking forward, and taking into account limited resources, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to EMPHASIZE the following areas of development with the Government of the
Kyrgyz Republic in the near future (2016-2017)?

Please rate the IMPORTANCE of the three key clusters of interventions of the World Bank Group’s strategy . (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                   Office of     Office of                     PMU/                     Bilateral/                     Financial                                  Independent
                                 President/PM   Parliamen-    Employee of   Consultant on  Local       Multilateral                     Sector/                                   Government
                                   /Minister      tarian       a Ministry   WBG project Government       Agency       Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO            Media       Institution    Academia         Other
                                   N   Mea n    N     Mea n    N    Mea n    N    Mea n   N    Mea n    N    Mea n      N    Mea n    N     Mea n    N   Mea n     N      Mea n    N    Mea n     N    Mea n   N      Mea n
Public administration and
                                  14    8.29    16    8.50    23    7.04     18   8.67    23   7.70    18     7.61     15    8.13     15     8.60   34      8.15   12     6.50     4     8.75     16   8.31    12     8.83
public service delivery
Business environment and
                                  15    7.87    14    8.43    22    7.68     15   8.20    24   7.58    18     7.83     15    7.80     15     7.87   34      7.79   12     7.08     4     8.75     16   7.63    11     7.27
investment climate
Management of natural
resources and physical            14    7.93    14    8.64    24    6.54     15   8.33    23   7.78    18     7.00     14    7.57     15     7.73   34      7.21   13     7.46     3     6.00     15   7.20    9      8.11
infrastructure




                                                                                                       78
                                                                                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz Republic (continued)

Please rate the IMPORTANCE of the World Bank Group’s involvement in the f ollowing areas of development. (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                   Office of     Office of                   PMU/                    Bilateral/                   Financial                           Independent
                                 President/PM   Parliamen-   Employee of Consultant on   Local      Multilateral                   Sector/                            Government
                                   /Minister       tarian     a Ministry WBG project Government       Agency     Private Sector Private Bank   NGO/CBO       Media     Institution    Academia         Other
                                   N    Mea n    N     Mea n  N    Mea n   N    Mea n  N    Mea n    N     Mea n   N     Mea n   N     Mea n   N   Mea n   N    Mea n   N     Mea n   N    Mea n   N      Mea n
Information and
                                  15    7.27    16    7.25   18   7.67   17    7.47   22    7.64    17    6.29    16    7.31    11     7.73    30   7.83   10   6.20    6     7.17    14   6.57    10     6.40
communications technology
Transport                         14    8.21    14    7.57   20   7.75   17    7.53   21    7.67    18    8.11    15    7.33    13     7.31    33   7.73   12   6.92    7     6.57    16   6.50    9      7.89
Law and justice                   14    7.79    13    8.00   16   7.44   17    8.06   18    7.44    15    7.27    16    7.50    13     7.31    35   7.97   14   7.00    7     6.57    15   6.53    11     7.18
Urban development                 13    7.69    15    8.27   19   7.32   15    7.13   20    7.35    17    7.00    14    7.43    12     7.17    33   7.55   12   7.25    6     6.33    15   6.67    9      7.56
Environmental sustainability      14    7.64    16    7.00   23   7.57   17    8.12   21    7.81    17    7.29    15    7.87    12     6.83    33   8.00   12   7.50    6     5.17    15   7.13    10     7.20
Poverty reduction                 15    7.73    15    7.93   21   8.29   19    9.21   23    7.65    17    7.76    17    8.29    13     8.38    36   8.61   11   7.82    6     6.33    16   7.31    9      7.22
Private sector development        14    8.00    13    8.46   20   7.35   17    7.94   22    8.23    17    8.18    16    8.38    14     8.50    35   7.49   12   7.50    6     6.67    16   7.25    11     7.55
Foreign direct investment*        14    8.71    16    8.50   21   7.29   16    8.81   23    8.52    17    7.41    16    7.81    13     9.23    35   8.17   12   8.08    6     5.50    15   7.80    10     8.40
Water and sanitation              13    8.23    16    8.19   23   8.00   17    8.47   25    8.00    16    7.88    15    7.33    11     7.64    32   7.66   12   7.33    6     5.33    16   7.31    9      7.22
Trade and exports                 14    7.57    15    7.53   17   6.65   15    8.13   22    7.68    17    7.47    16    7.94    12     7.42    33   7.21   12   6.92    4     4.50    14   6.86    10     7.40
Economic growth                   14    8.21    16    8.44   21   8.10   16    9.13   20    8.15    17    7.53    16    8.00    13     8.77    32   7.94   13   6.92    7     6.14    13   7.23    10     7.90
Health                            13    8.54    16    8.00   20   8.00   17    8.53   20    7.95    16    7.50    16    7.56    13     8.08    34   8.65   12   7.75    6     6.00    16   7.69    10     8.30
Disaster management               13    7.46    14    7.43   21   7.19   16    7.44   21    7.38    15    7.13    16    6.75    11     6.73    32   7.47   11   6.09    5     5.40    13   7.08    10     7.40
Job creation/employment           15    7.53    15    8.07   19   7.68   16    8.81   22    7.50    17    7.65    15    7.80    12     8.75    35   8.34   12   7.50    6     7.17    14   7.14    9      7.78
Financial markets                 14    7.21    14    7.00   17   6.76   16    7.75   21    7.33    16    7.00    15    7.20    13     8.31    29   7.45   12   7.17    6     6.67    13   7.31    9      7.56
Gender equity and equality of
                                  15    6.53    15    6.07   19   6.84   16    7.44   21    7.43    16    6.25    16    6.19    10     5.70    32   7.22   12   6.42    5     5.40    14   6.07    10     6.60
opportunity
Energy                            14    7.93    15    7.67   22   7.91   15    8.13   21    7.14    17    7.76    15    7.93    11     8.09    32   7.69   12   8.17    5     6.60    16   6.63    10     7.50
Rural development                 15    7.53    15    8.13   21   7.76   17    8.82   25    7.80    17    7.71    16    7.88    11     8.82    32   8.06   13   7.85    6     4.83    16   6.88    11     7.55
Global/regional integration       13    7.46    15    7.73   19   6.42   16    8.06   21    7.43    17    7.12    14    6.71    10     8.00    28   6.54   12   6.75    5     5.80    13   7.08    10     6.90
Food security                     13    7.69    17    7.71   22   7.55   16    8.44   22    7.18    16    7.19    15    7.47    11     7.45    33   7.39   12   6.17    5     6.60    15   6.87    12     6.92
Education                         16    7.81    15    7.87   22   7.68   18    8.94   24    7.54    17    7.94    16    8.88    13     9.00    36   8.08   12   7.75    7     7.29    16   7.06    10     7.70
Social protection                 15    6.80    15    7.53   21   7.19   17    7.88   22    7.05    16    7.19    16    7.63    10     7.30    34   7.74   12   6.42    5     6.80    14   7.07    10     7.10
Climate change                    14    7.21    16    7.13   21   7.62   17    8.47   20    7.65    17    6.53    16    7.25    10     5.30    28   7.25   12   6.50    5     5.20    14   6.71    10     7.10
Agricultural development          15    7.80    16    8.38   23   7.57   16    8.56   25    7.80    17    8.06    17    8.71    14     8.36    34   7.94   13   7.69    6     5.83    14   7.21    12     7.42
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                    79
                                                                                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz Republic (continued)

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than TWO)

                                             Office of the                                  PMU/                Bilateral/                Financial                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents                  President/Prime       Office of   Employee of Consultant on Local   Multilateral   Private      Sector/     NGO/            Government
(Responses combined)                       Minister/Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry WBG project Government   Agency       Sector    Private Bank    CBO    Media    Institution Academia   Other
Offer more i nnova tive fi na nci a l
                                                31.3%          29.4%         38.5%        19.0%        16.1%       22.2%      14.3%        31.3%       17.8%   13.3%     20.0%       31.3%     28.6%
products
Ens ure grea ter s el ectivi ty i n i ts
                                                0.0%           23.5%         11.5%        9.5%           9.7%      5.6%       14.3%        0.0%        22.2%   0.0%       0.0%       12.5%     7.1%
work
Provi de more a dequa te da ta/
knowl edge/s tatis tics /fi gures on            12.5%           0.0%          7.7%        4.8%         12.9%       16.7%       4.8%        0.0%        2.2%    13.3%     10.0%       6.3%      0.0%
the Kyrgyz Republ i c’s economy
Improve the competitivenes s of
i ts fi na nci ng compa red to                  6.3%            5.9%         19.2%        4.8%           6.5%      16.7%       9.5%        18.8%       6.7%    13.3%     30.0%       6.3%      28.6%
ma rkets
Rea ch out more to groups
                                                12.5%          11.8%         15.4%        14.3%        22.6%       55.6%      38.1%        37.5%       62.2%   40.0%      0.0%       37.5%     21.4%
outs i de of Government*
Increa s e the l evel of ca pa ci ty
                                                56.3%          29.4%         30.8%        19.0%        19.4%       11.1%      52.4%        18.7%       33.3%   33.3%     20.0%       37.5%     21.4%
devel opment i n the country
Improve the qua l i ty of i ts experts
a s rel a ted to the Kyrgyz                     0.0%           11.8%          7.7%        14.3%          9.7%      16.7%       4.8%        18.8%       6.7%    0.0%      20.0%       0.0%      7.1%
Republ i c’s s peci fi c cha l l enges
Offer more i nnova tive knowl edge
                                                12.5%           5.9%         15.4%        19.0%          9.7%      22.2%       9.5%        12.5%       8.9%    13.3%     30.0%       6.3%      0.0%
s ervi ces
Col l a bora te more effectivel y wi th
                                                31.3%          35.3%         11.5%        42.9%        29.0%       11.1%       9.5%        18.8%       6.7%    13.3%     50.0%       25.0%     42.9%
Government cl i ents *
Work fa s ter                                   0.0%            5.9%          7.7%        0.0%         16.1%       0.0%        4.8%        6.3%        4.4%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      21.4%
Reduce the compl exi ty of
obtai ni ng Worl d Ba nk Group                  31.3%          11.8%         30.8%        28.6%        38.7%       5.6%       33.3%        25.0%       20.0%   46.7%     10.0%       31.3%     14.3%
fi na nci ng
Other                                           0.0%            5.9%          0.0%        9.5%           0.0%      5.6%        0.0%        6.3%        6.7%    6.7%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                    80
                                                                                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


G. Communication and Information Sharing
How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)

                                          Office of the                                  PMU/                Bilateral/                Financial                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents               President/Prime       Office of   Employee of Consultant on Local   Multilateral   Private      Sector/     NGO/            Government
(Responses combined)                    Minister/Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry WBG project Government   Agency       Sector    Private Bank    CBO    Media    Institution Academia   Other
Di rect contact wi th WBG                    62.5%          31.3%         33.3%        42.9%        37.5%       44.4%      33.3%        31.3%       33.3%   40.0%     55.6%       58.8%     42.9%
Worl d Ba nk Group’s s emi na rs /
                                             56.3%          25.0%         44.4%        61.9%        78.1%       50.0%      66.7%        50.0%       40.0%   46.7%     88.9%       29.4%     42.9%
works hops /conferences *
Worl d Ba nk Group’s publ i ca tions
                                             25.0%          25.0%         40.7%        9.5%           3.1%      33.3%      14.3%        25.0%       24.4%   20.0%     11.1%       29.4%     14.3%
a nd other wri tten ma teri a l s
Worl d Ba nk Group’s webs i te               31.3%          25.0%         37.0%        38.1%        15.6%       22.2%      14.3%        18.8%       28.9%   26.7%     11.1%       41.2%     35.7%
Soci a l medi a (e.g., Fa cebook,
                                             6.3%            6.3%         14.8%        14.3%        28.1%       11.1%      38.1%        12.5%       28.9%   33.3%     11.1%       11.8%     28.6%
bl ogs , Twi tter, YouTube, Fl i ckr)
e-News l etters                              18.8%          50.0%         22.2%        19.0%        25.0%       27.8%      23.8%        31.3%       26.7%   26.7%     22.2%       29.4%     14.3%
Other                                       0.0%             6.3%          0.0%        4.8%           3.1%      0.0%        4.8%        0.0%        0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      7.1%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the WBG will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?

                                          Office of the                                  PMU/                Bilateral/             Financial                       Independent
                                        President/Prime       Office of   Employee of Consultant on Local   Multilateral   Private   Sector/        NGO/            Government
Percentage of Respondents               Minister/Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry WBG project Government   Agency       Sector Private Bank       CBO    Media    Institution Academia   Other
Yes                                          33.3%          68.8%         26.1%        47.4%        29.2%       37.5%      20.0%        26.7%       15.8%   26.7%     44.4%       35.3%     23.1%
No                                           66.7%          31.3%         73.9%        52.6%        70.8%       62.5%      80.0%        73.3%       84.2%   73.3%     55.6%       64.7%     76.9%

Do you have access to the Internet?

                                          Office of the                                  PMU/                Bilateral/             Financial                       Independent
                                        President/Prime       Office of   Employee of Consultant on Local   Multilateral   Private   Sector/        NGO/            Government
Percentage of Respondents               Minister/Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry WBG project Government   Agency       Sector Private Bank       CBO    Media    Institution Academia   Other
Yes                                         100.0%          100.0%        96.4%       100.0%        89.7%      100.0%      95.2%        93.3%       95.5%   93.3%     100.0%     100.0%     92.3%
No                                                                        3.6%                      10.3%                   4.8%        6.7%        4.5%    6.7%                            7.7%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?

                                          Office of the                                  PMU/                Bilateral/             Financial                       Independent
                                        President/Prime       Office of   Employee of Consultant on Local   Multilateral   Private   Sector/        NGO/            Government
Percentage of Respondents               Minister/Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry WBG project Government   Agency       Sector Private Bank       CBO    Media    Institution Academia   Other
Yes                                          61.5%          45.5%         44.4%        68.4%        29.6%       77.8%      42.9%        50.0%       62.8%   60.0%     55.6%       68.8%     33.3%
No                                           38.5%          54.5%         55.6%        31.6%        70.4%       22.2%      57.1%        50.0%       37.2%   40.0%     44.4%       31.3%     66.7%

                                                                                                 81
                                                                                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites?*

                                       Office of the                                  PMU/                Bilateral/             Financial                       Independent
                                     President/Prime       Office of   Employee of Consultant on Local   Multilateral   Private   Sector/        NGO/            Government
Percentage of Respondents            Minister/Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry WBG project Government   Agency       Sector Private Bank       CBO    Media    Institution Academia   Other
Yes                                        7.7%          38.5%         15.4%        42.1%        51.9%       11.1%      38.1%        14.3%       34.9%   57.1%     11.1%       43.8%     38.5%
No                                        92.3%          61.5%         84.6%        57.9%        48.1%       88.9%      61.9%        85.7%       65.1%   42.9%     88.9%       56.3%     61.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups



H. Background Information

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than TWO)

                                       Office of the                                  PMU/                Bilateral/                Financial                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents            President/Prime       Office of   Employee of Consultant on Local   Multilateral   Private      Sector/     NGO/            Government
(Responses combined)                 Minister/Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry WBG project Government   Agency       Sector    Private Bank    CBO    Media    Institution Academia   Other
Obs erver*                                11.8%          22.2%          3.0%        3.7%         22.6%       9.5%       52.6%        33.3%       41.3%   26.3%     16.7%       38.9%     33.3%
Us e WBG reports /da ta *                  17.6%         22.2%         18.2%        7.4%         16.1%       47.6%      21.1%        16.7%       34.8%   36.8%     25.0%       50.0%     11.1%
Enga ge i n WBG rel a ted/
                                           35.3%         27.8%         27.3%        66.7%        41.9%       33.3%      15.8%        0.0%        39.1%   31.6%     41.7%       38.9%     22.2%
s pons ored events /a cti vi ti es *
Col l a bora te a s pa rt of my
                                           64.7%         55.6%         72.7%        51.9%        35.5%       57.1%      21.1%        41.7%       15.2%   21.1%     66.7%       16.7%     33.3%
profes s i ona l duti es *
Us e WBG webs i te for
                                            5.9%         11.1%         15.2%        7.4%         25.8%       9.5%       21.1%        25.0%       19.6%   15.8%      0.0%       27.8%     27.8%
i nforma ti on, da ta , res ea rch, etc.
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                              82
                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



Appendix C: Responses to Indicator Questions by Location16
Bishkek N=225           Other Areas N=92

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group


                                                                                               Bishkek                     Other Areas
                                                                                         N      Mean        SD        N       Mean     SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz
                                                                                        217      5.93      2.43       86       5.52     2.70
Republic?
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)


                                                                                               Bishkek                     Other Areas
                                                                                         N      Mean        SD        N       Mean     SD
 Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                        183      6.27      2.13       73       6.79     2.63
 effectiveness in the Kyrgyz Republic.
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


                                                                                               Bishkek                     Other Areas
                                                                                         N      Mean        SD        N       Mean     SD
 To what extent do you believe the WBG's staff is well prepared to help the
                                                                                        163      6.77      2.27       72       7.15     2.53
 Kyrgyz Republic solve its most complicated development challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in the Kyrgyz Republic?

                                                                                               Bishkek                     Other Areas
                                                                                         N      Mean        SD        N       Mean     SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                                        191      6.65      2.43       80       7.10     2.41
development in the Kyrgyz Republic
The WBG’s work is aligned with what I consider the development
                                                                                        184      6.42      2.19       74       6.68     2.38
priorities for the Kyrgyz Republic
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




16
  Only 317 respondents provided the information about their geographic location. Thus only these respondents were included in the analysis
presented in this Appendix.

                                                                      83
                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in the Kyrgyz Republic, in terms of each of the
following?

                                                                                              Bishkek               Other Areas
                                                                                        N      Mean     SD     N       Mean     SD
Responsiveness to needs*                                                              160       5.48    2.20   65      6.57   2.30
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*                    152       5.75    2.00   60      6.72   2.26
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                             158       5.63    2.04   62      6.74   2.12
Being inclusive                                                                       167       6.29    2.29   69      6.39   2.41
Openness (sharing data and other information)                                         169       6.77    2.29   65      6.66   2.64
Collaboration with the Government                                                     175       7.59    2.07   68      7.41   2.34
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                         158       6.09    2.27   62      7.32   2.35
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                      161       6.60    2.78   60      6.75   2.21
decisions important to my work
Collaboration with civil society                                                      147       5.93    2.52   71      6.52   2.45
Staff accessibility at the Local Country Office in the Kyrgyz Republic                172       6.78    2.60   57      6.19   2.51
Staff accessibility at the Headquarters in Washington                                 104       5.38    2.88   37      5.81   2.77
Collaboration with other donors and development partners                              140       6.51    2.51   54      6.78   2.60
Collaboration with the private sector                                                 130       5.58    2.31   61      5.72   2.41
Straightforwardness and honesty                                                       156       6.73    2.72   62      7.11   2.71
Treating clients and stakeholders in the Kyrgyz Republic with respect                 170       7.64    2.44   60      7.38   2.56
Being a long-term partner                                                             162       7.90    2.29   57      7.54   2.66
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations.




C. World Bank Group’s Sectoral Effectiveness and Results


                                                                                              Bishkek               Other Areas
                                                                                        N      Mean     SD     N       Mean     SD

To what extent does the WBG’s work help to achieve development results
                                                                                      158       6.33    2.04   66      7.03   2.27
in the Kyrgyz Republic?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations.

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz Republic?

                                                                                              Bishkek               Other Areas
                                                                                        N      Mean     SD     N       Mean     SD
The World Bank Group's financial instruments meet the needs of the
                                                                                      162       6.35    2.33   64      6.80   2.32
Kyrgyz Republic
The World Bank Group meets the Kyrgyz Republic’s needs for knowledge
                                                                                      167       6.40    2.39   62      6.39   2.10
services
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




                                                                     84
                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

In the Kyrgyz Republic, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:

                                                                                                Bishkek                   Other Areas
                                                                                          N      Mean           SD   N       Mean     SD
 Are adaptable to the Kyrgyz Republic’s specific development challenges
                                                                                         137      6.48      2.33     56      7.02    2.28
 and country circumstances
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)


                                                                                                Bishkek                   Other Areas
                                                                                          N      Mean           SD   N       Mean     SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the WBG's
knowledge work and activities make to development results in your                        174      7.88      2.14     69      7.74   2.06
country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank
                                                                                         153      7.21      2.14     64      7.12   2.41
Group's knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)



E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?

                                                                                                Bishkek                   Other Areas
                                                                                          N      Mean           SD   N       Mean     SD
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in the Kyrgyz Republic*                     110      6.23      2.47     48      7.31   2.31
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                                         114      7.14      2.44     54      7.78   2.38
appropriate use of them
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between locations.




                                                                       85
                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



Appendix D: Responses to Select Questions by Collaboration with the WBG17
Currently collaborating with the WBG N=151                        Not collaborating with the WBG N=157

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                            Collaborating              Not Collaborating
                                                                                            with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                          N     Mean      SD           N     Mean      SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz
                                                                                       141      6.82     2.17    153     4.86     2.42
Republic?*
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

                                                                                            Collaborating              Not Collaborating
                                                                                            with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                          N     Mean      SD           N     Mean      SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                        132     6.98      2.05    116     5.72    2.29
effectiveness in the Kyrgyz Republic.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.


                                                                                            Collaborating              Not Collaborating
                                                                                            with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                          N     Mean      SD           N     Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe the WBG's staff is well prepared to help the
                                                                                         125      7.37     2.12      101       6.34     2.44
Kyrgyz Republic solve its most complicated development challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




17
  Only 308 respondents provided the information about their collaboration with the World Bank Group (question H3 in the questionnaire). Thus
only these respondents were included in the analysis presented in this Appendix.

                                                                      86
                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in the Kyrgyz Republic, in
which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge
services) in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents                                              Currently collaborating        Not collaborating
 (Responses combined)                                                       with the WBG                 with the WBG
 Health                                                                           14.7%                      14.0%
 Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                  8.4%                      6.0%
 Agricultural development                                                         34.3%                      28.0%
 Global/regional integration                                                       5.6%                      4.7%
 Job creation/employment                                                          21.0%                      30.0%
 Public administration and public service delivery                                34.3%                      26.0%
 Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                    6.3%                      6.7%
 Rural development                                                                19.6%                      16.7%
 Foreign direct investment                                                        11.9%                      7.3%
 Education                                                                        17.5%                      22.0%
 Energy                                                                            7.0%                      3.3%
 Financial markets                                                                 2.8%                      0.7%
 Urban development                                                                 2.8%                      4.7%
 Environmental sustainability                                                      2.1%                      6.0%
 Economic growth                                                                  24.5%                      24.7%
 Private sector development                                                       11.9%                      16.7%
 Water and sanitation                                                              9.8%                      6.0%
 Food security                                                                     6.3%                      6.0%
 Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                     5.6%                      4.0%
 Information and communications technology                                         4.2%                      7.3%
 Trade and exports                                                                 4.9%                      7.3%
 Gender equity and equality of opportunity*                                        2.1%                      7.3%
 Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                           6.3%                      7.3%
 Business environment and investment climate                                      14.0%                      14.0%
 Management of natural resources and physical infrastructure                       6.3%                      6.7%
 Poverty reduction                                                                 9.8%                      10.0%
 Disaster management                                                               1.4%                      1.3%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in the Kyrgyz Republic?
                                                                               Collaborating          Not Collaborating
                                                                               with the WBG            with the WBG
                                                                             N     Mean      SD      N     Mean       SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                                   130      7.22    2.19     131      6.29     2.55
development in the Kyrgyz Republic*
 The WBG’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities
                                                                                     123      7.16      2.11   126      5.85    2.19
 for the Kyrgyz Republic*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                 87
                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in the Kyrgyz Republic, in terms of each of the
following?
                                                                                Collaborating           Not Collaborating
                                                                                with the WBG              with the WBG
                                                                             N      Mean      SD       N      Mean      SD
Responsiveness to needs*                                                          120       6.21   2.26   99    5.21    2.12
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*                114       6.52   2.06   91    5.37    2.03
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                         114       6.50   2.11   97    5.23    1.94
Being inclusive*                                                                  121       7.06   2.17   105   5.36    2.19
Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                    120       7.23   2.18   106   6.10    2.49
Collaboration with the Government*                                                121       7.92   1.90   113   7.08    2.31
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                     114       6.95   2.23   98    5.72    2.31
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                  117       7.54   2.31   97    5.51    2.60
decisions important to my work*
Collaboration with civil society*                                                  98       6.79   2.28   112   5.50    2.57
Staff accessibility at the Local Country Office in the Kyrgyz Republic*           114       7.47   2.32   107   5.68    2.54
Staff accessibility at the Headquarters in Washington*                             70       6.54   2.68   66    4.48    2.62
Collaboration with other donors and development partners*                         101       7.31   2.22   87    5.75    2.63
Collaboration with the private sector*                                             93       6.16   2.20   91    5.07    2.38
Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                  112       7.21   2.47   97    6.34    2.91
Treating clients and stakeholders in the Kyrgyz Republic with respect*            115       8.03   2.14   106   7.00    2.68
Being a long-term partner*                                                        109       8.46   1.89   103   7.15    2.66
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                     88
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


C. World Bank Group’s Sectoral Effectiveness and Results

The World Bank Group has emphasized the main objective to improve governance in its strategy with the Government of the
Kyrgyz Republic, focusing on the following areas of economic development. How would you rate the EFFECTIVENESS of the
World Bank Group’s support in these areas over the past two years (2014-2015)?

Please rate the EFFECTIVENESS of the three key clusters of interventions of the World Bank Group’s strategy.
                                                                                   Collaborating         Not Collaborating
                                                                                   with the WBG            with the WBG
                                                                                 N     Mean      SD      N     Mean      SD
Public administration and public service delivery*                                    86      6.24     2.52      81       5.01     2.45
Business environment and investment climate*                                          79      6.59     2.26      73       5.38     2.22
Management of natural resources and physical infrastructure*                          68      6.10     2.31      66       4.79     2.30
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

Please rate the EFFECTIVENESS of the World Bank Group’s work in the following areas of development .
                                                                                Collaborating                     Not Collaborating
                                                                                with the WBG                        with the WBG
                                                                              N     Mean      SD                  N     Mean      SD
Information and communications technology                                             60      6.35     2.46      69       5.51     2.38
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)*                                     76      6.88     2.27      70       5.90     2.58
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)*                                              57      5.63     2.48      68       4.76     2.24
Urban development                                                                     63      6.19     2.29      77       5.39     2.49
Environmental sustainability*                                                         76      6.96     2.32      71       5.07     2.43
Poverty reduction*                                                                    86      6.84     2.36      90       5.81     2.50
Private sector development*                                                           75      6.20     2.34      81       5.42     2.39
Foreign direct investment*                                                            76      6.83     2.51      74       5.82     2.50
Water and sanitation*                                                                 78      7.03     2.29      86       5.64     2.62
Trade and exports                                                                     63      5.89     2.35      64       5.38     2.49
Economic growth*                                                                      72      6.46     2.46      81       5.59     2.44
Health                                                                                74      6.58     2.21      84       5.93     2.51
Disaster management*                                                                  66      6.70     2.37      61       5.44     2.43
Job creation/employment*                                                              67      5.90     2.42      76       4.87     2.12
Financial markets                                                                     60      6.32     2.10      65       5.54     2.43
Gender equity and equality of opportunity*                                            66      7.17     2.06      72       5.90     2.63
Energy*                                                                               69      6.71     2.14      76       5.74     2.54
Rural development*                                                                    76      6.76     2.34      77       5.57     2.61
Global/regional integration*                                                          64      6.47     2.48      55       5.02     2.39
Food security*                                                                        67      6.79     2.27      69       5.38     2.30
Education*                                                                            76      6.79     2.32      90       5.77     2.64
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)*                       66      6.11     2.35      70       5.06     2.59
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)*                                        61      6.49     2.32      61       5.26     2.55
 Agricultural development                                                                83      6.78     2.33     79      6.10    2.62
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                   89
                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


C. World Bank Group’s Sectoral Effectiveness and Results (continued)

                                                                                       Collaborating            Not Collaborating
                                                                                       with the WBG               with the WBG
                                                                                     N     Mean      SD         N     Mean      SD
To what extent does the WBG’s work help to achieve development results in
                                                                                   109      6.98     1.97     106      6.08     2.18
the Kyrgyz Republic?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz Republic?
                                                                               Collaborating          Not Collaborating
                                                                               with the WBG            with the WBG
                                                                             N     Mean      SD      N     Mean       SD
The WBG's financial instruments meet the needs of the Kyrgyz Republic*             112      6.90     2.11     107      5.94     2.41
The WBG meets the Kyrgyz Republic’s needs for knowledge services*                  109      6.98     2.15     113      5.75     2.36
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

                                                                                       Collaborating            Not Collaborating
                                                                                       with the WBG               with the WBG
                                                                                     N     Mean      SD         N     Mean      SD
 To what extent do you believe the WBG measures and corrects its work in
                                                                                   100      6.81     2.09      83      5.65     1.76
 real time in the Kyrgyz Republic?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

In the Kyrgyz Republic, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities :
                                                                                  Collaborating       Not Collaborating
                                                                                 with the WBG            with the WBG
                                                                              N       Mean      SD    N       Mean    SD
Are timely                                                                         100      6.82     2.17      91      6.18     2.36
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation*           101      7.12     2.12      94      5.98     2.14
Lead to practical solutions*                                                        99      6.96     2.22      86      5.84     2.37
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)*                              109      7.24     2.20      98      6.15     2.35
Are source of relevant information on global good practices*                       103      7.39     2.26     100      6.59     2.41
Are adequately disseminated*                                                       105      6.92     2.44      94      5.71     2.38
Are translated enough into local language*                                          94      6.63     2.70      93      5.52     2.72
Are adaptable to the Kyrgyz Republic’s specific development challenges and
                                                                                   100      7.06     2.28      86      6.06     2.25
country circumstances*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                  90
                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

                                                                                             Collaborating            Not Collaborating
                                                                                             with the WBG               with the WBG
                                                                                           N     Mean      SD         N     Mean      SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the WBG's knowledge
                                                                                          114      7.96      1.94    120    7.75    2.27
work and activities make to development results in your country?
 Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                          108      7.55       2.13   99     6.79    2.25
 knowledge work and activities?*
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.



E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                  Collaborating            Not Collaborating
                                                                                 with the WBG                with the WBG
                                                                              N       Mean       SD       N      Mean      SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly*                                            92       7.62      2.24    60     6.02    2.76
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                          103      7.38      2.54    95     6.54    2.49
programs it supports*
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely
                                                                                          104      7.37      2.36    75     6.53    2.34
fashion*
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy” requirements are reasonable                     65       7.38      2.04    49     6.88    2.43
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable                           82       7.37      2.31    63     6.56    2.71
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in the Kyrgyz Republic*                      91       6.87      2.32    63     6.00    2.57
Working with the World Bank Group increases the Kyrgyz Republic’s
                                                                                          107      7.63      2.26    94     7.11    2.52
institutional capacity
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                                          91       7.51      2.26    69     6.96    2.61
appropriate use of them
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support*                           108      7.55      2.40    88     6.57    2.38
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

                                                                                             Collaborating           Not Collaborating
                                                                                             with the WBG              with the WBG
                                                                                           N     Mean      SD        N     Mean      SD
 To what extent do you believe that the WBG’s work helps to find solutions
                                                                                   93              6.84      2.54    83     5.87    2.40
 that promote private public partnerships in the Kyrgyz Republic?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                       91
                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz Republic

Looking forward, and taking into account limited resources, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to EMPHASIZE the
following areas of development with the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic in the near future (2016-2017)?

Please rate the IMPORTANCE of the three key clusters of interventions of the World Bank Group’s strategy .
                                                                                 Collaborating          Not Collaborating
                                                                                 with the WBG              with the WBG
                                                                              N      Mean      SD      N       Mean     SD
Public administration and public service delivery                                  104      8.11     2.13     112      7.96     2.49
Business environment and investment climate                                         98      8.07     2.07     112      7.60     2.35
Management of natural resources and physical infrastructure                         98      7.66     2.17     109      7.29     2.39
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)

Please rate the IMPORTANCE of the World Bank Group’s involvement in the f ollowing areas of development.
                                                                               Collaborating         Not Collaborating
                                                                               with the WBG            with the WBG
                                                                             N     Mean      SD      N     Mean      SD
Information and communications technology                                           93      7.19     2.27     106      7.19     2.68
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                    97      7.79     2.10     110      7.19     2.63
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                             93      7.42     2.26     107      7.42     2.66
Urban development                                                                   90      7.46     2.28     109      7.17     2.55
Environmental sustainability                                                       101      7.44     2.11     109      7.48     2.36
Poverty reduction                                                                   99      8.26     1.97     116      7.82     2.41
Private sector development                                                          99      7.93     2.15     113      7.63     2.50
Foreign direct investment                                                          100      8.22     2.03     112      7.91     2.39
Water and sanitation                                                                98      7.96     2.05     111      7.50     2.51
Trade and exports                                                                   91      7.43     2.03     107      7.21     2.58
Economic growth                                                                     90      8.24     1.95     115      7.71     2.61
Health                                                                              96      8.10     1.91     111      7.88     2.46
Disaster management                                                                 90      7.32     2.09     104      6.93     2.82
Job creation/employment                                                             94      8.13     2.04     112      7.61     2.56
Financial markets*                                                                  91      7.66     2.00     101      6.98     2.51
Gender equity and equality of opportunity                                           92      6.97     2.49     106      6.28     2.74
Energy                                                                              95      7.81     2.04     108      7.48     2.62
Rural development                                                                  100      8.02     2.20     113      7.52     2.80
Global/regional integration*                                                        90      7.48     2.00     100      6.71     2.71
Food security*                                                                      97      7.77     2.04     108      6.98     2.73
Education                                                                          105      8.08     1.98     115      7.83     2.52
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                      95      7.58     2.09     109      6.97     2.73
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)*                                      95      7.48     2.13     102      6.71     2.76
 Agricultural development                                                            104      8.00     2.17    114      7.69    2.63
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                  92
                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


G. Communication and Information Sharing

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                    Collaborating         Not Collaborating
                                                                                   with the WBG             with the WBG
                                                                                N       Mean       SD     N     Mean      SD
I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.                           88       6.92   2.15   68    6.99    2.43
I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.                  88       7.43   2.31   69    7.20    2.44
The World Bank Group’s social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                                   66       7.38   2.23   68    6.18    2.79
information about the institution*
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it*           97       7.54   2.45   89    6.46    2.89
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                                   83       7.81   2.22   53    6.25    2.96
inquiries*
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                 93
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic



Appendix E: Responses to Select Questions by Year18
Comparing responses across Country Surveys reflect changes in attitudes over time, but also changes in respondent
samples and changes to the survey instrument itself. To reduce the influence of the latter factor, only those
questions with similar response scales/options were analyzed. To reduce the influence of the former, the samples
from both FY13 and FY16 were weighted to have equivalent stakeholder groups.

                                                                                                   Original Distribution
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                  FY13                            FY16
 Office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister                                            4.9%                            5.6%
 Government institutions (includes office of Parliamentarian,
 employees of ministries, independent government institutions,                             11.0%                           31.7%
 PMU/Consultants on WBG supported projects, and judiciary)
 Bilateral/multilateral agencies                                                           12.8%                            6.9%
 Private sector (includes financial sector/private banks)                                   8.5%                           12.7%
 Academia                                                                                  11.0%                            5.9%
 Media                                                                                      6.1%                            6.2%
 Civil society (includes NGOs/CBOs, private foundations, trade
                                                                                           23.8%                           19.0%
 unions, and youth groups)
 Local government                                                                          22.0%                           12.1%
 Total Number of Respondents (Un-Weighted)                                                   164                             306
(Note, respondents who indicated Other were excluded.)

The weighted stakeholder breakdown is presented below:
                                                                                                Weighted Distribution
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                  FY13                            FY16
 Office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister                                           5.2%                            5.2%
 Government Institutions                                                                   20.9%                           20.9%
 Bilateral/Multilateral Agency                                                             10.2%                           10.2%
 Private Sector                                                                            10.5%                           10.5%
 Academia                                                                                  8.4%                            8.4%
 Media                                                                                     6.3%                            6.3%
 Civil Society                                                                             20.9%                           20.9%
 Local Government                                                                          17.6%                           17.6%
 Total Number of Respondents (Weighted)                                                      158                             300

All data presented in this Appendix are weighted. As a result, means of the FY16 data and the total number of
respondents indicated will be slightly different than the aggregated responses in Appendix A. Similarly, responses
from FY13 respondents and the total number of respondents indicated may differ from those reported in the FY13
COS report.




18
     Only those questions that were asked in the FY ’13 and FY ’16 country opinion surveys, with similar response scales/options, are presented.

                                                                           94
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                              FY13                     FY16
                                                                                       N      Mean       SD       N    Mean   SD
 How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz
                                                                                        157      6.21    2.08    286   5.66   2.49
 Republic?*
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.


                                                                                              FY13                     FY16
                                                                                       N      Mean       SD       N    Mean   SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                      145      6.11     1.98     240   6.28   2.28
effectiveness in the Kyrgyz Republic.
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


                                                                                              FY13                     FY16
                                                                                       N      Mean       SD       N    Mean   SD
 To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared
 to help the Kyrgyz Republic solve its most complicated development                   130      6.61     2.04     224   6.81   2.43
 challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in the Kyrgyz Republic?
                                                                                              FY13                     FY16
                                                                                       N      Mean       SD       N    Mean   SD
 Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                                      143      6.67     2.26     255   6.73   2.43
 development in the Kyrgyz Republic
 The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                                      144      6.03     2.09     241   6.40   2.26
 development priorities for the Kyrgyz Republic
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in the Kyrgyz Republic in terms of each of the
following?
                                                                                              FY13                     FY16
                                                                                       N      Mean       SD       N    Mean   SD
Responsiveness to needs                                                               129      5.56     2.21     213   5.80   2.29
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)                     131      5.55     2.10     202   5.93   2.14
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                              126      5.48     2.12     209   5.88   2.14
Being inclusive                                                                       128      6.10     2.16     223   6.11   2.33
Openness (sharing data and other information)                                         131      6.33     2.11     220   6.58   2.39
Collaboration with the Government                                                     128      7.62     1.90     227   7.55   2.15
Collaboration with civil society                                                      124      6.19     2.26     213   6.02   2.50
Staff accessibility at the Local Country Office in the Kyrgyz Republic                130      6.60     2.48     216   6.50   2.60
Staff accessibility at the Headquarters in Washington                                 92       5.03     2.71     131   5.44   2.79
Collaboration with other donors and development partners*                             103      7.26     1.86     186   6.56   2.58
Straightforwardness and honesty                                                       102      6.80     2.00     207   6.72   2.75
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.




                                                                    95
                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

Please rate the EFFECTIVENESS of the World Bank Group’s work in the following areas of development.
                                                                                               FY13                    FY16
                                                                                        N      Mean       SD      N    Mean   SD
Information and communications technology*                                            102      5.10       2.07   129   5.90   2.40
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                      116      6.15       2.34   144   6.47   2.37
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)*                                               95      4.42       2.40   124   5.26   2.37
Urban development                                                                     108      5.45       2.45   137   5.74   2.34
Environmental sustainability                                                           97      5.47       2.54   143   5.99   2.49
Poverty reduction                                                                     125      5.85       2.50   177   6.32   2.46
Private sector development                                                            109      5.46       2.21   161   5.87   2.43
Foreign direct investment                                                             109      6.06       2.30   150   6.33   2.53
Water and sanitation                                                                  122      6.27       2.37   165   6.38   2.54
Trade and exports                                                                      91      5.46       2.22   129   5.71   2.41
Economic growth                                                                       109      5.49       2.26   153   5.99   2.45
Health                                                                                114      6.22       2.30   157   6.32   2.36
Disaster management                                                                    96      5.54       2.34   126   6.09   2.43
Job creation/employment*                                                              104      4.35       2.30   143   5.38   2.23
Financial markets*                                                                     85      5.29       2.40   126   6.00   2.26
Energy*                                                                               107      5.33       2.27   143   6.23   2.40
Rural development                                                                     115      5.76       2.43   153   6.22   2.59
Global/regional integration                                                            85      5.28       2.13   119   5.81   2.52
Food security*                                                                        103      5.26       2.17   136   6.07   2.32
Education*                                                                            116      5.54       2.30   163   6.18   2.49
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                        103      5.22       2.50   140   5.65   2.51
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)*                                         80      5.02       2.73   124   5.82   2.43
Agricultural development*                                                             115      5.54       2.52   162   6.49   2.50
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.


                                                                                               FY13                    FY16
                                                                                        N      Mean       SD      N    Mean   SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
                                                                                       151      6.09     1.94    215   6.53   2.16
development results in the Kyrgyz Republic?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz Republic?
                                                                                               FY13                    FY16
                                                                                        N      Mean       SD      N    Mean   SD
The World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the needs of the Kyrgyz
                                                                                      143      6.17       2.34   217   6.34   2.35
Republic
 The World Bank Group meets the Kyrgyz Republic’s needs for knowledge
                                                                                      136      6.44       2.16   215   6.38   2.33
 services
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)


                                                                    96
                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?

 Percentage of Respondents                                                                      FY13                        FY16
 Weekly                                                                                         5.9%                        3.0%
 Monthly                                                                                        12.7%                       12.7%
 A few times a year                                                                             32.9%                       35.1%
 Rarely                                                                                         41.5%                       33.8%
 Never*                                                                                         7.1%                        15.4%
*Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.

In the Kyrgyz Republic, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities :
                                                                                                   FY13                        FY16
                                                                                           N       Mean         SD      N      Mean    SD
Are timely                                                                                129      6.13         2.12   184      6.57   2.32
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation                   123      6.09         2.12   191      6.49   2.23
Lead to practical solutions                                                               129      6.38         2.07   179      6.42   2.41
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                      132      6.30         2.28   204      6.70   2.33
Are source of relevant information on global good practices                               128      6.69         2.16   197      7.01   2.37
Are adequately disseminated*                                                              130      5.68         2.57   198      6.36   2.48
Are translated enough into local language                                                 124      6.53         2.52   183      6.20   2.74
Are adaptable to the Kyrgyz Republic’s specific development challenges and
                                                                                          123      6.42         1.99   186      6.63   2.30
country circumstances
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.


                                                                                                   FY13                        FY16
                                                                                           N       Mean         SD      N      Mean    SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the WBG’s knowledge
                                                                                          139      6.62         2.14   229      7.71   2.15
work and activities make to development results in your country?*
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                          135      6.98         1.97   208      7.15   2.17
knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
*Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents




                                                                       97
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                                                          FY13                       FY16
                                                                                    N     Mean         SD      N     Mean    SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly*                                    123      6.19        2.31   149     6.83   2.60
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                  133      6.61        2.19   194     6.92   2.56
programs it supports
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion         120      6.70        2.22   173     7.04   2.40
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy” requirements are reasonable              88      6.58        2.16   110     7.08   2.22
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable*                  108      6.26        2.31   137     7.00   2.54
Working with the World Bank Group increases the Kyrgyz Republic’s
                                                                                  126      6.94        2.05   197     7.41   2.43
institutional capacity
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                                  105      6.42        2.39   158     7.30   2.47
appropriate use of them*
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support                    124      6.85        2.13   192     7.10   2.47
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.


G. Communication and Information Sharing

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the WBG will now disclose any information
in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?*
 Percentage of Respondents                                                               FY13                       FY16
 Yes                                                                                     16.4%                      30.2%
 No                                                                                      83.6%                      69.8%
*Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                               FY13                       FY16
 Yes                                                                                     21.7%                      18.1%
 No                                                                                      78.3%                      81.9%

Were you able to obtain this information?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                               FY13                       FY16
 Yes                                                                                     77.8%                      87.6%
 No                                                                                      22.2%                      12.4%

Do you have access to the Internet?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                               FY13                       FY16
 Yes                                                                                     91.8%                      95.6%
 No                                                                                      8.2%                       4.4%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                               FY13                       FY16
 Yes                                                                                     62.2%                      55.1%
 No                                                                                      37.8%                      44.9%




                                                                  98
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?*
 Percentage of Respondents                                                              FY13                   FY16
 High speed/WiFi                                                                        74.5%                  85.2%
 Dial-up                                                                                25.5%                  14.8%
*Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.
                                                                                          FY13                    FY16
                                                                                   N      Mean     SD      N      Mean     SD
I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.                          113     6.36    2.35    146      6.91   2.29
I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.                 116     6.90    2.24    151      7.34   2.34
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it           130     6.81    2.68    179      6.94   2.69
 The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                                   99     6.46    2.63    131      7.13   2.64
 inquiries
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)


H. Background Information

Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group (IBRD/IDA, IFC, or MIGA) in your country?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                              FY13                   FY16
 Yes                                                                                    46.5%                  46.9%
 No                                                                                     53.5%                  53.1%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz Republic?
(Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                                   FY13                   FY16
 Observer                                                                               19.5%                  25.0%
 Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                      22.9%                  27.5%
 Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                         28.1%                  35.7%
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                          43.0%                  37.7%
 Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                     18.1%                  17.8%




                                                                  99
                                                                                                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


Appendix F: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the World Bank Group
                                                                                             Which of the following
                                                                                                                          Which of the following describes your exposure to the World Bank in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than 2)
                                                                                              describes your level of
                                                                                           interaction with the WBG?           Observer          Use WBG reports/data   Engage in WBG activities       Collaborate        Use WBG website
                                                                                                Not        Currently
                                                                                                                         No Mean    Yes Mean     No Mean    Yes Mean     No Mean     Yes Mean      No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean   Yes Mean
Indicator Question                                                                         Collaborating Collaborating
Overa l l , pl ea s e ra te your i mpres s i on of the Worl d Ba nk Group’s
                                                                                               5.72          6.98         6.63            5.78     6.45       6.41         6.23         6.79        6.33        6.58      6.41        6.58
effecti venes s i n the Kyrgyz Republ i c.
Overa l l the Worl d Ba nk Group currentl y pl a ys a rel eva nt rol e i n devel opment
                                                                                               6.29          7.22         7.02            6.33     6.81       6.94         6.76         7.01        6.65        7.10      6.85        6.85
i n the Kyrgyz Republ i c
The Worl d Ba nk Group’s work i s a l i gned wi th wha t I cons i der the
                                                                                               5.85          7.16         6.82            5.65     6.43       6.86         6.49         6.66        6.35        6.81      6.54        6.61
devel opment pri ori ti es for the Kyrgyz Republ i c
Res pons i venes s to needs                                                                    5.21          6.21         5.76            5.84     5.76       5.81         5.70         5.91        5.83        5.72      5.82        5.58
Fl exi bi l i ty (i n terms of the i ns ti tuti on’s products a nd s ervi ces )                5.37          6.52         6.06            5.69     6.07       5.75         5.91         6.11        5.88        6.10      5.99        5.92
Fl exi bi l i ty (i n terms of cha ngi ng country ci rcums ta nces )                           5.23          6.50         5.90            5.93     5.99       5.69         5.96         5.81        5.81        6.02      5.94        5.74
Bei ng i ncl us i ve                                                                           5.36          7.06         6.52            5.60     6.33       6.25         6.25         6.40        5.87        6.89      6.39        5.92
Opennes s (s ha ri ng da ta a nd other i nforma ti on)                                         6.10          7.23         6.91            6.10     6.75       6.70         6.73         6.75        6.52        7.00      6.73        6.74
Col l a bora ti on wi th the Government                                                        7.08          7.92         7.74            7.02     7.50       7.77         7.45         7.81        7.50        7.67      7.60        7.48
The s peed i n whi ch i t gets thi ngs a ccompl i s hed on the ground                          5.72          6.95         6.46            6.15     6.40       6.35         6.40         6.36        6.28        6.52      6.38        6.42
Ea s e of a cces s to the peopl e a t the Worl d Ba nk Group who a re ma ki ng
                                                                                               5.51          7.54         6.99            5.31     6.70       6.52         6.35         7.17        6.37        6.98      6.71        6.35
deci s i ons i mporta nt to my work
Col l a bora ti on wi th ci vi l s oci ety                                                     5.50          6.79         6.34            5.63     6.01       6.53         6.18         6.13        6.01        6.37      6.17        6.12
Sta ff a cces s i bi l i ty a t the Loca l Country Offi ce i n the Kyrgyz Republ i c           5.68          7.47         7.04            5.32     6.59       6.78         6.42         7.03        6.46        6.86      6.67        6.50
Sta ff a cces s i bi l i ty a t the Hea dqua rters i n Wa s hi ngton                           4.48          6.54         5.91            4.21     5.51       5.59         5.29         5.94        5.29        5.78      5.48        5.75
Col l a bora ti on wi th other donors a nd devel opment pa rtners                              5.75          7.31         6.85            5.76     6.49       6.90         6.31         7.12        6.43        6.81      6.64        6.46
Col l a bora ti on wi th the pri va te s ector                                                 5.07          6.16         5.91            4.72     5.49       5.96         5.57         5.71        5.23        6.12      5.72        5.22
Stra i ghtforwa rdnes s a nd hones ty                                                          6.34          7.21         7.02            6.10     6.71       7.14         6.92         6.68        6.73        6.95      6.91        6.50
Trea ti ng cl i ents a nd s ta kehol ders i n the Kyrgyz Republ i c wi th res pect             7.00          8.03         7.84            6.46     7.45       7.80         7.42         7.77        7.37        7.78      7.58        7.37
Bei ng a l ong-term pa rtner                                                                   7.15          8.46         7.89            7.34     7.81       7.68         7.73         7.87        7.54        8.05      7.85        7.43
To wha t extent does the Worl d Ba nk Group’s work hel p to a chi eve
                                                                                               6.08          6.98         6.69            5.98     6.57       6.39         6.39         6.76        6.34        6.72      6.46        6.79
devel opment res ul ts i n the Kyrgyz Republ i c?
The WBG’s fi na nci a l i ns truments meet the needs of the Kyrgyz Republ i c                  5.94          6.90         6.61            6.00     6.48       6.42         6.27         6.84        6.30        6.67      6.43        6.61
The WBG meets the Kyrgyz Republ i c’s needs for knowl edge s ervi ces                          5.75          6.98         6.69            5.84     6.34       6.85         6.33         6.80        6.41        6.59      6.47        6.58
Are a da pta bl e to the Kyrgyz Republ i c’s s peci fi c devel opment cha l l enges a nd
                                                                                               6.06          7.06         6.88            5.86     6.57       6.92         6.61         6.79        6.68        6.67      6.56        7.14
country ci rcums ta nces
Overa l l , how s i gni fi ca nt a contri buti on do you bel i eve the WBG’s knowl edge
                                                                                               7.75          7.96         7.97            7.51     7.79       8.03         7.91         7.75        7.79        7.94      7.79        8.15
work a nd a cti vi ti es ma ke to devel opment res ul ts i n your country?
Overa l l , how woul d you ra te the techni ca l qua l i ty of the Worl d Ba nk Group's
                                                                                               6.79          7.55         7.38            6.80     7.13       7.53         7.09         7.53        7.27        7.22      7.24        7.26
knowl edge work a nd a cti vi ti es ?
The WBG ta kes deci s i ons qui ckl y i n the Kyrgyz Republ i c                                6.00          6.87         6.75            5.78     6.47       6.76         6.38         6.85        6.69        6.40      6.52        6.73
Where country s ys tems a re a dequa te, the Worl d Ba nk Group ma kes
                                                                                               6.96          7.51         7.48            6.94     7.36       7.36         7.16         7.74        7.36        7.36      7.37        7.31
a ppropri a te us e of them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No means.




                                                                                                                         100
                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


Appendix G: The Kyrgyz Republic FY 2016 Questionnaire




                      World Bank Group Country Survey FY16 – Kyrgyz Republic


The World Bank Group is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in the Kyrgyz Republic or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The
following survey will give the World Bank Group’s team that works in the Kyrgyz Republic, greater insight into how
the Bank’s work is perceived. This is one tool the World Bank Group uses to assess the views of its stakeholders,
and to develop more effective strategies that support development in the Kyrgyz Republic.

A local independent firm has been hired to oversee the logistics of this survey. This ensures anonymity and
confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid.

Finally, the survey relates to the World Bank Group’s work. The World Bank Group consists of IBRD, IDA, IFC,
MIGA, and ICSID. When responding to the survey, please consider the area of the World Bank Group with which
you are most familiar.

To complete the survey, please circle/check the response that most accurately reflects your opinion.
If you prefer not to answer a question, please leave it blank. If you feel that you do not have an
adequate amount of information on a subject, please check “Don’t know”.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING THE KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

  A1. In general would you say that the Kyrgyz Republic is headed in ... ?
  1   The right direction
  2   The wrong direction
  3   Not sure




                                                       101
                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

 A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in the Kyrgyz Republic.
 Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in the
 Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than THREE)
  1   Global/regional integration                          15    Health
  2   Food security                                        16    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
      Public administration and public service delivery
      (i.e., anti-corruption, public financial
  3                                                        17    Poverty reduction
      management, public expenditure, fiscal system
      reform, health and education services)
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  4                                                        18    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
      assistance)
  5   Private sector development                           19    Education
  6   Foreign direct investment                            20    Agricultural development
  7   Urban development                                    21    Trade and exports
  8   Energy                                               22    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
  9   Job creation/employment                              23    Business environment and investment climate
                                                                 Management of natural resources and physical
 10   Rural development                                    24
                                                                 infrastructure (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 11   Financial markets                                    25    Economic growth
 12   Water and sanitation                                 26    Disaster management
 13   Environmental sustainability
                                                           27    Information and communications technology
 14   Gender equity and equality of opportunity




                                                           102
                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A3. The World Bank Group has committed itself to twin goals: ending extreme poverty by 2030 and
 boosting shared prosperity. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many
 different areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing
 poverty in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than THREE)
  1   Water and sanitation                                 14     Foreign direct investment
  2   Gender equity and equality of opportunity            15     Energy
                                                                  Public administration and public service delivery
                                                                  (i.e., anti-corruption, public financial management,
  3   Rural development                                    16
                                                                  public expenditure, fiscal system reform, health and
                                                                  education services)
  4   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)        17     Private sector development
                                                                  Management of natural resources and physical
  5   Global/regional integration                          18
                                                                  infrastructure (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
  6   Economic growth                                      19     Environmental sustainability
  7   Urban development                                    20     Health
  8   Business environment and investment climate          21     Agricultural development
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  9                                                        22     Disaster management
      assistance)
 10   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)              23     Job creation/employment
 11   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)     24     Financial markets
 12   Information and communications technology            25     Trade and exports
 13   Education                                            26     Food security




                                                            103
                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A4. The World Bank Group’s “Shared Prosperity” goal captures two key elements, economic growth
 and equity. It will seek to foster income growth among the bottom 40 percent of a country’s
 population. Improvement in the Shared Prosperity Indicator requires growth and well-being of the
 less well-off. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity” in your country, which of the
 following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no
 more than TWO)
  1    Consistent economic growth
  2    More reliable social safety net
  3    Greater access to micro-finance for the poor
  4    Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability
  5    Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens
  6    Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized businesses)
  7    A growing middle class
  8    Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas
  9    Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas
  10   Better employment opportunities for young people
  11   Better employment opportunities for women
  12   Greater equity of fiscal policy
  13   Education and training that better ensure job opportunity
  14   Better quality public services
  15   Other (please specify):_____________________________________


 A5. Do you think the gap between the rich and the poor is a very big problem, a moderately big
 problem, a small problem or not a problem at all in the Kyrgyz Republic?              (Select only ONE
 response)
  1    A very big problem
  2    A moderately big problem
  3    A small problem
  4    Not a problem at all
  5    Don’t know


 A6. In your view, is global climate change a very serious problem, somewhat serious, not too
 serious, or not a problem?       (Select only ONE response)
  1    A very serious problem
  2    A somewhat serious problem
  3    Not too serious problem
  4    Not a problem
  5    Don’t know




                                                             104
                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz Republic?
          1                2       3           4         5         6             7         8            9               10
 Not familiar at all                                                                                            Extremely familiar



 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in the Kyrgyz
 Republic.
         1             2       3       4   5       6         7         8          9               10                     
 Not effective at
                                                                                               Very effective        Don't know
 all


 B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
 knowledge) to help the Kyrgyz Republic solve its most complicated development challenges?
         1             2       3       4   5       6         7         8          9              10                      
 To no degree at                                                                                  To a very
                                                                                                                     Don't know
 all                                                                                     significant degree


 B4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results
 in the Kyrgyz Republic, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most
 of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more
 than THREE)
  1   Health                                                      15       Economic growth
  2   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)            16       Private sector development
  3   Agricultural development                                    17       Water and sanitation
  4   Global/regional integration                                 18       Food security
  5   Job creation/employment                                     19       Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
      Public administration and public service delivery
      (i.e., anti-corruption, public financial management,
  6                                                               20       Information and communications technology
      public expenditure, fiscal system reform, health and
      education services)
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  7                                                               21       Trade and exports
      assistance)
  8   Rural development                                           22       Gender equity and equality of opportunity
  9   Foreign direct investment                                   23       Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 10   Education                                                   24       Business environment and investment climate
                                                                           Management of natural resources and physical
 11   Energy                                                      25
                                                                           infrastructure (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 12   Financial markets                                           26       Poverty reduction
 13   Urban development
                                                                  27       Disaster management
 14   Environmental sustainability




                                                                 105
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 B5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest
 VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in the Kyrgyz Republic?
                                                                      Greatest Value            Second Greatest Value
                                                                   (Choose only ONE)           (Choose only ONE)
  1   Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                                   
  2   Data and statistics                                                                                
  3   Convening/facilitating                                                                             
  4   Financial resources                                                                                
  5   Capacity development                                                                               
  6   Technical assistance                                                                               
      Help to bring discipline/effective supervision to
  7                                                                                                      
      implementation of investment projects
  8   Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                         
  9   Donor coordination                                                                                 
      Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South
 10                                                                                                      
      knowledge sharing)
 11   Other (please specify): ________________________                                                   


 B6. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work
 in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1   Too influenced by developed countries
  2   Not exploring alternative policy options
  3   Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the Government
  4   Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving
  5   Not enough public disclosure of its work
  6   Arrogant in its approach
  7   Not client focused
  8   The credibility of its knowledge/data
  9   World Bank Group’s processes too complex
 10   Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 11   Staff too inaccessible at the Local Country Office in the Kyrgyz Republic
 12   Staff too inaccessible at the Headquarters in Washington
 13   Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 14   World Bank Group’s processes too slow (e.g., too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures)
 15   Not aligned with other donors’ work
 16   Not aligned with country priorities
 17   Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in the Kyrgyz Republic
 18   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 19   Don’t know




                                                             106
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 B7. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty
 in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Trust Fund management
 2     Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
 3     Capacity development
 4     Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)
 5     Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 6     Policy based lending / budget support to the Government
 7     Multi-sectoral approaches
 8     Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 9     Don’t know


 B8. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support help the poorest in
 the Kyrgyz Republic? (Select only ONE response)
 1     To a fully sufficient degree
 2     To a somewhat sufficient degree
 3     To a somewhat insufficient degree
 4     To a very insufficient degree
 5     Don’t know


 B9. In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which TWO of the following
 groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Parliament                                              7       NGOs/Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
  2    Donor community                                         8       Youth/university groups
  3    Media                                                   9       Beneficiaries
  4    Local Government                                                Other (please specify):
                                                              10
  5    Private sector                                                  _____________________________________
  6    Academia/think tanks/research institutes               11       Don’t know


 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in the
 Kyrgyz Republic?
                                                                   Strongly                                    Strongly   Don't
                                                                   disagree                                       agree   know
        Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
 B10                                                               1       2    3      4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        relevant role in development in the Kyrgyz Republic
        The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
 B11    consider the development priorities for the Kyrgyz         1       2    3      4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        Republic




                                                          107
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in the Kyrgyz Republic, in
 terms of each of the following?
                                                                        To no                                  To a very
                                                                                                                            Don't
                                                                        degree at                             significant
                                                                                                                            know
                                                                        all                                      degree
 B12     Responsiveness to needs                                        1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9     10       
         Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
 B13                                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9     10       
         services)
         Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B14                                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9     10       
         circumstances)
 B15     Being inclusive                                                1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9     10       

 B16     Openness (sharing data and other information)                  1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9     10       

 B17     Collaboration with the Government                              1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9     10       
         The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
 B18                                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9     10       
         the ground
         Ease of access to the people at the World Bank
 B19     Group who are making decisions important to my                 1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9     10       
         work
 B20     Collaboration with civil society                               1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9     10       
         Staff accessibility at the Local Country Office in the
 B21                                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9     10       
         Kyrgyz Republic
         Staff accessibility at the Headquarters in
 B22                                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9     10       
         Washington
         Collaboration with other donors and development
 B23                                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9     10       
         partners
 B24     Collaboration with the private sector                          1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9     10       
 B25     Straightforwardness and honesty                                1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9     10       
         Treating clients and stakeholders in the Kyrgyz
 B26                                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9     10       
         Republic with respect
 B27     Being a long-term partner                                      1      2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9     10       



 B28. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the
 following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    The Government works inefficiently
  2    Poor donor coordination
  3    The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
  4    Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
  5    There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
  6    The World Bank Group works too slowly
  7    The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
  8    Political pressures and obstacles
  9    Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 10    Other (please specify): ________________________________________



                                                                  108
                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C1. The World Bank Group has emphasized the main objective to improve governance in its strategy
 with the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, focusing on the following areas of economic development.
 How would you rate the EFFECTIVENESS of the World Bank Group’s support in these areas over the past
 two years (2014-2015)? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in working in any of the sectors listed
 below, please respond “Don’t know”)
                                                                    Not effective                                   Very    Don't
                                                                    at all                                      effective   know
 Please rate the EFFECTIVENESS of the three key clusters of interventions of the World Bank
 Group’s strategy
      Public administration and public service delivery (i.e.,
      anti-corruption, public financial management, public
  1                                                                  1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
      expenditure, fiscal system reform, health and
      education services)
  2   Business environment and investment climate                    1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
      Management of natural resources and physical
  3                                                                  1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
      infrastructure (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 Please rate the EFFECTIVENESS of the World Bank Group’s work in the foll owing areas of
 development
  4   Information and communications technology                      1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  5   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)               1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  6   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                        1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  7   Urban development                                              1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  8   Environmental sustainability                                   1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  9   Poverty reduction                                              1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 10   Private sector development                                     1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 11   Foreign direct investment                                      1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      

 12   Water and sanitation                                           1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      

 13   Trade and exports                                              1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 14   Economic growth                                                1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 15   Health                                                         1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 16   Disaster management                                            1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 17   Job creation/employment                                        1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 18   Financial markets                                              1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 19   Gender equity and equality of opportunity                      1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 20   Energy                                                         1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 21   Rural development                                              1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 22   Global/regional integration                                    1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 23   Food security                                                  1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 24   Education                                                      1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 25                                                                  1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
      assistance)
 26   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                  1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 27   Agricultural development                                       1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      




                                                             109
                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C2. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in the
 Kyrgyz Republic?
        1           2       3      4       5       6        7         8       9                10                   
 To no degree at                                                                                To a very
                                                                                                                Don't know
 all                                                                                   significant degree


 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in the
 Kyrgyz Republic?
                                                        Strongly                                            Strongly     Don't
                                                        disagree                                               agree     know
      The World Bank Group’s financial instruments
      (i.e., investment lending, Development Policy
 C3                                                     1         2       3   4    5       6    7     8     9     10      
      Loan, Trust Funds, etc.) meet the needs of the
      Kyrgyz Republic
      The World Bank Group meets the Kyrgyz
 C4   Republic’s needs for knowledge services (e.g.,    1         2       3   4    5       6    7     8     9     10      
      research, analysis, data, technical assistance)


 C5. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its work in real time
 in the Kyrgyz Republic?
        1           2       3      4       5       6        7         8       9                10                   
 To no degree at                                                                                To a very
                                                                                                                Don't know
 all                                                                                   significant degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                            110
                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S KNOWLEDGE WORK AND ACTIVITIES (i.e., ANALYSIS,
STUDIES, RESEARCH, DATA, REPORTS, CONFERENCES)
 D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you
 do?
 1     Weekly
 2     Monthly
 3     A few times a year
 4     Rarely
 5     Never


 In the Kyrgyz Republic, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work
 and activities:
                                                         To no                                                  To a very
                                                                                                                             Don't
                                                         degree at                                             significant
                                                                                                                             know
                                                         all                                                      degree
  D2     Are timely                                       1         2       3   4    5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
  D3                                                      1         2       3   4    5     6     7     8       9     10        
         involvement during preparation
  D4     Lead to practical solutions                      1         2       3   4    5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
  D5                                                      1         2       3   4    5     6     7     8       9     10        
         understand)
         Are source of relevant information on global
  D6                                                      1         2       3   4    5     6     7     8       9     10        
         good practices
  D7     Are adequately disseminated                      1         2       3   4    5     6     7     8       9     10        
  D8     Are translated enough into local language        1         2       3   4    5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Are adaptable to the Kyrgyz Republic’s
  D9     specific development challenges and              1         2       3   4    5     6     7     8       9     10        
         country circumstances


 D10. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group's knowledge work
 and activities make to development results in your country?
           1              2    3     4      5        6        7         8       9               10                        
 Not significant at all                                                                     Very significant       Don't know


 D11. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge work and
 activities?
           1              2    3     4       5       6        7         8       9               10                        
 Very low technical                                                                      Very high technical
                                                                                                                   Don't know
 quality                                                                                             quality




                                                              111
                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                           Strongly                                                  Strongly   Don't
                                                           disagree                                                     agree   know
       The World Bank Group disburses funds
 E1                                                        1         2   3   4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
       promptly
       The World Bank Group effectively monitors
 E2    and evaluates the projects and programs it          1         2   3   4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
       supports
       The World Bank Group’s approvals and
 E3                                                        1         2   3   4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
       reviews are done in a timely fashion
       The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy”
 E4                                                        1         2   3   4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
       requirements are reasonable
       The World Bank Group’s conditions on its
 E5                                                        1         2   3   4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
       lending are reasonable
       The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly
 E6                                                        1         2   3   4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
       in the Kyrgyz Republic
       Working with the World Bank Group increases
 E7                                                        1         2   3   4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
       the Kyrgyz Republic’s institutional capacity
       Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
       financial management, etc.) are adequate, the
 E8                                                        1         2   3   4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
       World Bank Group makes appropriate use of
       them
       The World Bank Group provides effective
 E9    implementation support (i.e., supervision of        1         2   3   4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
       projects)


 E10. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find solutions that
 promote private public partnerships in the Kyrgyz Republic?
          1              2      3       4      5       6        7        8       9               10                        
                                                                                         To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                                  Don't know
                                                                                                      degree


 E11. Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in the Kyrgyz Republic?
 (Select only one response)
      The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses on the most important development challenges in
 1
      the Kyrgyz Republic
      The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in the Kyrgyz Republic, and it is involved in too many areas of
 2
      development.
 3    Don’t know




                                                               112
                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN THE KYRGYZ REPUBLIC
 F1. Looking forward, and taking into account limited resources, how IMPORTANT is it for the World
 Bank Group to EMPHASIZE the following areas of development with the Government of the Kyrgyz
 Republic in the near future (2016-2017)?
                                                                     Not important                               Very    Don't
                                                                     at all                                  important   know
 Please rate the IMPORTANCE of the three key clusters of interventions of the World Bank
 Group’s strategy
       Public administration and public service delivery (i.e.,
       anti-corruption, public financial management, public
  1                                                                   1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
       expenditure, fiscal system reform, health and
       education services)
  2    Business environment and investment climate                    1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
       Management of natural resources and physical
  3                                                                   1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
       infrastructure (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 Please rate the IMPORTANCE of the World Bank Group’s involvement in the following areas of
 development
  4    Information and communications technology                      1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  5    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)               1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  6    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                        1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  7    Urban development                                              1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  8    Environmental sustainability                                   1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  9    Poverty reduction                                              1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  10   Private sector development                                     1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  11   Foreign direct investment                                      1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     

  12   Water and sanitation                                           1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     

  13   Trade and exports                                              1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  14   Economic growth                                                1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  15   Health                                                         1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  16   Disaster management                                            1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  17   Job creation/employment                                        1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  18   Financial markets                                              1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  19   Gender equity and equality of opportunity                      1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  20   Energy                                                         1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  21   Rural development                                              1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  22   Global/regional integration                                    1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  23   Food security                                                  1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  24   Education                                                      1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  25                                                                  1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
       assistance)
  26   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                  1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     
  27   Agricultural development                                       1     2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9     10     




                                                              113
                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN THE KYRGYZ REPUBLIC
 F2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in the
 Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1   Offer more innovative financial products
  2   Ensure greater selectivity in its work
  3   Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on the Kyrgyz Republic’s economy
  4   Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, other terms)
  5   Reach out more to groups outside of Government
  6   Increase the level of capacity development in the country
  7   Improve the quality of its experts as related to the Kyrgyz Republic’s specific challenges
  8   Offer more innovative knowledge services
  9   Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., national, state, local)
 10   Work faster
 11   Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing
 12   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


 F3. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in the Kyrgyz
 Republic, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you
 believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in the Kyrgyz Republic? (Select only ONE
 response)
  1   Financial services
  2   Knowledge products
  3   Convening services
  4   None of the above
  5   The combination is appropriate for the Kyrgyz Republic
  6   Don’t know




                                                            114
                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING
 G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in the
 Kyrgyz Republic? (Choose no more than TWO)
      Social media (e.g., blogs, Facebook, Twitter,
  1                                                        6    International television
      YouTube, Flickr)
  2   International newspapers                             7    Local newspapers
  3   Local radio                                          8    Internet
  4   International radio                                  9    Periodicals
  5   Local television                                    10    Other (please specify): ____________________


 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
      Direct contact with World Bank Group (i.e., face          Social media (e.g., blogs, Facebook, Twitter,
  1                                                        5
      to face meetings/discussions)                             YouTube, Flickr)
      World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/
  2                                                        6    e-Newsletters
      conferences
      World Bank Group’s publications and other
  3
      written materials                                    7    Other (please specify): ____________________
  4   World Bank Group’s website


      Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policies under which the
 G3   World Bank Group discloses any information in its possession that is not on a list of          Yes        No
      exceptions? (If YES please go to Question G4; if NO please go to G5)


 G4. If yes, from which of the following sources did you learn about the World Bank Group's Access
 to Information Policies? (Select only ONE response)
  1   World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences
  2   World Bank Group’s website
  3   World Bank Group’s e-Newsletters
  4   News/Media
  5   Colleagues/Friends/Peer organizations
  6   Other (please specify): _____________________


      Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past
 G5                                                                                                  Yes        No
      year? (If YES please go to Question G6; if NO please go to G7)
 G6   Were you able to obtain this information?                                                      Yes        No
 G7   Do you have access to the Internet?                                                            Yes        No
 G8   Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group website?                                         Yes        No
      Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites (e.g., blogs, Facebook,
 G9                                                                                                  Yes        No
      Twitter, YouTube, and Flickr)?




                                                         115
                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G10. Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
  1    High speed/WiFi
  2    Dial-up


 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.
                                                                 Strongly                              Strongly   Don't
                                                                 disagree                                 agree   know
       I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to
 G11   navigate. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank      1     2    3   4   5    6   7    8    9   10      
       Group website)
       I find the information on the World Bank Group’s
 G12   websites useful. (Only answer if you have used a World    1     2    3   4   5    6   7    8    9   10      
       Bank Group website)
       The World Bank Group’s social media channels (e.g.,
 G13   blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr) are valuable   1     2    3   4   5    6   7    8    9   10      
       sources of information about the institution
       When I need information from the World Bank Group I
 G14   know how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach   1     2    3   4   5    6   7    8    9   10      
       them, etc.)
       The World Bank Group is responsive to my information
 G15                                                             1     2    3   4   5    6   7    8    9   10      
       requests and inquiries




                                                         116
                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?         (Select only ONE response)
 1    Office of the President, Prime Minister         11    NGO/Community Based Organization
 2    Office of Minister                              12    Media (press, radio, TV, web, etc.)
                                                            Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory
 3    Office of Parliamentarian                       13
                                                            Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
      Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial
 4                                                    14    Trade Union
      Department or Implementation Agency
      Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing
      implementation of project/
 5                                                    15    Faith-Based Group
      Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank
      Group supported project/program
 6    Local Government Office or Staff                16    Youth Group
 7    Bilateral/Multilateral Agency                   17    Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 8    Private Sector Organization                     18    Judiciary Branch
 9    Private Foundation
                                                      19    Other (please specify): ________________________
 10   Financial Sector/Private Bank


 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Select only ONE response)
 1    Water                                           12    Gender
 2    Social protection and labor                     13    Transport and ICT
 3    Fragility, conflict and violence                14    Urban, rural, and social development
 4    Environment and natural resources               15    Governance
 5    Public-private partnerships                     16    Poverty
 6    Education                                       17    Jobs
 7    Health, nutrition, and population               18    Agriculture
 8    Energy and extractives                          19    Climate Change
 9    Macroeconomics and fiscal management            20    Generalist (specialized in multiple sectors)
 10   Trade and competitiveness
                                                      21    Other (please specify): ____________________
 11   Finance and markets


 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group (IDA, IFC, or
 MIGA) in your country? (Select only ONE response)
 1    Yes
 2    No


 H4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily engage with in the
 Kyrgyz Republic? (Select only ONE response)
 1    The World Bank (IDA)
 2    The International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
 3    The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
 4    Other (please specify):___________________________




                                                           117
                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: The Kyrgyz Republic


SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION
 H5. Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?
 (If YES please go to Question H6; If NO please go to H7)
 1   Yes
 2   No


 H6. If yes, what was your view of how the two institutions work together in the Kyrgyz Republic?
 (Select only ONE response)
 1   The two institutions work well together
 2   The way the two institutions work together needs improvement
 3   The two institutions do not work well together
 4   Don’t know


 H7. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz
 Republic? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1   Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2   Use World Bank Group reports/data
 3   Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities
 4   Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5   Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.


 H8. What’s your gender?
 1   Female
 2   Male


 H9. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1   Bishkek
 2   Oblast centers
 3   Small towns
 4   Other




                              Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                            118
