                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil




FY16 Brazil Country Opinion Survey Report


         THE WORLD BANK GROUP
            Public Opinion Research Group




                          1
                                                                          May 2016
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil




Acknowledgements
The Country Opinion Survey for Brazil is part of the County Opinion Survey Program series of the
World Bank Group. This report was prepared by the Public Opinion Research Group (PORG) team
led by Sharon Felzer (Senior Communications Officer, Head of PORG), Jessica Cameron, Jing Guo,
and Svetlana Markova. Calita Woods and Dania Mendoza provided data support. The report was
prepared under the overall guidance and supervision of Sumir Lal (Director, ECRGP). PORG
acknowledges the significant contribution from the Brazil country team. In particular, PORG is
grateful for the support from Candyce Rocha (Senior Communications Officer) and Gabriela Bastos
(Consultant) who coordinated the survey related activities from Brasilia, Brazil.




                                              1
                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil




Table of Contents

     I. Objectives ...................................................................................3

     II. Methodology ...............................................................................3

    III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................4

    IV. General Issues Facing Brazil.........................................................8

    V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group .......................13

    VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness......................................20

   VII. How the World Bank Group Operates .......................................27

   VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments .....................33

    IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Brazil ...................39

     X. Communication and Outreach ..................................................43

    XI. Appendices ................................................................................49

                              BRAZIL




                                                    2
                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



I. Objectives
This survey was designed to assist the World Bank Group (WBG) in gaining a better understanding
of how stakeholders in Brazil perceive the WBG. The survey explored:
     General Issues Facing Brazil
     Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
     World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results
     The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
     Working with the World Bank Group
     The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Brazil
     Communication and Information Sharing
     Background Information


II. Methodology
From March to April 2016, 561 stakeholders of the WBG in Brazil were invited to provide their
opinions on the WBG’s work in the country by participating in a country opinion survey.
Participants were drawn from the office of the President/Prime Minister, office of a Minister,
office of a Parliamentarian, employees of ministries/ministerial departments/ implementation
agencies, Project Management Units (PMUs) overseeing implementation of WBG projects or
consultants/contractors working on WBG-supported projects/programs, local government office
or staff, bilateral/multilateral agencies, private sector organizations, private foundations, the
financial sector/private banks, NGOs/community-based organizations (CBOs), the media,
independent government institutions, trade unions, faith-based groups, youth groups,
academia/research institutes/think tanks, and the judiciary branch. A total of 248 stakeholders
participated in the survey (44% response rate).

Respondents received an invitation to complete the questionnaires via email and completed it
entirely online. Respondents were asked about: general issues facing Brazil; their overall
attitudes toward the WBG; the WBG’s effectiveness and results; the WBG’s knowledge work
and activities; working with the WBG; the WBG’s future role in Brazil; and the WBG’s
communication and information sharing.

Every country that engages in the Country Opinion Survey must include specific indicator
questions that will be aggregated for the World Bank Group’s annual Corporate Scorecard.
These questions are identified throughout the survey report.

The results of this year’s Country Survey were compared to those in the Country Survey
conducted in FY ’13 (response rate was 2%, N=200). The data were weighted to reach similar
stakeholder compositions across the two survey years, allowing for more statistically reliable
comparisons. There were too few respondents from media in FY ’16 for the category to be
included, and stakeholders who identified themselves as “Other” in the stakeholder category
options also were not included in these comparisons. As a result, mean ratings, percentages of
respondents, and the total number of respondents in both years are slightly different from those
of the original data reported in the FY ’13 COS report and the non-weighted data presented in
this report. For the weighted stakeholder breakdown and year comparison results, please refer to
Appendix E (see page 99).

                                                3
                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



III. Demographics of the Sample
Current Position
      For further analyses, the small number of respondents from the office of a Minister were
       combined with those from the office of the President. The few respondents from private
       foundations, youth groups, and trade unions were combined with those from
       NGOs/CBOs to form a “Civil Society” category. The few respondents from bilateral/
       multilateral agencies, the media, independent government institutions, and the judiciary
       branch were included in the “Other” category for all further analyses.




                                               4
                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Area of Primary Specialization




                                 5
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Geographic Locations
     For all further analyses, the small number of respondents from Northeast, South, and
      North Brazil were combined into an “Other Areas” category.




Exposure to Agencies within the World Bank Group




                                              6
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Familiarity with the World Bank Group
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey indicated significantly
         higher levels of familiarity with the WBG compared to respondents from the FY ’13
         Country Survey (weighted mean in FY ’16 = 6.5; weighted mean in FY ’13 = 5.8)1.
        Collaboration: Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher
         ratings of familiarity with the WBG (mean rating = 7.0) compared to respondents who do
         not collaborate with the WBG (mean rating = 6.1).
        Impact of Familiarity: Respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the WBG were
         significantly, strongly correlated with their ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness in
         Brazil, and moderately, significantly correlated with the extent to which the WBG’s work
         helps to achieve development results and the extent to which the WBG plays a relevant
         role in development in Brazil.




 1
  Please refer to Appendix E (page 99) for more details on weighting. The means in the chart were calculated
 based on un-weighted data.

                                                       7
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



IV. General Issues Facing Brazil
Headed in the Right Direction
        Year comparison2: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey were significantly more
         likely to indicate that Brazil was headed in the right direction and significantly less likely
         to indicate that Brazil was headed in the wrong direction or that they were not sure
         compared to respondents from this year’s Country Survey.




 2
  Please refer to Appendix E (page 99) for more details on weighting. The percentages in the chart were
 calculated based on weighted data.

                                                       8
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



IV. General Issues Facing Brazil (continued)
Development Priority
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that the most
      important development priority in Brazil was education (percentage of respondents =
      67%), followed by public sector governance/reform (52%) and health (35%).




                                             9
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



IV. General Issues Facing Brazil (continued)
Factors Contributing to Poverty Reduction
      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that education
       would contribute most to poverty reduction in Brazil (percentage of respondents = 68%),
       followed by economic growth (37%) and equality of opportunity (29%).




                                              10
                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



IV. General Issues Facing Brazil (continued)
Factors Contributing to “Shared Prosperity”
      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that education
       and training that better ensure job opportunity would achieve “shared prosperity” in Brazil
       (percentage of respondents = 57%), followed by consistent economic growth (32%) and
       better quality public services (22%).




                                               11
                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



IV. General Issues Facing Brazil (continued)
Gap between the Rich and the Poor




Global Climate Change




                                    12
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
Attributing Failed/Slow Reform Efforts

      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that they most
       often attributed failed or slow WBG assisted reform efforts to political pressures and
       obstacles (percentage of respondents = 37%), the government working inefficiently
       (33%), and an inadequate level of civil society participation (30%).




                                              13
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
As noted in the “Methodology” section, the indicator questions referred to throughout the survey
report are questions that are asked in every country that engages in the Country Opinion Survey.
These will be aggregated for the World Bank Group’s annual Corporate Scorecard.


The World Bank Group’s Overall Effectiveness (Indicator Question)
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had significantly higher
         ratings for the WBG and IDB/BID’s overall effectiveness in Brazil (weighted means =
         7.2 and 7.0, respectively) compared to respondents from the FY ’13 Country Survey
         (weighted means = 6.2 and 6.3, respectively)3.
        Stakeholders: Respondents from local government and PMUs/Consultants on WBG-
         supported projects gave the highest ratings for the WBG’s overall effectiveness whereas
         respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian gave significantly lower ratings.
        Locations: Respondents from Other Areas and Center-West Brazil gave significantly
         higher ratings for the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Brazil (mean ratings = 7.5 and 7.1,
         respectively) compared to respondents from Southeast Brazil (mean rating = 6.4).
        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG gave significantly
         higher ratings for the WBG and IDB/BID’s overall effectiveness in Brazil (mean ratings
         = 7.4 and 7.2, respectively) compared to respondents who are not collaborating (mean
         ratings = 6.6 and 6.4, respectively).




3Please refer to Appendix E (page 99) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The means in the chart were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             14
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Achieving Development Results (Indicator Question)
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey gave statistically similar
         ratings for the extent to which the WBG achieves development results (weighted mean =
         6.6) compared to respondents from the FY ’13 Country Survey (weighted mean = 6.0)4.
        Locations: Respondents from Other Areas gave significantly higher ratings for the
         WBG’s overall effectiveness in Brazil (mean rating = 7.7) compared to respondents from
         Southeast and Center-West Brazil (mean ratings = 6.2 and 6.2, respectively).




WBG Staff Preparedness
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey gave statistically similar
         ratings for the WBG’s staff being well prepared (weighted mean = 7.6) compared to
         respondents from the FY ’13 Country Survey (weighted mean = 7.2)4.
        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG gave significantly
         higher ratings for the WBG’s staff preparedness (mean rating = 7.9) compared to
         respondents who are not collaborating (mean rating = 7.2).




4Please refer to Appendix E (page 99) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The means in the charts were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             15
                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Overall Ratings for Indicator Questions by Stakeholder Groups
      Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects and
       local government had the highest mean ratings for the aggregated responses to the
       twenty-five COS indicator questions whereas respondents from academia and civil
       society had significantly lower mean ratings. Responses for individual indicator questions
       by stakeholder groups can be found in Appendix B (see page 68).
      Collaboration: Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had a significantly higher
       mean rating for the aggregated responses to the twenty-five COS indicator questions
       (mean rating = 7.1) compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG
       (mean rating = 6.3). Responses for individual indicator questions by exposure to the
       WBG can be found in Appendix F (see page 105).




                                               16
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Greatest Value
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that the WBG’s
      greatest value to Brazil was its financial resources for policy based lending/budget
      support to the government (percentage of respondents = 48%) and its financial resources
      for investment lending (31%).




                                             17
                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Effectiveness of WBG’s Instruments in Reducing Poverty
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that the World
      Bank’s most effective instruments at reducing poverty in Brazil was its technical
      assistance (percentage of respondents = 49%) and investment lending (47%).




                                           18
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Greatest Weakness
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that the WBG’s
      greatest weaknesses in its work in Brazil were not enough public disclosure of its work
      (percentage of respondents = 36%) and being too influenced by developed countries (23%).




                                            19
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness
Importance of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas




                                     20
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Importance of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas (continued)
     Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across seven of these
      thirty-one development areas (refer to Appendix B, page 68, for a complete breakdown).
      For the most part, respondents from the office of the President/Minister, the office of a
      Parliamentarian, and PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects tended to give the
      highest ratings of importance for these areas whereas respondents from civil society and
      local government tended to give significantly lower ratings. Those development areas
      which have significant stakeholder group differences were:
          “Environmental sustainability”;
          “Trade and exports”;
          “Private sector development”;
          “Foreign direct investment”;
          “Regulatory framework”;
          “Disaster management”; and
          “Health”.


     Collaboration: Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher
      ratings for the importance of the WBG’s involvement in “Natural resource management”
      (mean rating = 7.8) compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG
      (mean rating = 7.0).




                                              21
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas5




5
 Note, primarily informed stakeholders responded to these questions. Respondents were given the option of “don’t know” if they
did not have exposure to the WBG’s work in certain development areas. See Appendix A (page 52) for details.

                                                              22
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas (continued)

      Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across five of these
       thirty-one development areas (refer to Appendix B, page 68, for a complete breakdown).
       For the most part, respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects and
       other organizations tended to give the highest ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness in
       these areas whereas respondents from academia, civil society, and local government
       tended to give significantly lower ratings of effectiveness. Those development areas
       which had significant stakeholder group differences were:
           “Information and communications technology”;
           “Regulatory framework”;
           “Anti-corruption”;
           “Health”; and
           “Financial markets”.


      Collaboration: Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher
       ratings for the importance of the WBG’s involvement in “Anti-corruption” and “Welfare
       of the vulnerable population” (mean ratings = 7.0 and 7.2, respectively) compared to
       respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG (mean ratings = 5.6 and 6.1,
       respectively).




                                              23
                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas: Year Comparison6




6All   means presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix E (page 99) for details.

                                                                 24
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
The WBG Promoting Private Public Partnerships




Helping the Poorest




                                     25
                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Drivers of Effectiveness
To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the World Bank Group’s overall
effectiveness and ratings of its ability to help achieve development results in Brazil, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the thirty-one specific areas
of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the World Bank Group’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve
development results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area
increase, respondents’ ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of
effectiveness in one area increase, ratings of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development
results increase. Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of effectiveness in one
specific area are related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness
or perceptions of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results.

      Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
       correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the WBG’s
       overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
       drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Brazil. The areas
       determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
              The WBG’s effectiveness at education;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at environmental sustainability;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at social protection; and
              The WBG’s effectiveness at public sector governance/reform.

      Achieving Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-
       Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the
       WBG’s ability to help achieve development results in Brazil, suggesting that ratings of
       effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s ability to
       help achieve development results. The areas determined to be key drivers from these
       analyses were:
              The WBG’s effectiveness at disaster management;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at information and communications technology;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at public sector governance/reform;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at natural resource management;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at education;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at water and sanitation; and
              The WBG’s effectiveness at poverty reduction.




                                                26
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates
The World Bank Group’s Work in Brazil
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had significantly higher
         levels of agreement that “Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
         development in Brazil” (mean rating = 6.4) and that “The WBG’s work is aligned with
         what I consider the development priorities for Brazil” (mean rating = 6.4) compared to
         respondents from the FY ’13 Country Survey (mean ratings = 5.8 and 5.7, respectively)7.
        Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects and
         local government had the highest levels of agreement for the WBG’s relevance and
         alignment in Brazil whereas respondents from civil society and academia had significantly
         lower levels of agreement (see Appendix B, page 68, for a complete breakdown).
        Locations: Respondents from Other Areas had significantly higher levels of agreement
         for the WBG’s relevance and alignment in Brazil (mean ratings = 7.2 and 7.8,
         respectively) compared to respondents from Southeast (mean ratings = 5.8 and 5.9,
         respectively) and Center-West Brazil (mean ratings = 6.0 and 5.8, respectively).




7Please refer to Appendix E (page 99) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The means in the chart were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             27
                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
Overall Perceptions
   Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects and local
    government had the highest levels of agreement that “The World Bank Group disburses
    funds promptly” whereas respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, the financial
    sector/private banks, and academia had significantly lower levels of agreement. Respondents
    from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects and local government had the highest
    levels of agreement that “The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable”
    whereas respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian and civil society had significantly
    lower levels of agreement (refer to Appendix B, page 68, for a complete breakdown).
   Locations: Respondents from Other Areas had significantly higher levels of agreement that
    “The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Brazil” and that “Where country systems
    are adequate, the World Bank Group makes appropriate use of them” (mean ratings = 7.4 and
    8.1, respectively) compared to respondents from Southeast (mean ratings = 6.4 and 7.6,
    respectively) and Center-West Brazil (mean ratings = 6.2 and 6.7, respectively).




                                               28
                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
Overall Perceptions: Year Comparison8




8   All means presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix E (page 99) for details.

                                                                 29
                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
The WBG as an Effective Development Partner
   Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across nearly all of these
    aspects of how the WBG operates in Brazil (refer to Appendix B, page 68, for a complete
    breakdown). For the most part, respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported
    projects tended to give the highest ratings whereas respondents from civil society tended to
    have significantly lower ratings.
   Locations: Respondents from Other Areas had significantly higher ratings for many of these
    aspects of how the WBG operates in Brazil compared to respondents from Southeast and
    Center-West Brazil (refer to Appendix C, page 89, for a complete breakdown)




                                                30
                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
The WBG as an Effective Development Partner: Year Comparison9




9All   means presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix E (page 99) for details.

                                                                 31
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
Internal Measuring and Monitoring




Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
         levels of agreement that Brazil received value for money from the WBG’s RAS
         (weighted mean = 6.6) compared to respondents from the FY ’13 Country Survey
         (weighted mean = 6.2)10.
        Stakeholders: Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, PMU/Consultant on
         WBG-supported project, local government, and other organizations gave the highest
         ratings that Brazil received value for money from the WBG’s RAS whereas respondents
         from civil society, academia, and employees of ministries gave significantly lower
         ratings.




10Please refer to Appendix E (page 99) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The means in the chart was
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             32
                                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments
Frequency of Consulting WBG Knowledge Work and Activities
           Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects
            indicated the most frequent usage of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities
            (percentage of respondents = 57% weekly/monthly) whereas respondents from office of a
            Parliamentarian indicated significantly less frequent usage (40% rarely).




Frequency of Consulting WBG Knowledge Work and Activities: Year Comparison11




11All   percentages presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix E (page 99) for details.

                                                                 33
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Meeting Brazil’s Knowledge Needs (Indicator Question)

        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
         levels of agreement that the WBG meets Brazil’s needs for knowledge services (weighted
         mean = 6.5) compared to respondents from the FY ’13 Country Survey (weighted mean =
         6.1)12.

        Stakeholders: Respondents from PMU/Consultant on WBG-supported project, local
         government, and other organizations had the highest levels of agreement that the WBG
         meets Brazil’s needs for knowledge services whereas respondents from academia gave
         significantly lower ratings.

        Locations: Respondents from Other Areas had significantly higher levels of agreement
         that the WBG meets Brazil’s needs for knowledge services (mean rating = 7.6) compared
         to respondents from Southeast and Center-West Brazil (mean ratings = 6.0 and 6.3,
         respectively).
        Collaboration: Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher
         levels of agreement that the WBG meets Brazil’s needs for knowledge services (mean
         rating = 6.9) compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG (mean
         rating = 6.1).




12Please refer to Appendix E (page 99) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The mean in the chart was
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             34
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Contribution of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
         ratings for the significance of the contribution of the WBG’s knowledge work and
         activities (weighted mean = 7.0) compared to respondents from the FY ’13 Country
         Survey (weighted mean = 6.6)13.

        Locations: Respondents from Other Areas gave significantly higher ratings for the
         significance of the contribution of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities (mean
         rating = 8.1) compared to respondents from Southeast and Center-West Brazil (mean
         ratings = 6.6 and 6.8, respectively).




13Please refer to Appendix E (page 99) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The mean in the chart was
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             35
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Technical Quality of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)

        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
         ratings for the technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities (weighted
         mean = 7.8) compared to respondents from the FY ’13 Country Survey (weighted
         mean = 7.6)14

        Locations: Respondents from Other Areas gave significantly higher ratings for the
         technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities (mean rating = 8.5)
         compared to respondents from Southeast and Center-West Brazil (mean ratings = 7.6 and
         7.8, respectively).




14
  Please refer to Appendix E (page 99) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The mean in the chart was
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             36
                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Qualities of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities15
           Stakeholders: Respondents from local government gave the highest ratings for the extent
            to which the WBG’s knowledge work and activities “Are accessible” whereas
            respondents from civil society gave significantly lower ratings.
           Locations: Respondents from Other Areas gave significantly higher ratings for the extent
            to which the WBG’s knowledge work and activities “Are adaptable to Brazil’s specific
            development challenges and country circumstances” (mean rating = 7.5) compared to
            respondents from Southeast and Center-West Brazil (mean ratings = 6.0 and 6.4,
            respectively).




15All   means presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix E (page 99) for details.

                                                                 37
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Meeting Brazil’s Needs for Financial Instruments (Indicator Question)
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
         levels of agreement that the WBG’s financial instruments meet Brazil’s needs (weighted
         mean = 6.1) compared to respondents from the FY ’13 Country Survey (weighted mean =
         5.8)16.

        Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects and
         other organizations had the highest levels of agreement that the WBG’s financial
         instruments meet Brazil’s needs whereas respondents from civil society had significantly
         lower levels of agreement.

        Locations: Respondents from Other Areas had significantly higher levels of agreement
         that the WBG’s financial instruments meet Brazil’s needs (mean rating = 6.9) compared
         to respondents from Southeast or Center-West Brazil (mean ratings = 5.7 and 5.8,
         respectively).

        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG had significantly
         higher levels of agreement that the WBG’s financial instruments meet Brazil’s needs
         (mean rating = 6.5) compared to respondents who are not collaborating with the WBG
         (mean rating = 5.6).




16Please refer to Appendix E (page 99) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The mean in the chart was
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             38
                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Brazil
Selectivity of the World Bank Group’s Support




                                      39
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in Brazil (continued)
Making the World Bank Group of Greater Value
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that, to make
      itself of greater value, the WBG should reduce the complexity of obtaining WBG
      financing (percentage of respondents = 50%), followed by improving the quality of its
      experts as related to Brazil’s specific challenges (23%) and increasing international
      knowledge exchange (21%).




                                             40
                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in Brazil (continued)
Where the World Bank Group Should Focus its Resources
     Year comparison: Respondents from the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that the WBG
      should focus its resources on education (percentage of respondents = 49%) and basic
      infrastructure (41%), followed by health (30%) and public sector governance/reform
      (29%).




                                           41
                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in Brazil (continued)
Future Combination of the WBG services




                                    42
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



X. Communication and Outreach
When considering the World Bank Group’s future outreach with key constituencies, please see
Appendix B (page 68) for all responses by stakeholder groups.

Information Sources
      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that they got
       most of their information about economic and social development issues from the
       Internet (percentage of respondents = 74%), followed by local newspapers (49%),
       periodicals (22%), and local television (21%).




                                              43
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)
Preferred Information Sources
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’13 Country Survey indicated that they
      preferred to get their information from e-Newsletters (percentage of respondents = 44%),
      the WBG’s website (39%), the WBG’s seminars/workshops/conferences (29%), and the
      WBG’s publications and other written materials (27%).




                                             44
                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)
Access to Information




                              45
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)
Access to Information (continued)
      Stakeholders: Respondents from PMU/Consultants on WBG-supported projects and
       local government were significantly more likely to have requested information from the
       WBG in the past year compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                              46
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)
WBG Website Usage




Information Sharing
     Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects, local
      government, and civil society had the highest levels of agreement that “The WBG is
      responsive to my information requests and inquiries” whereas respondents from the
      office of a Parliamentarian and academia had significantly lower levels of agreement.
     Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG had significantly
      higher levels of agreement that “The WBG is responsive to my information requests and
      inquiries” (mean rating = 8.5) compared to respondents who are not collaborating with
      the WBG (mean rating = 7.5).




                                             47
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)
WBG Social Media Usage




WBG Social Media Evaluation

     Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG had significantly
      higher levels of agreement that the WBG’s social media channels are valuable sources of
      information (mean rating = 7.7) compared to respondents who are not collaborating with
      the WBG (mean rating = 6.5).




                                             48
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



XI. Appendices

     A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents...................... 50

     B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ...................... 67

     C. Responses to Indicator Questions by Geographic Locations ......... 67

     D. Responses to Select Questions by Collaboration with WBG ......... 90

     E. Responses to Select Questions by Year......................................... 97

     F. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the WBG ........ 103

     G. WBG Country Opinion Survey FY16 – Brazil ................................ 104




                                          BRAZIL




                                            49
                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=248)
All rating scale questions are presented with the total number of respondents that provided a rating (N), the
number of respondents who indicated that they “Don’t know” (DK), the mean rating across all respondents (Mean),
and the standard deviation of this mean (SD). Indicator questions are noted with an asterisk (*).

A. General Issues Facing Brazil

                                                                                       Percentage of Respondents
 1. In general would you say that Brazil is headed in ... ?                                       (N=243)
 The right direction                                                                               30.0%
 The wrong direction                                                                               44.0%
 Not sure                                                                                          25.9%

 2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Brazil. Please
 identify which of the following you consider the most important development           Percentage of Respondents
 priorities in Brazil? (Choose no more than THREE)                                     (Responses Combined; N=246)
 Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government effectiveness, public financial
                                                                                                   56.1%
 management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform, fiscal adjustment)
 Education                                                                                         40.2%
 Poverty reduction                                                                                 18.7%
 Economic growth                                                                                   17.5%
 Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity, social inclusion)                                          14.6%
 Anti-corruption                                                                                   13.8%
 Job creation/employment                                                                           13.0%
 Global/regional integration                                                                       12.2%
 Environmental sustainability                                                                      11.4%
 Welfare of the vulnerable population (indigenous, quilombolas, and other
                                                                                                   11.0%
 traditional communities)
 Water and sanitation                                                                              10.6%
 Private sector development                                                                        9.3%
 Natural resource management                                                                       9.3%
 Health                                                                                            8.5%
 Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                    7.3%
 Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                                  6.5%
 Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                     5.7%
 Crime and violence                                                                                5.7%
 Urban development                                                                                 5.3%
 Rural development                                                                                 4.5%
 Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                           3.7%
 Gender equity                                                                                     3.3%
 Energy                                                                                            2.8%
 Agricultural development                                                                          1.6%
 Regulatory framework                                                                              1.6%
 Trade and exports                                                                                 1.2%
 Information and communications technology                                                         0.8%
 Foreign direct investment                                                                         0.4%
 Financial markets                                                                                 0.4%
 Disaster management                                                                               0.4%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                            0.0%



                                                         50
                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


A. General Issues Facing Brazil (continued)

 3. The World Bank Group has committed itself to twin goals: ending extreme
 poverty by 2030 and boosting shared prosperity. Poverty reduction is a broad
 term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of
 development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing             Percentage of Respondents
 poverty in Brazil? (Choose no more than THREE)                                        (Responses Combined; N=243)
 Education                                                                                         65.4%
 Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity, social inclusion)                                          33.7%
 Economic growth                                                                                   31.3%
 Job creation/employment                                                                           30.0%
 Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government effectiveness, public financial
                                                                                                   24.7%
 management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform, fiscal adjustment)
 Water and sanitation                                                                              23.5%
 Anti-corruption                                                                                   12.3%
 Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                    10.3%
 Health                                                                                            9.9%
 Rural development                                                                                 7.8%
 Welfare of the vulnerable population (indigenous, quilombolas, and other
                                                                                                   7.0%
 traditional communities)
 Private sector development                                                                        5.8%
 Urban development                                                                                 5.3%
 Environmental sustainability                                                                      4.9%
 Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                                  3.7%
 Global/regional integration                                                                       3.3%
 Natural resource management                                                                       2.9%
 Gender equity                                                                                     2.5%
 Crime and violence                                                                                2.5%
 Agricultural development                                                                          2.5%
 Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                           2.1%
 Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                     1.6%
 Information and communications technology                                                         1.2%
 Trade and exports                                                                                 1.2%
 Regulatory framework                                                                              0.4%
 Financial markets                                                                                 0.4%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                            0.0%
 Foreign direct investment                                                                         0.0%
 Energy                                                                                            0.0%
 Disaster management                                                                               0.0%




                                                        51
                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


A. General Issues Facing Brazil (continued)

 4. The World Bank Group’s “Shared Prosperity” goal captures two key elements,
 economic growth and equity. It will seek to foster income growth among the
 bottom 40 percent of a country’s population. Improvement in the Shared
 Prosperity Indicator requires growth and well-being of the less well-off. When
 thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity” in your country, which of the
 following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Brazil?                    Percentage of Respondents
 (Choose no more than TWO)                                                              (Responses Combined; N=242)
 Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                                         61.6%
 Sustained economic growth                                                                         51.2%
 Better quality public services                                                                    13.6%
 More reliable social safety net                                                                   12.8%
 Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                                   12.8%
 Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                               8.3%
 Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized
                                                                                                    8.3%
 businesses)
 Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability                 7.0%
 Better employment opportunities for young people                                                   7.0%
 Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                                            3.7%
 Other                                                                                              2.9%
 Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                            2.5%
 A growing middle class                                                                             2.1%
 Better employment opportunities for women                                                          2.1%
 Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                                       1.7%

 5. Do you think the gap between the rich and the poor is a very big problem, a
 moderately big problem, a small problem or not a problem at all in Brazil?             Percentage of Respondents
 (Select only ONE response)                                                                        (N=238)
 A very big problem                                                                                74.8%
 A moderately big problem                                                                          21.4%
 A small problem                                                                                   2.1%
 Not a problem at all                                                                               .8%
 Don’t know                                                                                         .8%

 6. In your view, is global climate change a very serious problem, somewhat             Percentage of Respondents
 serious, not too serious, or not a problem? (Select only ONE response)                            (N=242)
 A very serious problem                                                                            58.3%
 A somewhat serious problem                                                                        35.1%
 Not too serious problem                                                                           5.0%
 Not a problem                                                                                      .4%
 Don’t know                                                                                        1.2%




                                                         52
                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

How familiar are you with the work of these organizations in Brazil?
 (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)                                    N         DK      Mean        SD
1.   World Bank Group (WBG)*                                                      236         0      6.42       2.52
2.   Inter-American Development Bank (IDB/BID)                                    237        0        6.11      2.44
3.   Latin American Development Bank (CAF)                                        233        0        3.74      2.51
4.   Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI/BCiE)                  234        0        2.34      1.86

Overall, please rate your impression of the effectiveness of these
organizations in Brazil. (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)               N         DK      Mean        SD
5. World Bank Group (WBG)*                                                        201        32      6.91       1.95
6.   Inter-American Development Bank (IDB/BID)                                    196        39       6.72      1.94
7.   Latin American Development Bank (CAF)                                        131        99       5.13      2.25
8.   Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI/BCiE)                   96       134       3.79      2.33

Staff Preparedness                                                                 N         DK      Mean       SD
9. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well
    prepared to help Brazil solve its most complicated development                203        32       7.52      1.82
    challenges? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                        53
                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

 10. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact
 on development results in Brazil, in which sectoral areas do you believe the
 World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge          Percentage of Respondents
 services) in Brazil? (Choose no more than THREE)                                      (Responses Combined; N=238)
 Health                                                                                            18.1%
 Crime and violence                                                                                7.1%
 Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                                  10.9%
 Agricultural development                                                                          2.1%
 Global/regional integration                                                                       5.9%
 Job creation/employment                                                                           11.8%
 Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government effectiveness, public financial
                                                                                                   30.7%
 management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform, fiscal adjustment)
 Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                    2.5%
 Rural development                                                                                 6.7%
 Foreign direct investment                                                                         0.4%
 Education                                                                                         43.3%
 Energy                                                                                            2.5%
 Gender equity                                                                                     2.9%
 Financial markets                                                                                 0.4%
 Urban development                                                                                 11.8%
 Environmental sustainability                                                                      17.2%
 Economic growth                                                                                   26.5%
 Private sector development                                                                        3.8%
 Water and sanitation                                                                              19.7%
 Welfare of the vulnerable population (indigenous, quilombolas, and other
                                                                                                   6.7%
 traditional communities)
 Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                     8.8%
 Information and communications technology                                                         1.3%
 Trade and exports                                                                                 2.1%
 Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity, social inclusion)                                          15.1%
 Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                           1.7%
 Regulatory framework                                                                              0.8%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                            0.0%
 Natural resource management                                                                       6.3%
 Poverty reduction                                                                                 18.9%
 Anti-corruption                                                                                   6.7%
 Disaster management                                                                               0.8%




                                                        54
                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

 11. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which                Percentage of Respondents (N=233)
 activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is       Greatest      2nd Greatest
 of second greatest value in Brazil?                                       Value            Value     Combined
 Financial resources                                                       33.5%           15.2%        48.6%
 Capacity development                                                      20.6%           17.7%        38.3%
 Help to bring discipline/effective supervision to implementation of
                                                                           15.5%             20.3%           35.8%
 investment projects
 Policy advice, studies, analyses                                          12.4%             15.2%           27.6%
 Technical assistance                                                      7.3%              10.4%           17.7%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                2.1%              8.7%            10.8%
 Data and statistics                                                       4.3%              6.1%            10.4%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge
                                                                            2.6%             1.7%            4.3%
 sharing)
 Convening/Facilitating                                                     0.9%             2.2%            3.0%
 Donor coordination                                                         0.4%             2.2%            2.6%
 Other                                                                      0.4%             0.4%            0.9%

12. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest          Percentage of Respondents
   WEAKNESSES in its work in Brazil? (Choose no more than TWO)                         (Responses Combined; N=231)
Too influenced by developed countries                                                             25.1%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow (e.g., too bureaucratic in its operational
                                                                                                  20.8%
policies and procedures)
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                                          19.5%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                          17.3%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                          12.6%
Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the Government                                 12.1%
Don’t know                                                                                        11.7%
Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving                     11.3%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Brazil                                  8.2%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                      6.9%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                             6.5%
Other                                                                                             3.9%
Not client-focused                                                                                2.6%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                               2.2%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                          1.7%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                            1.7%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                             1.3%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                               0.4%




                                                        55
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

13. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the most effective             Percentage of Respondents
  in reducing poverty in Brazil? (Choose no more than TWO)                                 (Responses Combined; N=231)
Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)                            40.3%
Investment lending (financing specific projects)                                                        39.8%
Capacity development                                                                                    39.0%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government                                                 22.1%
Multi-sectoral approaches                                                                               20.3%
Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)                                   16.0%
Trust Fund management                                                                                   5.2%
Don’t know                                                                                              3.5%
Other                                                                                                   1.3%

14. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support             Percentage of Respondents
  help the poorest in Brazil? (Select only ONE response)                                              (N=229)
To a fully sufficient degree                                                                            2.6%
To a somewhat sufficient degree                                                                         35.4%
To a somewhat insufficient degree                                                                       35.8%
To a very insufficient degree                                                                           8.3%
Don't know                                                                                              17.9%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World                       Level of Agreement
Bank Group’s work in Brazil? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                       N       DK Mean        SD
15. Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development
                                                                                           214     14      6.20    2.16
    in Brazil*
16. The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                                           209     16      6.26    2.18
    development priorities for Brazil*

 To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in                     Level of Agreement
 Brazil, in terms of each of the following?
 (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                                   N      DK     Mean      SD
17. Responsiveness to needs*                                                               160     46     6.64     2.12
18.   Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*                   169     45      6.12    1.91
19.   Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                            175     41      6.05    2.01
20.   Being inclusive*                                                                     165     47      6.31    2.18
21.   Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                       191     24      7.15    2.07
22.   Collaboration with the Government*                                                   181     35      7.33    1.94
23.   The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                        166     50      6.20    2.14
24. Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                           164     49      6.88    2.34
    decisions important to my work*
25. Collaboration with civil society*                                                      166     51      6.11    2.18
26. Staff accessibility*                                                                   166     49      7.08    2.20
27.   Collaboration with other donors and development partners*                            105     105     6.59    1.86
28.   Collaboration with the private sector*                                               120      92     6.73    1.88
29.   Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                     172      41     7.98    2.03
30.   Treating clients and stakeholders in Brazil with respect                             177      38     8.31    1.73
31.   Being a long-term partner*                                                           192      24     8.63    1.67



                                                            56
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

 32. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take           Percentage of Respondents
 place, which of the following would you attribute to? (Choose no more than TWO)      (Responses Combined; N=218)
 The Government works inefficiently                                                              40.4%
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                             35.3%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                                               22.9%
 The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the
                                                                                                 17.9%
 ground
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                 17.4%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                           14.7%
 The World Bank Group works too slowly                                                           13.8%
 The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                              9.2%
 Other                                                                                           6.9%
 Poor donor coordination                                                                         3.2%




                                                       57
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

 1. In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved                Importance
 in the following areas of development in Brazil?
 (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                                             N      DK     Mean       SD
1.    Crime and violence                                                                156     51     6.38      2.81
2.    Financial markets                                                                 161     46     6.37      2.43
3.    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                  177     31     7.72      1.92
4.    Anti-corruption                                                                   159      47     7.27     2.50
5.    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                           148      56     6.07     2.67
6.    Urban development                                                                 185      26     7.85     1.99
7.    Environmental sustainability                                                      193      15     7.98     1.95
8.    Trade and exports                                                                 151      56     6.88     2.37
9.    Information and communications technology                                         163      45     7.40     2.24
10.   Poverty reduction                                                                 194      20     8.04     2.17
11.   Gender equity                                                                     164      41     7.27     2.49
12.   Private sector development                                                        161      45     6.89     2.37
13.   Foreign direct investment                                                         152      55     7.04     2.31
14.   Water and sanitation                                                              176      32     8.14     2.06
15.   Regulatory framework                                                              151      54     6.64     2.44
16. Economic growth                                                                     177      31     7.71     2.26
17. Energy                                                                              168      38     7.45     2.43
18. Disaster management                                                                 155      50     6.85     2.48
19. Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government effectiveness, public
    financial management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform, fiscal              179      28     7.41     2.59
    adjustment)
20. Job creation/employment                                                             166      39     7.33     2.28
21. Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                              153      56     6.73     2.45
22. Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity, social inclusion)                            171      37     7.33     2.42
23. Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                      154      52     6.46     2.50
24. Rural development                                                                   174      34     7.41     2.31
25. Global/regional integration                                                         168      38     7.49     2.35
26. Welfare of the vulnerable population (indigenous, quilombolas, and other
                                                                                        164      44     6.98     2.70
    traditional communities)
27. Natural resource management                                                         171      37     7.32     2.42
28. Health                                                                              161      45     7.62     2.35
29. Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                       176      30     7.60     2.30
30. Agricultural development                                                            172      40     7.23     2.40
31. Education                                                                           172      38     8.16     2.25




                                                         58
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

 2. How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it                Effectiveness
 does in the following areas of development in Brazil?
 (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                             N      DK     Mean       SD
1.    Gender equity                                                                      73     124    6.66      2.25
2.    Information and communications technology                                          71     125    6.89      2.09
3.    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                   98     101    7.31      1.98
4.    Crime and violence                                                                 50     146     5.48     2.01
5.    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                            51     144     5.78     2.48
6.    Urban development                                                                 106      91     7.20     1.91
7.    Environmental sustainability                                                      128      68     7.28     1.94
8.    Regulatory framework                                                               66     130     6.18     2.26
9.    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                             55     143     6.64     2.16
10.   Poverty reduction                                                                 120      78     7.17     2.16
11.   Anti-corruption                                                                    67     128     6.33     2.40
12.   Private sector development                                                         85     112     6.99     1.89
13.   Foreign direct investment                                                          75     118     6.92     1.92
14.   Water and sanitation                                                              111      86     7.39     1.71
15.   Trade and exports                                                                  66     130     6.80     1.88
16. Economic growth                                                                     101      95     7.35     2.05
17. Health                                                                               86     108     7.22     2.17
18. Disaster management                                                                  72     123     6.56     2.31
19. Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government effectiveness, public
    financial management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform, fiscal               98     100     6.43     2.39
    adjustment)
20. Job creation/employment                                                              90     108     6.86     2.06
21. Financial markets                                                                    73     122     6.81     2.22
22. Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity, social inclusion)                             91     106     6.91     2.17
23. Energy                                                                               95     101     7.19     2.02
24. Rural development                                                                   101      90     7.13     2.11
25. Global/regional integration                                                          93     102     6.94     2.31
26. Welfare of the vulnerable population (indigenous, quilombolas, and other
                                                                                         94     101     6.60     2.49
    traditional communities)
27. Education                                                                           105      92     7.30     2.10
28. Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                       68     128     6.24     2.31
29. Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                       111      84     7.11     2.14
30. Agricultural development                                                            101      95     7.35     2.13
31. Natural resource management                                                         107      90     7.08     2.16

 Achieving Development Results*                                                           N     DK     Mean      SD
 3. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development
                                                                                         186     17     6.48     1.91
     results in Brazil? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                         59
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank
 Group in Brazil? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                         N     DK      Mean     SD
 4. The World Bank Group’s financial instruments (i.e., investment lending, equity
     investment, trade finance, guarantees, Development Policy Loan, Trust Funds,                 166     39      6.01    2.11
     Program 4 Result, etc.) meet the needs of Brazil*
 5. The World Bank Group meets Brazil’s needs for knowledge services (e.g.,
                                                                                                  182     22      6.43    2.04
     research, analysis, data, technical assistance)*

 Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)                                                              N     DK      Mean     SD
 6. To what extent do you believe that Brazil received value for money from the
     World Bank Group’s Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)?                                     117     86      6.52    2.02
      (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

 Internal monitoring                                                                               N     DK      Mean     SD
 7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its
                                                                                                  148     57      6.22    2.12
     work in real time in Brazil? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

 1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and                          Percentage of Respondents
 activities in the work you do?                                                                             (N=203)
 Weekly                                                                                                        11.8%
 Monthly                                                                                                       20.2%
 A few times a year                                                                                            47.3%
 Rarely                                                                                                        18.2%
 Never                                                                                                         2.5%

 In Brazil, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge                            Degree
 work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                    N      DK Mean           SD
 2. Are timely                                                                                   174     28    7.44       1.90
 3. Lead to practical solutions                                                                  171     28    6.65       1.98
 4.   Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                       177      24      7.21    1.90
 5.   Are translated enough into local language                                                  166      33      6.77    2.14
 6.   Are adaptable to Brazil’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                                 171      29      6.49    2.04
      circumstances*

 Overall Evaluations                                                                               N     DK      Mean     SD
 7. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group’s
    knowledge work and activities make to development results in your country?*                  180      21      6.98    1.98
      (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
 8.   Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group’s
      knowledge work and activities?*                                                            184      20      7.84    1.65
      (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




                                                                 60
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


E. Working with the World Bank Group

 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?                               Level of Agreement
 (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                                        N     DK Mean        SD
 1.   The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                             124    73     6.31   2.39
 2.   The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                                159      37      7.33    2.10
      programs it supports
 3.   The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                 134      61      6.82    2.24
 4.   The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy” requirements are reasonable                     134      61      6.88    2.14
 5.   The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable                           133      62      6.90    2.16
 6.   The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Brazil*                                   133      61      6.56    2.12
 7.   Working with the World Bank Group increases Brazil’s institutional capacity               170      26      7.86    2.13
 8.   Where country systems (e.g., procurement, financial management, etc.) are
                                                                                                105      88      7.36    2.23
      adequate, the World Bank Group makes appropriate use of them*
 9.   The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support (i.e.,
                                                                                                145      48      7.46    1.98
      supervision of projects)

 WBG Promoting PPP in Brazil                                                                      N     DK      Mean         SD
 10. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find
     solutions that promote private public partnerships in Brazil?                               130     68      6.95    1.81
      (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

11. Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in                     Percentage of Respondents
  Brazil? (Select only one response)                                                                       (N=199)
The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses on the most important
                                                                                                              48.2%
development challenges in Brazil
The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in Brazil, and it is involved in too
                                                                                                              22.1%
many areas of development
Don’t know                                                                                                    29.6%


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Brazil

 1. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of                   Percentage of Respondents
     greater value in Brazil? (Choose no more than TWO)                                       (Responses Combined; N=198)
 Increase the level of capacity development in the country/ Invest in capacity
                                                                                                         36.9%
 building
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                                           19.2%
 Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                                          18.7%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost,
                                                                                                         16.2%
 timeliness, other terms)
 Offer more innovative financial products                                                                15.7%
 Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., national, state, local)                     14.1%
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Brazil’s specific challenges                           13.6%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                                12.6%
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Brazil’s economy                             9.6%
 Work more on the state level                                                                            9.6%
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                                  8.1%
 Work faster                                                                                             4.0%
 Other                                                                                                   4.0%
 Work more on the federal level                                                                          1.5%
 Increase availability of Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)                                           0.5%

                                                                 61
                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Brazil (continued)

 2. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group
 offers in Brazil, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE
 of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in           Percentage of Respondents
 Brazil? (Select only ONE response)                                                                (N=200)
 Knowledge products                                                                                40.5%
 Financial services                                                                                30.0%
 The combination is appropriate for Brazil                                                         10.5%
 Don't know                                                                                        10.5%
 Convening services                                                                                6.0%
 None of the above                                                                                 2.5%



G. Communication and Information Sharing

 1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social                   Percentage of Respondents
   development issues in Brazil? (Choose no more than TWO)                              (Responses Combined; N=205)
 Internet                                                                                          63.4%
 Periodicals                                                                                       30.7%
 Local newspapers                                                                                  23.9%
 International newspapers                                                                          22.9%
 Social media (e.g., blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                    16.6%
 Other                                                                                             11.7%
 Local television                                                                                  9.8%
 International television                                                                          2.9%
 Local radio                                                                                       2.4%
 International radio                                                                               0.0%

 2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?              Percentage of Respondents
 (Choose no more than TWO)                                                              (Responses Combined; N=204)
 World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/ conferences                                                50.0%
 World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials                                       34.0%
 e-Newsletters                                                                                     34.0%
 Direct contact with World Bank Group (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)                    28.0%
 World Bank Group’s website                                                                        25.0%
 Social media (e.g., blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                    12.0%
 Mobile phones                                                                                     2.0%
 Other                                                                                             1.0%

 3. Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under
 which the WBG will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on       Percentage of Respondents
 a list of exceptions?                                                                             (N=197)
 Yes                                                                                               35.5%
 No                                                                                                64.5%




                                                         62
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

 4. If yes, from which of the following sources did you learn about the World         Percentage of Respondents
   Bank Group's Access to Information Policies? (Select only ONE response)            (Responses Combined; N=76)
 World Bank Group’s website                                                                         42.1%
 World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences                                                  22.4%
 Colleagues/Friends/Peer organizations                                                              21.1%
 Other                                                                                              6.6%
 World Bank Group’s e-Newsletters                                                                   3.9%
 News/Media                                                                                         3.9%

 5. Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities        Percentage of Respondents
     in the past year?                                                                              (N=206)
 Yes                                                                                                35.4%
 No                                                                                                 64.6%

                                                                                      Percentage of Respondents
 6. Were you able to obtain this information?                                                       (N=73)
 Yes                                                                                                89.0%
 No                                                                                                 11.0%

                                                                                      Percentage of Respondents
 7. Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group website?                                          (N=207)
 Yes                                                                                                85.0%
 No                                                                                                 15.0%

 8. Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites (e.g., blogs,    Percentage of Respondents
     Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)?                                                           (N=206)
 Yes                                                                                                19.4%
 No                                                                                                 80.6%

 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.                              Level of Agreement
 (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                             N        DK     Mean     SD
 9. When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it           98       102     6.66  2.47
 10. The World Bank Group’s social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                                      183      18       7.01   2.54
     information about the institution
 11. The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and inquiries      121      80       8.01   1.90




                                                       63
                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


H. Background Information

 1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                       Percentage of Respondents
 (Select only ONE response)                                                                       (N=245)
 Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                                           21.2%
 PMU overseeing implementation of project/Consultant/Contractor working on
                                                                                                  14.7%
 WBG supported project/program
 Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency                          13.9%
 Other                                                                                            10.6%
 Private Sector Organization                                                                      8.6%
 NGO/ Community-Based Organization                                                                6.5%
 Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                                    5.3%
 Office of Minister                                                                               4.5%
 Local Government Office or Staff                                                                 4.1%
 Office of Parliamentarian                                                                        3.7%
 Independent Government Institution                                                               1.6%
 Office of the President                                                                          1.2%
 Bilateral/ Multilateral Agency                                                                   1.2%
 Private Foundation                                                                                .8%
 Youth Group                                                                                       .8%
 Media                                                                                             .4%
 Trade Union                                                                                       .4%
 Judiciary Branch                                                                                  .4%

 2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                           Percentage of Respondents
 (Select only ONE response)                                                                       (N=244)
 Other                                                                                            18.4%
 Generalist (specialized in multiple sectors)                                                     12.3%
 Environment and natural resources                                                                11.5%
 Finance and markets                                                                              7.0%
 Water                                                                                            6.6%
 Education                                                                                        5.3%
 Social protection and labor                                                                      4.9%
 Transport and ICT                                                                                4.9%
 Health, nutrition, and population                                                                4.5%
 Urban, rural, and social development                                                             4.1%
 Governance                                                                                       3.7%
 Agriculture                                                                                      3.7%
 Gender                                                                                           2.9%
 Energy and extractives                                                                           2.5%
 Macroeconomics and fiscal management                                                             2.5%
 Trade and competitiveness                                                                        2.5%
 Climate change                                                                                   1.6%
 Fragility, conflict and violence                                                                  .8%
 Poverty                                                                                           .4%

 3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group        Percentage of Respondents
 (IBRD, IFC, or MIGA) in your country? (Select only ONE response)                                 (N=245)
 Yes                                                                                              35.1%
 No                                                                                               64.9%



                                                        64
                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


H. Background Information (continued)

 4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily         Percentage of Respondents
   engage with in Brazil? (Select only ONE response)                                            (N=223)
 The World Bank (IDA)                                                                           73.1%
 The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                    14.8%
 Other                                                                                          11.7%
 The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                             .4%

                                                                                     Percentage of Respondents
 5. Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?                                  (N=241)
 Yes                                                                                            10.0%
 No                                                                                             90.0%

 6. If yes, what was your view of how the two institutions work together in          Percentage of Respondents
   Brazil? (Choose no more than TWO)                                                            (N=27)
 The two institutions work well together                                                        48.1%
 Don't know                                                                                     25.9%
 The way the two institutions work together needs improvement                                   18.5%
 The two institutions do not work well together                                                 7.4%

 7. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank         Percentage of Respondents
   Group in Brazil? (Choose no more than TWO)                                        (Responses Combined; N=241)
 Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                                 41.1%
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                                  31.5%
 Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                              31.1%
 Observer                                                                                       26.6%
 Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                             25.3%

                                                                                     Percentage of Respondents
 8. What’s your gender?                                                                         (N=246)
 Female                                                                                         43.1%
 Male                                                                                           56.9%

                                                                                     Percentage of Respondents
 9. Which best represents your geographic location?                                             (N=247)
 Southeast                                                                                      41.7%
 Center-West                                                                                    37.2%
 Northeast                                                                                      9.7%
 South                                                                                          6.5%
 North                                                                                          4.9%




                                                      65
                                                                                                                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups17
Office of the President/Minister N=14  Office of Parliamentarian N=9  Employee of a Ministry N=34  PMU/Consultant on WBG-supported project N=36
Local Government N=10  Private Sector N=21  Financial Sector/Private Bank N=13  Civil Society N=21  Academia N=52  Other N=35


A. General Issues facing Brazil

In general, would you say that Brazil is headed in...?
                                                              Office of the                             PMU/                                                        Financial
                                                               President/    Office of   Employee of Consultant on  Local                            Private         Sector/
     Percentage of Respondents                                  Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry  WBG project Government                          Sector       Private Bank      Civil Society Academia   Other
     The right direction                                         57.1%        44.4%        34.4%        33.3%         -                              14.3%            38.5%            38.1%        17.6%    35.3%
     The wrong direction                                         21.4%        55.6%        15.6%        41.7%      50.0%                             76.2%            53.8%            33.3%        66.7%    26.5%
     Not sure                                                    21.4%           -         50.0%        25.0%      50.0%                              9.5%            7.7%             28.6%        15.7%    38.2%




17   Only 245 respondents provided the information about their current positions. Thus, only these respondents were included in the across-stakeholder analysis presented in this appendix.
                                                                                                               66
                                                                                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


A. General Issues facing Brazil (continued)

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Brazil. Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Brazil?
(Choose no more than THREE)
                                                  Office of the                                        PMU/                                 Financial
  Percentage of Respondents                         President/        Office of    Employee of Consultant on         Local     Private       Sector/
  (Responses combined)                               Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry           WBG project Government Sector          Private Bank Civil Society Academia   Other
  Global/regional integration                          7.1%            12.5%            5.9%           16.7%         0.0%       0.0%          7.7%          19.0%       17.3%   17.1%
  Welfare of the vulnerable population                14.3%            25.0%           17.6%           11.1%         10.0%      0.0%          7.7%          19.0%       3.8%    14.3%
  Public sector governance/ reform*                   35.7%            50.0%           52.9%           66.7%         70.0%      90.5%         69.2%         47.6%       50.0%   42.9%
  Social protection                                    7.1%            12.5%           20.6%           8.3%          0.0%       4.8%          0.0%           4.8%       5.8%    2.9%
  Gender equity*                                       7.1%            25.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           0.0%       1.9%    11.4%
  Private sector development                          14.3%            12.5%            2.9%           13.9%         10.0%      9.5%          0.0%           9.5%       11.5%   8.6%
  Foreign direct investment                            0.0%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           0.0%       1.9%    0.0%
  Urban development                                    0.0%             0.0%            8.8%           5.6%          10.0%      9.5%          0.0%           4.8%       3.8%    5.7%
  Energy                                               7.1%             0.0%            0.0%           2.8%          0.0%       0.0%          7.7%           4.8%       3.8%    2.9%
  Job creation/employment                             21.4%            50.0%            8.8%           13.9%         20.0%      4.8%          0.0%          14.3%       13.5%   11.4%
  Rural development                                    7.1%             0.0%            5.9%           8.3%          10.0%      4.8%          0.0%           4.8%       1.9%    2.9%
  Financial markets                                    0.0%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       4.8%          0.0%           0.0%       0.0%    0.0%
  Water and sanitation                                14.3%             0.0%            5.9%           11.1%         20.0%      23.8%         15.4%          9.5%       1.9%    14.3%
  Environmental sustainability                         0.0%             0.0%           17.6%           16.7%         0.0%       9.5%          0.0%          14.3%       19.2%   2.9%
  Equality of opportunity                             14.3%            25.0%           14.7%           5.6%          20.0%      4.8%          7.7%          19.0%       15.4%   25.7%
  Health                                               7.1%            12.5%            8.8%           8.3%          10.0%      14.3%         23.1%          0.0%       1.9%    14.3%
  Climate change                                       0.0%             0.0%            8.8%           2.8%          10.0%      4.8%          7.7%           9.5%       3.8%    8.6%
  Poverty reduction                                   21.4%             0.0%           20.6%           19.4%         10.0%      14.3%         0.0%          23.8%       26.9%   17.1%
  Transport                                            0.0%             0.0%            2.9%           13.9%         0.0%       9.5%          15.4%          0.0%       9.6%    2.9%
  Education                                           21.4%            25.0%           47.1%           22.2%         30.0%      47.6%         53.8%         42.9%       48.1%   40.0%
  Agricultural development                             7.1%             0.0%            2.9%           2.8%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           4.8%       0.0%    0.0%
  Trade and exports                                    7.1%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           0.0%       3.8%    0.0%
  Crime and violence                                  14.3%             0.0%            2.9%           2.8%          10.0%      4.8%          15.4%          0.0%       9.6%    2.9%
  Anti-corruption*                                     7.1%            25.0%           14.7%           8.3%          10.0%      14.3%         53.8%          4.8%       13.5%   8.6%
  Law and justice                                      7.1%             0.0%            5.9%           0.0%          0.0%       4.8%          7.7%           0.0%       5.8%    2.9%
  Regulatory framework                                 0.0%             0.0%            0.0%           2.8%          0.0%       4.8%          0.0%           0.0%       1.9%    2.9%
  Communicable/non-communicable diseases               0.0%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           0.0%       0.0%    0.0%
  Natural resource management*                        14.3%            12.5%            2.9%           8.3%          0.0%       4.8%          0.0%          28.6%       3.8%    20.0%
  Economic growth                                     35.7%            12.5%           20.6%           22.2%         30.0%      9.5%          7.7%          14.3%       11.5%   17.1%
  Disaster management                                  0.0%             0.0%            0.0%           2.8%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           0.0%       0.0%    0.0%
  Information and communications technology            0.0%             0.0%            0.0%           2.8%          10.0%      0.0%          0.0%           0.0%       0.0%    0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                           67
                                                                                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


A. General Issues facing Brazil (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty
in Brazil? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                  Office of the                                  PMU/                                  Financial
  Percentage of Respondents                        President/     Office of     Employee of Consultant on     Local        Private      Sector/
  (Responses combined)                              Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry       WBG project Government Sector          Private Bank Civil Society Academia       Other
  Water and sanitation                               14.3%           0.0%          12.1%         36.1%        30.0%        38.1%         7.7%         15.8%        26.9%       22.9%
  Equality of opportunity*                           35.7%          37.5%          57.6%         25.0%        10.0%        14.3%         7.7%         47.4%        34.6%       40.0%
  Rural development                                  14.3%           0.0%          12.1%         13.9%        10.0%        14.3%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       11.4%
  Climate change                                      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          2.8%         0.0%          9.5%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       2.9%
  Global/regional integration                         7.1%           0.0%          0.0%          5.6%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         9.6%       0.0%
  Gender equity                                       0.0%           0.0%          6.1%          0.0%         0.0%          4.8%         0.0%          0.0%         5.8%       0.0%
  Economic growth                                    50.0%          25.0%          39.4%         36.1%        50.0%        28.6%         53.8%        10.5%        25.0%       22.9%
  Urban development                                   0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          2.8%         20.0%         9.5%         0.0%         15.8%         3.8%       8.6%
  Regulatory framework                                0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          5.3%         0.0%       0.0%
  Social protection                                  14.3%          25.0%          12.1%         11.1%        10.0%         4.8%         0.0%          5.3%         9.6%       14.3%
  Law and justice                                     7.1%           0.0%          3.0%          2.8%         0.0%          0.0%         7.7%          0.0%         1.9%       0.0%
  Transport                                           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          5.6%         0.0%          9.5%         7.7%          5.3%         3.8%       2.9%
  Crime and violence                                  7.1%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         10.0%         4.8%         0.0%          0.0%         3.8%       2.9%
  Communicable/non-communicable diseases              0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
  Information and communications technology           0.0%           0.0%          3.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          5.3%         1.9%       0.0%
  Anti-corruption*                                   14.3%          37.5%          3.0%          5.6%         0.0%         23.8%         30.8%         5.3%        11.5%       14.3%
  Education                                          57.1%          87.5%          75.8%         58.3%        70.0%        52.4%         76.9%        47.4%        71.2%       62.9%
  Foreign direct investment                           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
  Energy                                              0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
  Public sector governance/ reform                   21.4%          12.5%          15.2%         38.9%        20.0%        14.3%         30.8%        21.1%        34.6%       14.3%
  Private sector development                          7.1%           0.0%          3.0%          8.3%         0.0%          4.8%         0.0%          5.3%         9.6%       5.7%
  Natural resource management                         0.0%           0.0%          3.0%          2.8%         0.0%          0.0%         7.7%         10.5%         0.0%       5.7%
  Environmental sustainability                        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          5.6%         0.0%          4.8%         7.7%         21.1%         1.9%       8.6%
  Health                                              7.1%          25.0%          12.1%         5.6%         20.0%        19.0%         23.1%         5.3%         7.7%       2.9%
  Agricultural development                            0.0%           0.0%          3.0%          2.8%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         15.8%         1.9%       0.0%
  Disaster management                                 0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
  Job creation/employment                            35.7%          37.5%          30.3%         22.2%        40.0%        33.3%         30.8%        31.6%        21.2%       40.0%
  Financial markets*                                  0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         7.7%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
  Trade and exports                                   0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          2.8%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         3.8%       0.0%
  Welfare of the vulnerable population*               7.1%          12.5%          6.1%          5.6%         10.0%         0.0%         0.0%         26.3%         1.9%       11.4%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                          68
                                                                                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


A. General Issues facing Brazil (continued)

When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity” in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrat e how this would be achieved in Brazil? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                     Office of the                                PMU/                                      Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                            President/    Office of     Employee of Consultant on         Local      Private       Sector/
 (Responses combined)                                  Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry     WBG project Government Sector              Private Bank Civil Society Academia      Other
 Sustained economic growth                              61.5%        37.5%            39.4%       61.1%            66.7%       57.1%          76.9%        25.0%        53.8%      42.9%
 More reliable social safety net                         7.7%         0.0%            12.1%       19.4%            22.2%        4.8%          0.0%         15.0%        19.2%      8.6%
 Greater access to micro-finance for the poor            0.0%         0.0%             0.0%        5.6%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%         10.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 Greater voice and participation for citizens to
                                                         0.0%         0.0%             6.1%        5.6%             0.0%        0.0%          7.7%         40.0%        1.9%       8.6%
 help ensure greater accountability*
 Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens    15.4%         0.0%             6.1%        2.8%             0.0%        9.5%          15.4%        15.0%        9.6%       8.6%
 Better entrepreneurial opportunities                    7.7%        12.5%            15.2%       11.1%             0.0%       19.0%          0.0%          5.0%        3.8%       5.7%
 A growing middle class                                  7.7%         0.0%             3.0%        2.8%             0.0%        4.8%          0.0%          0.0%        1.9%       0.0%
 Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural
                                                         7.7%         0.0%             0.0%        5.6%            11.1%        9.5%          0.0%          0.0%        1.9%       5.7%
 areas
 Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban
                                                         0.0%         0.0%             3.0%        2.8%            11.1%        0.0%          0.0%          5.0%        0.0%       5.7%
 areas
 Better employment opportunities for young
                                                         7.7%        12.5%             6.1%        5.6%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%         15.0%        5.8%       14.3%
 people
 Better employment opportunities for women               0.0%        12.5%             0.0%        0.0%             0.0%        4.8%          0.0%          0.0%        1.9%       5.7%
 Greater equity of fiscal policy                        15.4%        25.0%            21.2%        5.6%            11.1%        4.8%          7.7%         15.0%        9.6%       20.0%
 Education and training that better ensure job
                                                        46.2%        87.5%            63.6%       61.1%            77.8%       71.4%          76.9%        45.0%        61.5%      51.4%
 opportunity
 Better quality public services                          7.7%        12.5%            15.2%       11.1%             0.0%       14.3%          0.0%         10.0%        21.2%      17.1%
 Other                                                   0.0%         0.0%             3.0%        0.0%             0.0%        0.0%          7.7%          0.0%        5.8%       5.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you think the gap between the rich and the poor is a very big problem, a moderately big problem, a small problem or not a problem at all in Brazil?*
                                                   Office of the                                   PMU/                                    Financial
                                                    President/       Office of   Employee of Consultant on        Local       Private        Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                           Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry         WBG project Government Sector           Private Bank     Civil Society Academia   Other
 A very big problem                                    61.5%          75.0%         75.8%          68.6%          55.6%        61.9%          75.0%          94.7%        75.0%    85.3%
 A moderately big problem                              30.8%          25.0%         21.2%          31.4%          11.1%        33.3%          25.0%           5.3%        21.2%    11.8%
 A small problem                                          -              -           3.0%              -          11.1%        4.8%             -                -        3.8%       -
 Not a problem at all                                   7.7%             -             -               -            -            -              -                -          -      2.9%
 Don’t know                                               -              -             -               -          22.2%          -              -                -          -        -
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                              69
                                                                                                                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


A. General Issues facing Brazil (continued)

In your view, is global climate change a very serious problem, somewhat serious, not too serious, or not a problem?
                                                      Office of the                                   PMU/                                                                  Financial
                                                       President/    Office of    Employee of Consultant on         Local                                   Private          Sector/
  Percentage of Respondents                             Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry       WBG project Government                                    Sector        Private Bank         Civil Society Academia           Other
  A very serious problem                                 53.8%        55.6%           51.5%           47.2%         44.4%                                   61.9%             76.9%               63.2%        50.0%            80.0%
  A somewhat serious problem                             38.5%        33.3%           42.4%           38.9%         44.4%                                   33.3%             23.1%               31.6%        44.2%            17.1%
  Not too serious problem                                 7.7%        11.1%            3.0%           8.3%          11.1%                                    4.8%               -                  5.3%        5.8%               -
  Not a problem                                             -            -               -            2.8%            -                                        -                -                     -          -                -
  Don’t know                                                -            -             3.0%           2.8%            -                                        -                -                     -          -              2.9%

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
How familiar are you with the work of these organizations in Brazil? (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
                                       Office of the         Office of      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant on                                               Financial
                                    President/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry           WBG project       Local Government    Private Sector     Sector/Private Bank        Civil Society         Academia            Other
                                      N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N       Mean SD       N      Mean SD      N    Mean    SD
World Bank Group (WBG)*              12    6.25   2.49   8    4.50   3.21   33   5.88   2.79    35   7.69   2.42    9    8.44   1.01   21   5.62   2.20    13    6.00    2.08   19      5.26   1.91   50    6.68   2.17   34   6.44    2.83
Inter-American Development Bank
                                     12    6.17   2.08   8    5.88   3.31   33   5.61   2.46    35   6.34   2.65    9    8.11   1.45   21   5.62   2.04    13    6.00    2.89   20      5.45   2.44   50    6.30   2.44   34   6.24    2.31
(IDB/BID)
Latin American Development Bank
                                     12    4.92   2.43   8    3.00   2.56   32   3.28   2.43    35   3.46   2.75    9    5.56   3.17   21   3.19   1.89    13    4.85    2.64   19      3.74   2.13   49    4.00   2.57   34   3.38    2.35
(CAF)
Central American Bank for
                                     12    2.50   1.62   8    2.63   2.72   33   2.33   1.92    35   1.71   1.84    8    1.38   0.74   21   2.52   1.75    13    2.69    1.93   19      2.47   1.78   50    2.38   1.73   34   2.76    2.09
Economic Integration (CABEI/BCiE)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Overall, please rate your impression of the effectiveness of these organizations in Brazil. (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                       Office of the         Office of      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant on                                               Financial
                                    President/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry           WBG project       Local Government    Private Sector     Sector/Private Bank        Civil Society         Academia            Other
                                      N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N       Mean SD       N      Mean SD      N    Mean    SD
World Bank Group (WBG)*              10    7.10   1.97   6    7.00   2.76   21   7.10   1.95    32   8.12   1.90    9    8.11   1.62   19   6.89   1.63    13    6.69    1.55   16      5.50   1.90   45    6.31   1.69   28   6.64    1.99
Inter-American Development Bank
                                     11    7.18   1.83   5    6.60   2.19   20   7.30   1.95    29   7.72   1.93    9    8.00   1.50   19   6.58   1.87    12    6.58    2.47   18      5.50   1.86   43    6.14   1.46   28   6.39    1.95
(IDB/BID)*
Latin American Development Bank
                                     6     6.17   1.72   4    4.50   3.00   14   5.93   2.27    16   5.56   2.37    7    5.86   2.91   14   4.43   1.87     9    5.33    2.29   13      4.62   2.18   31    4.61   1.94   17   5.35    2.64
(CAF)
Central American Bank for
                                     4     4.25   2.22   3    5.00   3.46   12   5.08   2.71    8    3.50   2.51    3    1.33   0.58   13   3.69   2.21     7    4.57    2.23   7       3.14   2.04   24    2.87   1.70   15   4.53    2.56
Economic Integration (CABEI/BCiE)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                       Office of the         Office of      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant on                                               Financial
                                    President/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry           WBG project       Local Government    Private Sector     Sector/Private Bank        Civil Society         Academia            Other
                                      N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N       Mean SD       N      Mean SD      N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the
WBG's staff is well prepared to
help Brazil solve its most           12    7.58   1.78   5    8.20   1.79   30   7.07   1.96    34   8.12   1.77    8    7.25   1.58   20   7.90   1.41    11    7.36    1.75   16      7.13   1.59   38    7.03   2.09   27   7.85    1.75
complicated development
challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                                                                   70
                                                                                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Brazil, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most
of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in Brazil? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                      Office of the                               PMU/                                 Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                             President/      Office of   Employee of Consultant on   Local       Private      Sector/
 (Responses combined)                                   Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry    WBG project Government Sector         Private Bank Civil Society Academia       Other
 Health*                                                  8.3%          50.0%         18.2%       14.3%       11.1%        23.8%         53.8%         15.0%       14.0%       11.4%
 Crime and violence                                       0.0%          0.0%          12.1%        2.9%       22.2%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%       12.0%       8.6%
 Transport                                                0.0%          25.0%         9.1%        25.7%       11.1%         4.8%         15.4%         10.0%       10.0%       2.9%
 Agricultural development                                 0.0%          0.0%          6.1%         2.9%        0.0%         4.8%         7.7%           0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 Global/regional integration                             16.7%          12.5%         6.1%         5.7%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          10.0%        6.0%       5.7%
 Job creation/employment                                 16.7%          25.0%         15.2%       11.4%        0.0%         9.5%         0.0%          15.0%       14.0%       8.6%
 Public sector governance/ reform                        33.3%          12.5%         30.3%       37.1%       77.8%        33.3%         38.5%         25.0%       28.0%       20.0%
 Social protection                                        0.0%          0.0%          9.1%         2.9%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        2.0%       2.9%
 Rural development                                        8.3%          0.0%          6.1%        11.4%       11.1%         9.5%         0.0%          10.0%        2.0%       8.6%
 Foreign direct investment                                0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        2.0%       0.0%
 Education                                               50.0%          50.0%         36.4%       28.6%       11.1%        42.9%         69.2%         50.0%       50.0%       45.7%
 Energy                                                   8.3%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%        0.0%         9.5%         7.7%           0.0%        4.0%       0.0%
 Gender equity                                            0.0%          0.0%          6.1%         0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        6.0%       5.7%
 Financial markets                                        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%        0.0%         4.8%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 Urban development                                        0.0%          0.0%          6.1%        11.4%       22.2%        23.8%         7.7%          20.0%        8.0%       17.1%
 Environmental sustainability                             8.3%          12.5%         18.2%       17.1%       11.1%        23.8%         30.8%         20.0%       12.0%       17.1%
 Economic growth                                         58.3%          37.5%         21.2%       28.6%       33.3%        33.3%         30.8%         10.0%       18.0%       28.6%
 Private sector development                               0.0%          12.5%         3.0%         5.7%        0.0%         4.8%         0.0%           5.0%        6.0%       0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                    33.3%          25.0%         12.1%       31.4%       22.2%        19.0%         7.7%          15.0%       22.0%       8.6%
 Welfare of the vulnerable population                     0.0%          12.5%         12.1%        2.9%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          20.0%        4.0%       11.4%
 Climate change                                           8.3%          0.0%          12.1%        8.6%       11.1%        19.0%         0.0%          10.0%        4.0%       11.4%
 Information and communications technology                0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         5.7%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           5.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 Trade and exports                                        8.3%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%        0.0%         4.8%         0.0%           0.0%        4.0%       2.9%
 Equality of opportunity                                 16.7%          12.5%         21.2%        8.6%       11.1%         4.8%         0.0%          15.0%       20.0%       22.9%
 Law and justice                                          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        6.0%       2.9%
 Regulatory framework                                     0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        2.0%       2.9%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                   0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 Natural resource management                              0.0%          0.0%          6.1%         8.6%        0.0%         4.8%         0.0%          15.0%        2.0%       14.3%
 Poverty reduction                                       16.7%          12.5%         12.1%       17.1%       33.3%         4.8%         15.4%         30.0%       26.0%       20.0%
 Anti-corruption                                          8.3%          0.0%          6.1%         2.9%        0.0%         9.5%         15.4%          0.0%        8.0%       11.4%
 Disaster management                                      0.0%          0.0%          3.0%         0.0%        0.0%         4.8%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                          71
                                                                                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Brazil?
                                                 Office of the                                     PMU/                                     Financial
 Greatest Value                                   President/       Office of      Employee of Consultant on       Local        Private       Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                         Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry          WBG project Government Sector             Private Bank Civil Society Academia    Other
 Policy advice, studies, analyses                   25.0%            0.0%             9.4%         14.7%          0.0%          14.3%         23.1%           15.8%    16.3%     3.0%
 Data and statistics                                 0.0%           12.5%             0.0%          2.9%          0.0%          0.0%          7.7%            5.3%     8.2%      6.1%
 Convening/Facilitating                              0.0%            0.0%             3.1%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      3.0%
 Financial resources                                16.7%           50.0%            21.9%         38.2%         77.8%          19.0%         38.5%           26.3%    38.8%     30.3%
 Capacity development                               25.0%           25.0%            28.1%         17.6%          0.0%          9.5%          30.8%           26.3%    20.4%     21.2%
 Technical assistance                               25.0%            0.0%             6.3%          8.8%         22.2%          14.3%         0.0%            0.0%     2.0%      6.1%
 Discipline/effective supervision to
                                                     8.3%           12.5%            12.5%         17.6%          0.0%          38.1%         0.0%            15.8%    10.2%     24.2%
 implementation of investment projects
 Mobilizing third party financial resources          0.0%            0.0%             3.1%          0.0%          0.0%          4.8%          0.0%            10.5%    2.0%      0.0%
 Donor coordination                                  0.0%            0.0%             3.1%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise*                      0.0%            0.0%            12.5%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      6.1%
 Other                                               0.0%            0.0%             0.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%     2.0%      0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                      Office of the                             PMU/                                     Financial
 2nd Greatest Value                                    President/    Office of   Employee of Consultant on  Local          Private        Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                              Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry  WBG project Government        Sector      Private Bank   Civil Society Academia     Other
 Policy advice, studies, analyses                        16.7%         0.0%        12.9%        17.6%       0.0%           19.0%           23.1%          0.0%        16.3%      25.0%
 Data and statistics                                      8.3%         0.0%         6.5%         0.0%       0.0%            0.0%           0.0%           5.3%        16.3%      6.3%
 Convening/Facilitating                                   0.0%        12.5%         3.2%         0.0%       0.0%            4.8%           0.0%           5.3%        0.0%       3.1%
 Financial resources                                     25.0%        37.5%         9.7%        14.7%      22.2%           23.8%           30.8%         21.1%        2.0%       12.5%
 Capacity development                                    16.7%        12.5%        19.4%        17.6%      11.1%           23.8%           15.4%         15.8%        20.4%      12.5%
 Technical assistance                                     8.3%        12.5%        16.1%        11.8%      33.3%            0.0%           7.7%          21.1%        8.2%       3.1%
 Discipline/effective supervision to
                                                        25.0%        12.5%         25.8%          23.5%         22.2%       23.8%         23.1%          10.5%        12.2%      25.0%
 implementation of investment projects
 Mobilizing third party financial resources              0.0%        12.5%          3.2%          5.9%          11.1%        4.8%          0.0%          15.8%        16.3%      9.4%
 Donor coordination                                      0.0%        0.0%           3.2%          5.9%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          5.3%         2.0%       0.0%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                           0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          2.9%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         4.1%       3.1%
 Other                                                   0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         2.0%       0.0%




                                                                                           72
                                                                                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Brazil? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                    Office of the                                 PMU/                                  Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                           President/     Office of  Employee of Consultant on         Local      Private      Sector/
 (Responses combined)                                 Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry     WBG project Government Sector           Private Bank   Civil Society Academia    Other
 Too influenced by developed countries*                41.7%         37.5%        37.5%            8.8%          0.0%       19.0%         7.7%          47.4%        28.6%     22.6%
 Not exploring alternative policy options               8.3%         25.0%        18.8%            0.0%          22.2%       9.5%         0.0%          21.1%        12.2%     19.4%
 Not collaborating enough with stakeholders
                                                       16.7%          0.0%        3.1%             8.8%          0.0%        9.5%         0.0%         42.1%        10.2%      22.6%
 outside the Government*
 Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves
                                                        0.0%          0.0%        21.9%           20.6%          22.2%       4.8%         7.7%          0.0%        10.2%      9.7%
 to practical problem solving
 Not enough public disclosure of its work*              0.0%         12.5%        12.5%           11.8%          11.1%      42.9%         7.7%         21.1%        26.5%      9.7%
 Arrogant in its approach                               0.0%         12.5%        3.1%             0.0%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         4.1%       0.0%
 Not client-focused                                     8.3%         12.5%        9.4%             0.0%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       3.2%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                  0.0%          0.0%        0.0%             5.9%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         2.0%       0.0%
 World Bank Group’s processes too complex              16.7%         25.0%        18.8%           26.5%          22.2%      28.6%         23.1%        5.3%         12.2%      19.4%
 Not willing to honestly criticize policies and
                                                        8.3%         12.5%        6.3%             2.9%          0.0%        4.8%         15.4%         5.3%        12.2%      3.2%
 reform efforts in the country
 Staff too inaccessible                                 0.0%          0.0%        0.0%             0.0%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        8.2%       0.0%
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard
                                                        8.3%         12.5%        12.5%            5.9%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          5.3%        10.2%      0.0%
 to political realities
 World Bank Group’s processes too slow*                16.7%          0.0%        12.5%           44.1%          55.6%      28.6%         30.8%        10.5%        10.2%      9.7%
 Not aligned with other donors’ work                    0.0%          0.0%        0.0%             0.0%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         5.3%         0.0%       0.0%
 Not aligned with country priorities                   16.7%          0.0%        0.0%             0.0%          0.0%        4.8%         0.0%         0.0%         2.0%       3.2%
 Not adequately sensitive to political/social
                                                        0.0%          0.0%        9.4%             2.9%          0.0%        4.8%         7.7%         15.8%        14.3%      6.5%
 realities in Brazil
 Other                                                  8.3%          0.0%        0.0%             2.9%          0.0%        4.8%         7.7%          5.3%        2.0%       9.7%
 Don’t know                                             8.3%         12.5%        6.3%            14.7%          22.2%      14.3%         30.8%         5.3%        6.1%       16.1%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                          73
                                                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Brazil? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                 Office of the                                    PMU/                                Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                        President/    Office of      Employee of Consultant on         Local      Private    Sector/
 (Responses combined)                              Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry       WBG project Government Sector          Private Bank                                                Civil Society Academia             Other
 Trust Fund management                               8.3%         0.0%             3.0%           9.1%           0.0%        4.8%       0.0%                                                       12.5%        6.1%               2.9%
 Knowledge products/services                        25.0%         0.0%            21.2%           6.1%           0.0%       19.0%       7.7%                                                       12.5%        20.4%              23.5%
 Capacity development                               41.7%         37.5%           39.4%           33.3%         11.1%       47.6%       46.2%                                                      50.0%        38.8%              38.2%
 Technical assistance                               41.7%         25.0%           45.5%           48.5%         33.3%       47.6%       53.8%                                                      43.8%        38.8%              23.5%
 Investment lending                                 50.0%         25.0%           30.3%           39.4%         77.8%       52.4%       53.8%                                                      18.8%        34.7%              38.2%
 Policy based lending / budget support to the
                                                    25.0%         25.0%           24.2%           30.3%         33.3%       14.3%       7.7%                                                           18.8%          22.4%        17.6%
 Government
 Multi-sectoral approaches                           8.3%         25.0%           24.2%           24.2%         44.4%       14.3%       7.7%                                                           25.0%          18.4%        20.6%
 Other                                               0.0%         0.0%             0.0%           0.0%           0.0%        0.0%       0.0%                                                           6.3%           0.0%         5.9%
 Don’t know                                          0.0%         12.5%            0.0%           0.0%           0.0%        0.0%       7.7%                                                           6.3%           4.1%         8.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support help the poorest in Brazil?*
                                                  Office of the                                   PMU/                                                                       Financial
                                                   President/     Office of    Employee of Consultant on      Local                                          Private          Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                          Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry        WBG project Government                                        Sector        Private Bank         Civil Society Academia             Other
 To a fully sufficient degree                           -             -              3%             3%          -                                              5%                8%                    -         2%                 3%
 To a somewhat sufficient degree                      50%           13%             38%            61%        25%                                             57%               23%                  13%        20%                35%
 To a somewhat insufficient degree                    42%           38%             28%            24%        38%                                             33%               23%                  63%        45%                29%
 To a very insufficient degree                          -           25%              9%             6%          -                                               -               15%                  19%         8%                 9%
 Don't know                                            8%           25%             22%             6%        38%                                              5%               31%                   6%        24%                24%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Brazil? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                        Office of the         Office of      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant on                                               Financial
                                     President/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry           WBG project       Local Government    Private Sector     Sector/Private Bank        Civil Society           Academia            Other
                                       N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N       Mean SD         N      Mean SD       N   Mean    SD
Overall the World Bank Group
currently plays a relevant role in    12    5.75   1.49   7    6.14   2.91   32   6.31   2.24    33   7.55   1.91    9    7.11   1.54   19   6.21   1.84    10    5.80    2.78   15      4.93   2.02     46    5.17   1.90   28   6.68    2.11
development in Brazil*
The WBG’s work is aligned with
what I consider the development       11    6.36   1.80   7    6.86   2.19   30   5.60   2.27    33   7.48   2.05    7    7.57   1.51   20   6.10   1.89    12    6.83    2.33   15      5.33   1.80     43    5.23   2.16   28   6.75    1.96
priorities for Brazil*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                    74
                                                                                                                                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Brazil, in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                         Office of the         Office of      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant on                                               Financial
                                      President/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry           WBG project       Local Government    Private Sector     Sector/Private Bank        Civil Society         Academia            Other
                                        N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N       Mean SD       N      Mean SD      N    Mean    SD
Responsiveness to needs*               8     7.62   0.92   3    8.00   1.73   22   6.68   2.38    29   8.07   1.53    6    6.33   2.66   19   6.58   1.61    10    6.40    2.07   12      4.92   2.15   31    5.42   2.03   17   7.12    1.87
Flexibility (in terms of the
institution’s products and             8     6.88   1.46   3    6.67   0.58   23   5.83   1.88    28   7.43   1.48    8    6.75   2.12   19   6.05   2.01    11    5.82    2.04   13      4.92   2.22   30    5.33   1.71   23   6.13    1.77
services)*
Flexibility (in terms of changing
                                       8     6.88   1.36   3    6.67   0.58   22   5.82   1.76    30   7.53   1.70    7    7.29   1.98   19   5.58   2.09    11    5.45    2.21   13      4.85   1.91   34    5.06   1.86   25   6.32    1.80
country circumstances)*
Being inclusive*                       8     7.25   1.91   4    7.75   1.50   23   6.09   2.04    26   8.12   1.37    6    7.17   2.48   16   5.75   1.57     9    6.89    2.62   13      4.69   2.10   36    5.08   2.09   21   6.67    1.91
Openness (sharing data and other
                                       9     7.89   1.90   4    6.50   2.89   25   7.00   1.87    30   8.23   1.85    9    7.22   2.59   20   6.90   1.94    12    7.33    1.92   13      5.77   2.49   41    6.80   2.10   25   7.24    1.74
information)*
Collaboration with the
                                       11    7.91   1.76   4    6.50   2.89   27   7.07   1.98    31   8.58   1.46    9    8.00   1.73   15   6.80   2.08     5    7.20    2.05   15      6.13   1.89   34    6.56   1.89   27   7.67    1.66
Government*
The speed in which it gets things
                                       9     6.11   1.76   4    5.50   2.38   22   6.82   1.44    30   7.47   2.06    8    6.25   2.25   19   5.32   2.19    10    4.90    2.03   11      5.00   2.57   28    5.50   1.67   22   6.86    2.36
accomplished on the ground*
Ease of access to the people at the
World Bank Group who are making        11    8.00   2.10   3    6.00   1.00   23   7.22   2.09    31   8.55   1.96    8    7.63   1.85   14   7.00   1.57    11    5.91    2.02   13      5.15   2.58   26    5.15   2.26   22   6.82    2.09
decisions important to my work*
Collaboration with civil society*      10    6.80   1.40   4    5.00   2.71   21   6.00   2.12    24   8.13   1.54    4    6.00   1.83   16   5.88   2.22    10    5.80    1.93   16      4.63   2.19   34    5.41   1.99   24   6.25    2.19
Staff accessibility*                   9     7.89   1.62   3    5.67   1.16   23   7.48   1.90    28   8.50   1.95    9    8.00   1.41   17   7.59   1.66    11    6.73    1.19   13      5.85   3.00   29    5.62   2.16   21   6.81    2.25
Collaboration with other donors
                                       8     6.63   1.41   3    6.00   1.00   15   7.07   1.98    16   8.06   1.73    3    5.33   2.52   10   5.80   1.62     6    7.17    1.17   7       4.86   2.55   22    6.00   1.48   14   7.07    1.39
and development partners*
Collaboration with the private
                                       7     6.43   1.27   3    6.00   1.00   12   7.33   2.02    13   7.46   1.76    3    5.67   2.52   15   6.73   2.31    11    7.18    1.25   10      5.90   1.91   27    6.19   1.90   18   7.17    1.86
sector
Straightforwardness and honesty*       9     8.33   1.41   3    7.33   1.53   24   7.92   1.98    29   9.28   0.96    7    8.71   1.80   18   8.50   1.58    12    8.17    1.85   14      6.64   2.65   31    6.74   2.28   23   8.00    1.95
Treating clients and stakeholders
                                       9     8.89   1.05   3    7.33   1.53   28   8.36   1.70    30   9.33   0.88    8    8.50   2.51   17   8.41   1.91    12    8.25    1.36   13      7.31   2.25   31    7.26   1.79   23   8.57    1.31
in Brazil with respect*
Being a long-term partner*             11    8.64   2.16   5    8.60   1.95   30   8.87   1.38    30   9.40   1.16    9    8.89   1.36   19   8.79   1.69    12    8.83    1.12   13      7.23   2.49   35    7.97   1.81   25   8.64    1.41
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                     75
                                                                                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                  Office of the                                      PMU/                                   Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                         President/       Office of     Employee of Consultant on        Local        Private      Sector/
 (Responses combined)                               Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry          WBG project Government Sector            Private Bank Civil Society Academia   Other
 The Government works inefficiently                   27.3%          50.0%           28.1%           36.4%         25.0%        66.7%         50.0%       25.0%        50.0%    34.4%
 Poor donor coordination                               0.0%          16.7%            3.1%           3.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        6.8%     3.1%
 The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to
                                                       9.1%          16.7%           28.1%           15.2%         25.0%        14.3%         8.3%        25.0%        22.7%    9.4%
 political/social realities on the ground
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in
                                                      54.5%          16.7%           40.6%           45.5%         50.0%        33.3%         16.7%       25.0%        27.3%    34.4%
 Government
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil
                                                       0.0%          16.7%            3.1%           0.0%          0.0%         14.3%         8.3%        56.3%        18.2%    25.0%
 society participation*
 The World Bank Group works too slowly*               18.2%           0.0%           12.5%           18.2%         50.0%        23.8%         25.0%        0.0%        6.8%     6.3%
 The World Bank Group does not do adequate
                                                      18.2%           0.0%            9.4%           3.0%          0.0%          0.0%         8.3%        12.5%        11.4%    18.8%
 follow through/follow-up
 Political pressures and obstacles                    18.2%          16.7%           21.9%           24.2%         12.5%        23.8%         16.7%       31.3%        25.0%    25.0%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of
                                                       9.1%          33.3%           18.8%           15.2%         25.0%        19.0%         0.0%        12.5%        18.2%    25.0%
 country challenges
 Other                                                18.2%          16.7%            3.1%           6.1%          0.0%          0.0%         25.0%        6.3%        2.3%     12.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                           76
                                                                                                                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Brazil? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                      Office of the         Office of      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant on                                               Financial
                                   President/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry           WBG project       Local Government    Private Sector     Sector/Private Bank        Civil Society         Academia            Other
                                     N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N       Mean SD       N      Mean SD      N    Mean    SD
Crime and violence                  9     6.00   3.32   4    6.50   4.04   18   6.56   2.62    22   6.68   3.17    6    6.83   2.93   15   6.27   2.28    10    5.70    2.71   13      5.08   2.81   35    6.74   2.63   22   6.64    2.80
Financial markets                   9     6.89   2.62   4    6.50   3.00   18   7.11   2.06    21   6.10   2.49    6    5.67   1.63   15   7.33   1.45    11    7.91    1.87   13      5.38   2.66   39    5.67   2.46   23   6.52    2.71
Transport                           10    7.30   1.95   3    8.67   1.53   18   7.28   1.99    30   8.53   1.83    9    6.89   2.21   19   7.74   1.94    10    7.90    1.37   14      7.07   2.02   38    7.61   2.07   23   7.78    1.68
Anti-corruption                     9     7.11   2.03   4    7.25   2.63   18   7.44   2.15    26   7.42   2.90    6    6.67   3.27   18   8.33   1.72    10    7.90    2.28   12      6.92   2.07   36    6.28   2.79   19   7.79    2.32
Law and justice                     8     5.38   3.07   4    7.25   2.63   16   7.19   2.37    21   6.38   2.94    5    4.80   3.27   16   6.50   2.31    11    5.00    2.45   13      5.62   2.76   37    5.73   2.47   17   6.47    2.98
Urban development                   9     7.22   1.99   4    8.00   1.83   22   8.32   1.81    28   8.25   2.12    7    8.14   2.12   20   7.80   1.74    11    7.82    1.33   15      7.93   2.28   40    7.13   1.99   26   8.19    2.25
Environmental sustainability*       9     7.11   3.14   4    8.00   1.83   25   8.44   1.39    32   8.72   1.82    8    7.38   1.85   21   7.95   1.63    11    8.64    1.29   15      7.20   1.97   40    7.32   2.13   25   8.48    1.81
Trade and exports*                  9     7.89   1.45   4    8.00   1.83   19   7.21   1.84    21   7.52   2.34    5    3.40   2.61   15   6.73   1.83     9    6.78    2.64   12      5.75   3.70   36    6.67   2.31   21   7.29    1.93
Information and communications
                                    9     7.11   2.62   4    8.00   1.83   21   7.52   1.89    26   8.54   1.84    6    5.83   2.79   15   7.33   1.63     9    6.33    2.35   14      7.14   3.06   37    6.86   2.10   21   7.86    2.29
technology
Poverty reduction                   9     7.78   2.99   4    8.50   2.38   24   8.08   1.93    32   8.53   1.97    9    8.00   1.87   21   7.86   2.15    10    8.20    1.81   15      7.87   2.50   41    7.93   2.10   26   7.85    2.60
Gender equity                       9     7.56   2.88   4    7.25   2.63   19   6.89   2.73    25   8.16   2.01    8    6.25   2.44   17   7.35   2.47    10    6.90    3.14   14      7.36   2.68   37    6.68   2.25   20   7.85    2.60
Private sector development*         9     8.00   1.50   4    6.75   1.71   18   7.50   1.76    24   7.04   2.31    5    3.80   2.17   17   7.76   1.75    11    6.45    2.66   15      5.60   3.02   37    6.73   2.46   21   7.19    2.25
Foreign direct investment*          9     8.44   1.51   4    6.75   1.71   18   7.61   2.33    22   7.36   2.46    5    4.40   2.30   16   7.38   1.78    11    7.27    1.49   13      5.69   2.81   34    6.79   2.43   20   7.15    2.18
Water and sanitation                9     7.67   2.40   4    9.25   1.50   19   7.74   2.10    31   8.52   2.11    8    8.13   1.64   17   8.00   2.06     9    7.67    1.32   14      7.79   2.49   38    8.11   2.12   24   8.33    2.12
Regulatory framework*               9     5.89   3.26   3    7.33   1.53   18   7.50   1.95    23   7.22   2.26    5    3.60   2.41   16   7.44   1.75     9    5.67    2.69   12      5.67   1.92   35    6.54   2.54   19   6.63    2.61
Economic growth                     10    7.70   2.54   4    9.00   1.41   19   8.00   2.03    30   8.03   2.17    5    5.80   3.56   18   8.00   2.00    11    7.45    1.21   14      7.07   2.65   40    7.45   2.49   23   8.04    2.23
Energy                              9     7.44   2.19   4    8.25   1.71   19   8.00   2.21    27   8.00   2.40    4    3.50   1.29   18   7.50   2.20    11    7.09    2.39   11      6.73   2.57   39    7.56   2.46   24   7.21    2.70
Disaster management*                9     6.22   3.15   4    5.75   3.40   21   7.52   2.36    22   8.27   2.03    6    4.50   2.17   15   6.93   2.25    11    6.36    2.98   11      6.91   2.43   33    6.06   2.29   22   7.32    2.19
Public sector governance/ reform    9     7.78   3.03   4    9.00   2.00   21   7.76   2.43    29   8.07   2.19    9    7.67   1.41   19   7.74   2.21    11    7.64    2.38   13      5.62   2.96   39    6.69   3.09   24   7.67    2.39
Job creation/employment             9     7.78   1.20   3   10.00 0.00     21   8.00   2.12    26   8.12   2.25    6    5.67   2.73   17   7.29   1.80     9    7.33    2.12   12      6.33   2.71   38    6.87   2.38   23   7.35    2.19
Communicable/non-communicable
                                    8     7.13   2.85   4    6.75   4.03   21   7.10   2.47    20   7.60   2.44    6    4.67   2.16   14   6.79   1.76    10    6.50    2.72   13      6.23   2.46   35    6.49   2.54   20   6.75    2.25
diseases
Equality of opportunity             8     7.12   3.04   4    9.25   1.50   22   7.55   2.26    26   8.08   1.98    8    6.50   2.83   16   7.12   2.13    11    7.45    2.38   13      7.15   2.58   39    6.72   2.48   22   7.91    2.47
Social protection                   8     6.63   2.62   4    6.75   4.27   18   7.11   2.72    24   7.29   2.33    6    5.50   2.35   13   6.54   1.81    10    6.40    2.55   13      5.85   2.67   36    5.94   2.51   21   6.57    2.29
Rural development                   9     6.67   3.08   4    9.25   1.50   24   7.58   2.38    28   8.39   1.95    7    6.86   2.55   16   7.25   1.84    10    7.30    1.77   14      7.50   2.59   36    6.64   2.10   23   7.26    2.77
Global/regional integration         10    6.70   2.87   4    9.25   1.50   22   7.18   2.65    25   8.40   2.02    3    4.67   2.31   17   7.82   1.81    11    7.18    2.32   14      7.14   2.83   38    7.13   2.27   23   8.00    2.17
Welfare of the vulnerable
                                    8     7.25   3.15   4    8.75   1.89   20   7.20   2.57    27   7.85   2.45    8    6.50   3.07   15   7.27   1.79    10    7.60    2.27   12      6.50   3.18   34    5.85   2.63   24   7.13    3.00
population
Natural resource management         10    6.50   3.27   4    8.00   1.83   22   7.73   1.98    27   8.44   1.93    7    6.86   2.12   16   7.06   1.57    11    8.18    1.08   13      6.46   2.90   36    6.58   2.57   22   7.55    2.87
Health*                             9     6.56   3.09   4    9.00   2.00   22   7.73   2.53    26   8.42   2.12    8    6.50   2.83   15   8.47   1.30    10    7.80    1.32   11      6.45   2.95   33    6.76   2.26   21   8.24    2.14
Climate change                      10    7.00   2.94   4    8.00   1.83   25   7.96   1.97    26   8.19   2.42    7    6.57   2.88   17   8.00   1.77    10    8.70    1.49   15      6.73   2.96   36    6.97   2.16   24   7.88    2.27
Agricultural development            9     6.56   2.96   4    7.75   2.06   22   7.68   2.30    26   8.35   1.92    7    6.43   2.23   17   7.41   2.50    11    7.64    1.86   12      6.75   2.73   37    6.32   2.31   24   7.29    2.71
Education                           9     7.56   2.79   4    9.00   2.00   22   8.18   2.26    26   8.81   1.86    8    8.00   2.45   17   8.47   2.13     9    8.00    1.66   13      7.31   2.66   36    7.83   2.59   25   8.36    2.08
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                  77
                                                                                                                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)
How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Brazil? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                      Office of the         Office of      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant on                                               Financial
                                   President/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry           WBG project       Local Government    Private Sector     Sector/Private Bank        Civil Society         Academia            Other
                                     N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N       Mean SD       N      Mean SD      N    Mean    SD
Gender equity                       3     5.33   0.58   3    8.33   1.53   10   6.30   1.70    12   7.92   2.11    4    7.25   2.22   4    6.25   2.06     5    6.60    3.29   6       6.50   3.15   15    5.27   1.83   11   7.45    2.12
Information and communications
                                    4     7.50   1.29   3    6.67   1.53   8    6.50   1.77    14   8.00   1.92    2    6.00   2.83   4    6.25   1.50     4    5.50    1.92   6       6.00   2.90   15    5.87   2.13   10   8.40    1.51
technology*
Transport                           6     6.17   2.14   3    6.67   1.53   8    7.38   1.69    20   8.55   1.79    5    6.60   2.51   10   7.00   1.33     4    7.50    0.58   6       6.67   1.86   21    6.71   2.31   12   7.42    1.98
Crime and violence                  2     5.50   0.71   3    7.00   1.00   9    5.78   1.72    5    5.20   2.95    3    4.67   0.58   1    5.00    .       2    6.00    1.41   4       5.75   2.99   15    4.73   2.02   6    6.50    2.26
Law and justice                     2     5.50   0.71   3    7.00   1.00   8    5.50   2.07    6    7.17   2.79    2    2.50   2.12   1    5.00    .       2    4.00    4.24   7       6.29   3.04   16    5.00   2.00   4    8.50    1.92
Urban development                   6     6.00   2.45   3    7.00   1.00   14   7.36   1.55    19   8.05   1.93    4    7.00   2.16   11   6.64   2.11     5    6.40    3.13   9       7.11   1.54   22    6.77   1.72   11   8.09    1.76
Environmental sustainability        5     7.00   2.12   4    5.75   2.22   17   7.24   1.86    23   8.22   1.95    6    7.17   2.40   14   7.21   1.58     7    7.86    1.68   11      6.73   1.95   25    6.72   2.03   13   7.69    1.75
Regulatory framework*               8     5.75   2.25   3    6.00   2.65   7    6.00   1.41    12   7.67   2.19    2    2.00   1.41   5    7.20   1.48     3    5.33    3.79   2       3.50   2.12   15    5.67   1.76   8    7.13    2.17
Communicable/non-communicable
                                    4     5.75   1.71   3    6.00   2.65   10   6.90   1.97    8    7.63   2.45    2    6.50   3.54   2    4.00   1.41     2    6.00    1.41   5       6.40   2.41   12    6.17   2.41   6    7.83    1.33
diseases
Poverty reduction                   8     5.88   2.59   3    8.00   1.00   18   7.11   2.06    21   8.10   2.49    7    7.43   2.23   8    6.13   1.96     5    8.60    1.34   10      6.60   2.17   23    6.43   1.81   14   7.79    2.05
Anti-corruption*                    4     6.25   1.26   3    6.33   2.08   9    6.44   2.60    12   7.92   2.15    3    7.33   2.89   5    8.00   1.87     2    5.50    2.12   7       6.14   2.73   16    4.37   1.82   6    6.83    1.94
Private sector development          7     6.86   1.46   3    6.00   2.65   9    7.22   1.56    11   7.82   2.09    2    4.50   0.71   10   7.90   1.37     8    7.00    1.85   7       7.43   1.51   17    6.06   2.36   11   7.09    1.30
Foreign direct investment           7     6.86   1.22   3    6.00   2.65   11   7.55   1.70    7    7.43   2.64    2    3.50   2.12   8    7.75   1.49     5    6.40    1.14   6       7.83   1.17   16    6.44   1.86   9    7.22    1.64
Water and sanitation                8     7.00   1.77   3    6.67   1.53   15   7.07   2.12    18   8.11   2.14    5    7.00   1.87   10   7.00   1.16     4    7.25    0.50   9       7.11   1.76   22    7.09   1.41   14   7.93    1.49
Trade and exports                   8     7.13   1.36   3    6.67   1.53   9    7.11   1.62    5    6.40   2.61    2    3.50   2.12   5    6.00   1.58     6    7.67    1.63   6       7.50   2.43   14    6.14   1.79   8    7.75    1.58
Economic growth                     8     7.88   1.25   3    8.00   1.00   14   7.57   2.07    17   7.94   2.05    3    5.33   3.51   9    6.56   2.07     5    7.60    1.82   10      6.80   1.99   19    6.63   2.24   12   8.17    1.75
Health*                             6     6.17   1.60   3    8.00   1.00   16   7.06   2.44    11   8.18   2.27    4    7.25   1.71   8    5.88   2.48     5    8.40    1.52   6       5.67   2.81   16    6.81   1.80   9    8.78    1.20
Disaster management                 5     7.00   2.00   3    6.67   1.53   11   6.73   2.83    13   7.92   2.10    3    5.67   3.22   5    5.20   2.05     4    5.50    2.38   5       5.80   2.95   15    5.93   2.19   7    7.43    1.40
Public sector governance/ reform    9     7.00   2.50   3    6.00   2.65   16   6.63   2.34    19   7.63   2.43    5    6.60   1.34   6    5.00   1.67     2    4.00    4.24   7       6.14   2.85   22    5.55   2.37   9    6.89    1.62
Job creation/employment             6     6.83   1.94   3    6.00   2.65   13   7.69   1.49    15   7.27   2.55    3    6.67   2.52   6    7.33   1.37     5    7.20    1.92   10      6.70   2.41   18    5.61   2.00   11   7.36    1.57
Financial markets*                  5     7.00   1.58   3    6.00   2.65   9    8.22   1.56    6    7.17   3.06    2    1.50   0.71   8    6.88   2.48     8    7.75    1.49   7       7.57   1.90   14    5.86   1.96   11   6.55    1.75
Equality of opportunity             5     6.60   1.14   3    6.67   1.53   14   7.14   2.11    15   7.80   2.21    4    5.25   3.20   7    6.14   2.85     6    8.00    1.79   9       6.67   1.87   17    6.06   1.56   10   8.10    2.33
Energy                              7     6.43   2.07   3    6.00   2.65   11   7.18   2.18    15   7.40   2.41    3    6.67   2.52   10   7.80   2.04     5    8.00    1.58   9       7.22   2.05   19    6.68   1.83   12   7.58    1.78
Rural development                   7     6.14   1.86   3    6.00   2.65   15   7.53   1.89    15   8.33   2.23    4    8.50   1.73   9    6.33   2.65     5    7.60    1.52   8       6.63   2.13   22    6.18   1.82   10   7.60    1.78
Global/regional integration         6     7.00   2.10   3    6.00   2.65   11   7.27   2.72    13   7.85   2.38    2    6.50   0.71   7    6.14   1.95     5    7.20    1.30   11      7.09   2.63   22    6.09   2.22   12   7.50    2.43
Welfare of the vulnerable
                                    6     6.83   1.94   4    6.75   1.26   15   6.07   2.66    17   7.82   2.10    4    5.75   3.95   7    7.00   2.38     6    7.00    2.61   8       5.88   2.85   16    5.69   2.24   10   7.40    2.55
population
Education                           5     6.80   0.84   2    9.00   1.41   16   7.38   2.31    17   7.82   2.13    6    7.83   2.32   6    6.17   2.64     6    7.83    1.33   10      6.40   2.41   24    6.58   1.91   11   8.36    1.75
Social protection                   5     6.20   1.30   3    8.33   1.53   14   6.64   2.37    9    6.89   3.37    1    4.00    .     3    5.67   1.16     3    6.67    1.53   6       5.17   2.23   16    5.25   1.81   8    7.13    2.53
Climate change                      8     7.00   2.20   4    6.50   1.29   15   7.40   2.10    16   7.56   2.42    6    6.67   3.01   9    7.11   2.15     7    7.43    2.57   11      6.36   2.38   21    6.76   1.70   13   7.46    2.11
Agricultural development            6     6.83   1.17   3    6.00   2.65   15   7.80   1.97    17   8.29   2.05    3    7.00   2.00   9    7.00   2.83     5    8.00    1.41   11      6.91   2.39   20    6.45   2.09   10   8.00    2.11
Natural resource management         7     7.14   1.95   4    7.00   2.94   15   7.00   1.85    19   7.58   2.22    5    6.40   2.79   6    6.33   2.34     5    8.40    1.14   9       6.00   2.50   22    6.59   2.24   12   8.00    1.81
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                  78
                                                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

                                        Office of the         Office of      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant on                                               Financial
                                     President/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry           WBG project       Local Government    Private Sector     Sector/Private Bank        Civil Society         Academia            Other
                                       N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N       Mean SD       N      Mean SD      N    Mean    SD
To what extent does the WBG’s
work help to achieve development      11    6.64   1.69   4    7.50   1.73   28   6.04   2.08    31   7.29   2.15    7    7.00   1.53   20   6.55   1.54    10    6.30    1.64   13      5.54   1.56   34    5.88   1.74   25   6.80    2.00
results in Brazil?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Brazil? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                        Office of the         Office of      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant on                                               Financial
                                     President/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry           WBG project       Local Government    Private Sector     Sector/Private Bank        Civil Society         Academia            Other
                                       N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N       Mean SD       N      Mean SD      N    Mean    SD
The WBG's financial instruments
                                      10    6.10   2.13   4    6.50   1.29   22   5.55   2.48    26   7.00   2.15    7    6.71   1.38   18   6.22   1.90    11    5.45    2.42   12      4.58   1.93   31    5.10   1.85   22   6.91    1.57
meet the needs of Brazil*
The WBG meets Brazil’s needs for
                                      11    7.00   1.18   4    6.50   2.38   27   5.70   2.27    30   7.57   1.83    7    7.57   0.79   18   6.11   1.91    11    6.00    2.10   13      5.85   2.12   35    5.49   1.99   23   7.30    1.74
knowledge services*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                        Office of the         Office of      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant on                                               Financial
                                     President/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry           WBG project       Local Government    Private Sector     Sector/Private Bank        Civil Society         Academia            Other
                                       N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N       Mean SD       N      Mean SD      N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe that
Brazil received value for money
from the World Bank Group’s           6     6.00   1.10   3    7.33   0.58   15   5.80   2.65    21   7.57   1.89    4    7.75   0.50   10   6.80   1.03     7    6.14    1.46   11      5.45   2.51   26    5.73   1.69   13   7.92    1.85
Reimbursable Advisory Services
(RAS)?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                        Office of the         Office of      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant on                                               Financial
                                     President/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry           WBG project       Local Government    Private Sector     Sector/Private Bank        Civil Society         Academia            Other
                                       N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N       Mean SD       N      Mean SD      N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the
WBG measures and corrects its         8     6.88   1.13   4    6.00   3.46   23   6.39   1.50    27   6.70   2.45    4    6.00   1.83   14   6.14   1.66     7    5.86    1.95   11      5.73   2.28   28    5.14   2.00   19   7.05    2.53
work in real time in Brazil?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                                    79
                                                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?* (Select only ONE response)
                                                 Office of the                                  PMU/                                                                         Financial
                                                  President/    Office of      Employee of Consultant on       Local      Private                                             Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                         Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry       WBG project Government Sector                                                 Private Bank         Civil Society Academia           Other
 Weekly                                                -            -              3.4%         36.7%          14.3%         -                                                 16.7%                6.3%        7.7%             13.3%
 Monthly                                            27.3%        20.0%             10.3%        20.0%          14.3%      14.3%                                                16.7%               37.5%        23.1%            20.0%
 A few times a year                                 54.5%        40.0%             65.5%        26.7%          71.4%      52.4%                                                41.7%               43.8%        48.7%            43.3%
 Rarely                                             18.2%        40.0%             20.7%        13.3%            -        33.3%                                                25.0%               12.5%        20.5%            10.0%
 Never                                                 -            -                -           3.3%            -           -                                                   -                     -          -              13.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In Brazil, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                        Office of the         Office of      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant on                                               Financial
                                     President/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry           WBG project       Local Government    Private Sector     Sector/Private Bank        Civil Society         Academia            Other
                                       N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N       Mean SD       N      Mean SD      N    Mean    SD
Are timely                            11    8.00   1.48   2    8.50   2.12   25   7.60   1.94    30   7.97   2.03    7    8.43   0.54   18   6.83   1.95     9    7.22    1.48   13      6.08   2.06   32    7.19   1.93   24   7.46    1.87
Lead to practical solutions           10    7.00   1.70   2    8.00   1.41   27   6.48   2.05    29   7.38   1.94    6    7.67   1.03   16   5.94   1.98     9    6.33    2.45   13      5.69   2.25   34    6.29   1.92   22   7.09    1.80
Are accessible (well written and
                                      11    7.64   1.29   2    7.50   0.71   26   7.77   1.66    29   7.48   2.01    7    8.14   1.68   18   6.39   1.91     9    6.33    2.06   13      5.92   2.18   36    7.06   2.12   23   7.70    1.40
easy to understand)*
Are translated enough into local
                                      8     6.75   1.83   2    7.00   0.00   25   7.28   1.97    29   6.38   2.23    7    7.43   2.07   15   6.33   1.72     8    5.63    2.00   13      7.31   2.53   32    6.53   2.08   24   7.04    2.49
language
Are adaptable to Brazil’s specific
development challenges and            10    6.90   1.66   2    7.50   0.71   25   6.48   2.37    27   7.15   1.85    6    7.17   1.17   17   6.12   1.76     9    5.22    2.28   12      6.25   2.45   36    5.78   2.10   24   7.04    1.73
country circumstances
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                        Office of the         Office of      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant on                                               Financial
                                     President/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry           WBG project       Local Government    Private Sector     Sector/Private Bank        Civil Society         Academia            Other
                                       N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N       Mean SD       N      Mean SD      N    Mean    SD
Overall, how significant a
contribution do you believe the
WBG's knowledge work and              11    6.91   1.70   2    8.00   1.41   24   6.88   1.99    30   7.80   1.88    7    7.43   1.27   18   6.39   2.36    10    6.30    1.42   14      6.14   2.14   35    6.51   2.08   26   7.62    1.75
activities make to development
results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the
technical quality of the World
                                      11    8.18   1.25   3    6.67   3.51   28   7.64   1.89    30   8.30   1.97    7    8.86   0.69   18   7.22   1.77    10    7.00    1.16   14      7.71   1.33   36    7.78   1.55   24   8.04    1.23
Bank Group's knowledge work and
activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




                                                                                                                    80
                                                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                        Office of the         Office of      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant on                                               Financial
                                     President/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry           WBG project       Local Government    Private Sector     Sector/Private Bank         Civil Society           Academia            Other
                                       N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N       Mean SD         N      Mean SD       N   Mean    SD
The World Bank Group disburses
                                      10    6.10   2.38   3    4.67   3.22   16   6.44   2.45    27   8.04   2.26    5    7.20   2.39   16   5.56   1.79    10    5.30    2.11    6       6.17   2.71     14    5.21   2.19   14   5.79    1.89
funds promptly*
The World Bank Group effectively
monitors and evaluates the            10    6.40   1.84   3    8.67   1.53   24   7.13   2.23    30   8.33   1.99    7    8.14   1.22   18   7.56   1.76     9    6.78    2.49    11      6.64   1.86     24    6.62   2.37   20   7.25    1.97
projects and programs it supports
The WBG’s approvals and reviews
                                      9     6.89   2.57   3    5.67   2.31   19   6.37   1.86    28   7.36   2.77    6    6.33   2.42   16   7.06   1.73     8    7.00    1.69    7       6.57   2.30     17    6.29   2.14   18   7.22    2.24
are done in a timely fashion
The WBG’s “Safeguard Policy”
                                      7     7.29   2.56   3    5.00   3.46   17   6.53   2.40    28   7.64   1.83    5    6.60   2.79   15   7.00   1.85     8    6.00    2.39    12      6.33   1.92     20    6.00   2.08   17   7.76    1.60
requirements are reasonable
The WBG’s conditions on its
                                      9     5.67   1.73   3    4.67   3.22   17   7.00   2.42    25   8.04   1.70    5    8.40   0.55   19   6.74   2.02     9    6.33    2.35    8       5.13   1.89     17    6.47   2.38   18   7.28    1.84
lending are reasonable*
The World Bank Group takes
                                      8     6.50   0.93   3    6.00   1.00   16   6.13   2.53    30   7.47   2.16    6    7.50   1.64   18   6.11   2.19     9    5.56    1.81    9       6.33   2.45     14    5.86   2.18   17   6.88    1.62
decisions quickly in Brazil
Working with the WBG increases
                                      11    7.73   1.90   3    9.00   1.73   23   7.52   2.13    31   8.61   1.84    7    8.57   1.27   19   8.21   2.12    10    7.00    2.36    13      7.31   2.14     31    7.10   2.68   19   8.16    1.54
Brazil’s institutional capacity
Where country systems are
adequate, the World Bank Group        5     6.80   1.92   3    8.33   1.53   14   5.93   2.76    28   8.18   2.09    4    7.25   2.22   10   7.20   1.81     4    7.75    0.96    8       7.50   1.77     16    6.94   2.14   11   7.91    2.21
makes appropriate use of them
The World Bank Group provides
                                      8     7.13   1.25   3    7.33   2.52   20   7.20   1.85    30   8.40   2.28    6    8.17   1.47   17   7.00   2.12     7    7.14    0.90    10      7.50   1.51     23    6.65   2.17   18   7.67    1.68
effective implementation support
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                        Office of the         Office of      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant on                                               Financial
                                     President/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry           WBG project       Local Government    Private Sector     Sector/Private Bank         Civil Society           Academia            Other
                                       N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N       Mean SD         N      Mean SD       N   Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe that
the WBG’s work helps to find
                                      7     6.71   1.38   3    9.00   1.73   16   6.88   1.75    22   7.32   1.89    4    6.00   2.58   15   6.87   1.77     7    7.14    1.07    11      6.45   1.29     24    6.25   1.98   18   7.89    1.49
solutions that promote private
public partnerships in Brazil?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in Brazil? (Select only ONE response)
                                                    Office of the                                   PMU/                                                                     Financial
                                                     President/    Office of      Employee of Consultant on    Local                                         Private          Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                            Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry       WBG project Government                                       Sector        Private Bank          Civil Society Academia             Other
 The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective
 and focuses on the most important development         54.5%        20.0%            39.3%          67.7%     71.4%                                          65.0%               50.0%                  18.8%          33.3%        51.7%
 challenges in Brazil
 The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective
 in Brazil, and it is involved in too many areas of     9.1%        40.0%            17.9%          16.1%        -                                           15.0%               20.0%                  50.0%          33.3%        17.2%
 development
 Don’t know                                            36.4%        40.0%            42.9%          16.1%     28.6%                                          20.0%               30.0%                  31.3%          33.3%        31.0%


                                                                                                                    81
                                                                                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Brazil
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Brazil? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                   Office of the                                   PMU/                                      Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                          President/    Office of     Employee of Consultant on      Local     Private              Sector/
 (Responses combined)                                Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry        WBG project Government Sector              Private Bank   Civil Society Academia      Other
 Offer more innovative financial products             18.2%        16.7%           13.8%           10.3%        0.0%       23.8%               44.4%         31.3%        7.9%        10.3%
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work               18.2%         0.0%           10.3%           10.3%        0.0%       0.0%                11.1%         12.5%        5.3%        10.3%
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/
                                                       9.1%         0.0%           10.3%           10.3%        0.0%       4.8%                0.0%          18.8%        13.2%       10.3%
 statistics/figures on Brazil’s economy
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing
                                                      18.2%        33.3%           10.3%           17.2%       28.6%       28.6%              33.3%           0.0%        13.2%       13.8%
 compared to markets
 Reach out more to groups outside of
                                                       0.0%        16.7%           10.3%           3.4%         0.0%       38.1%              11.1%          43.8%        23.7%       24.1%
 Government*
 Increase the level of capacity development in the
                                                      27.3%        33.3%           44.8%           34.5%       57.1%       28.6%               0.0%          25.0%        44.7%       44.8%
 country/ Invest in capacity building
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to
                                                       9.1%         0.0%           10.3%           10.3%        0.0%       9.5%               22.2%          18.8%        21.1%       17.2%
 Brazil’s specific challenges
 Offer more innovative knowledge services             45.5%         0.0%            6.9%           6.9%        14.3%       14.3%              11.1%           6.3%        10.5%       17.2%
 Collaborate more effectively with Government
                                                      27.3%         0.0%           24.1%           13.8%       28.6%       9.5%                0.0%           6.3%        15.8%       10.3%
 clients
 Work more on the federal level                        0.0%         0.0%            3.4%           0.0%         0.0%       0.0%               0.0%            0.0%        2.6%        3.4%
 Work more on the state level                          9.1%        33.3%           10.3%           17.2%       14.3%       4.8%               0.0%            6.3%        10.5%       3.4%
 Work faster                                           0.0%         0.0%            0.0%           6.9%        14.3%       14.3%              11.1%           0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank
                                                       9.1%        66.7%           13.8%           31.0%       14.3%       23.8%              44.4%          25.0%         5.3%       10.3%
 Group financing*
 Increase availability of Reimbursable Advisory
                                                       0.0%         0.0%            0.0%           3.4%         0.0%       0.0%                0.0%           0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Services (RAS)
 Other                                                 9.1%         0.0%            6.9%           6.9%        14.3%       0.0%                0.0%           0.0%         0.0%       6.9%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Brazil, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the
World Bank Group should offer more of in Brazil? (Select only ONE response)
                                                   Office of the                                    PMU/                                      Financial
                                                    President/      Office of   Employee of Consultant on           Local       Private        Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                           Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry         WBG project Government Sector              Private Bank Civil Society Academia        Other
 Financial services*                                  18.2%          50.0%          27.6%           23.3%          16.7%         71.4%          50.0%         13.3%        25.6%      20.0%
 Knowledge products                                   63.6%          50.0%          48.3%           40.0%          33.3%         23.8%          30.0%         46.7%        46.2%      33.3%
 Convening services                                      -              -              -             3.3%              -         4.8%             -           13.3%        12.8%      10.0%
 None of the above                                       -              -              -             6.7%              -            -           10.0%         6.7%          2.6%         -
 The combination is appropriate for Brazil*           18.2%             -           6.9%            23.3%          50.0%            -             -           6.7%            -       13.3%
 Don't know                                              -              -           17.2%            3.3%              -            -           10.0%         13.3%        12.8%      23.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                                                                              82
                                                                                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


G. Communication and Information Sharing

How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Brazil? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                 Office of the                                    PMU/                                     Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                        President/      Office of   Employee of Consultant on        Local     Private            Sector/
 (Responses combined)                              Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry        WBG project Government Sector              Private Bank   Civil Society Academia     Other
 Social media                                       25.0%          14.3%         13.8%            20.0%        0.0%       19.0%              18.2%         25.0%        12.5%      17.2%
 International newspapers*                          33.3%          0.0%          27.6%            13.3%        0.0%       19.0%              9.1%          18.8%        42.5%      20.7%
 Local radio                                         8.3%          14.3%          3.4%            3.3%         0.0%       0.0%               0.0%           0.0%        0.0%       3.4%
 International radio                                 0.0%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%         0.0%       0.0%               0.0%           0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 Local television                                    8.3%          0.0%           6.9%            16.7%       28.6%       14.3%              9.1%          18.8%        5.0%       3.4%
 International television                            8.3%          0.0%           0.0%            3.3%         0.0%       4.8%               0.0%           0.0%        7.5%       0.0%
 Local newspapers                                   25.0%          0.0%          17.2%            23.3%       42.9%       28.6%              9.1%          31.3%        27.5%      27.6%
 Internet                                           58.3%          71.4%         72.4%            73.3%       71.4%       76.2%              72.7%         56.3%        40.0%      65.5%
 Periodicals                                        16.7%          42.9%         20.7%            26.7%       42.9%       28.6%              54.5%         31.3%        37.5%      24.1%
 Other                                               8.3%          0.0%          10.3%            10.0%       14.3%       4.8%               9.1%           6.3%        15.0%      20.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                  Office of the                               PMU/                                         Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                         President/    Office of   Employee of Consultant on    Local              Private        Sector/
 (Responses combined)                               Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry    WBG project Government            Sector      Private Bank   Civil Society Academia     Other
 Direct contact with World Bank Group                33.3%        28.6%          23.3%        36.7%      14.3%               33.3%           20.0%         31.3%        25.6%      24.1%
 Mobile phones                                        0.0%         0.0%          6.7%         3.3%        0.0%                0.0%           0.0%           0.0%        0.0%       6.9%
 World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/
                                                     50.0%         0.0%          63.3%        63.3%      85.7%               23.8%          50.0%          56.3%        48.7%      37.9%
 conferences*
 World Bank Group’s publications and other
                                                     16.7%        28.6%          26.7%        30.0%      42.9%               47.6%          50.0%          31.3%        53.8%      13.8%
 written materials*
 World Bank Group’s website                          16.7%        28.6%          20.0%        13.3%      14.3%               23.8%          10.0%          31.3%        33.3%      37.9%
 Social media*                                       16.7%        28.6%          3.3%         6.7%        0.0%               19.0%          10.0%          6.3%         7.7%       31.0%
 e-Newsletters                                       50.0%        42.9%          33.3%        43.3%      28.6%               42.9%          50.0%          25.0%        20.5%      31.0%
 Other                                                0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%        0.0%               0.0%           10.0%          6.3%         0.0%       0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the WBG will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                                  Office of the                                  PMU/                                    Financial
                                                   President/      Office of    Employee of Consultant on       Local      Private        Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                          Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry       WBG project Government Sector            Private Bank Civil Society Academia         Other
 Yes                                                  45.5%            -           32.1%         51.7%          16.7%       47.6%          27.3%           40.0%          30.8%    28.6%
 No                                                   54.5%        100.0%          67.9%         48.3%          83.3%       52.4%          72.7%           60.0%          69.2%    71.4%




                                                                                            83
                                                                                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

If yes, from which of the following sources did you learn about the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policies? (Select only ONE response)
                                                      Office of the                             PMU/                                 Financial
                                                       President/    Office of   Employee of Consultant on  Local      Private        Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                              Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry  WBG project Government    Sector      Private Bank   Civil Society Academia     Other
 World Bank Group’s
                                                        40.0%          -          33.3%        25.0%         -         20.0%             -           14.3%        15.4%      22.2%
 seminars/workshops/conferences
 World Bank Group’s website                             40.0%          -          33.3%        37.5%       50.0%       60.0%          66.7%          14.3%        53.8%      44.4%
 World Bank Group’s e-Newsletters                         -            -            -          6.3%          -           -              -            28.6%          -          -
 News/Media                                               -         100.0%          -            -           -           -              -            14.3%        7.7%         -
 Colleagues/Friends/Peer organizations                  20.0%          -          11.1%        18.8%       50.0%       20.0%            -            28.6%        23.1%      33.3%
 Other                                                    -            -          22.2%        12.5%         -           -            33.3%            -            -          -

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*
                                                Office of the                                   PMU/                                 Financial
                                                 President/      Office of       Employee of Consultant on   Local     Private        Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                        Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry         WBG project Government   Sector      Private Bank   Civil Society Academia     Other
 Yes                                               41.7%           14.3%            30.0%       70.0%       57.1%      28.6%           25.0%         43.8%        23.1%      27.6%
 No                                                58.3%           85.7%            70.0%       30.0%       42.9%      71.4%           75.0%         56.3%        76.9%      72.4%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                                      Office of the                             PMU/                                 Financial
                                                       President/    Office of   Employee of Consultant on  Local      Private        Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                              Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry  WBG project Government    Sector      Private Bank   Civil Society Academia     Other
 Yes                                                     80.0%        100.0%       88.9%        100.0%     75.0%       100.0%         100.0%         85.7%        66.7%      87.5%
 No                                                      20.0%           -         11.1%           -       25.0%          -              -           14.3%        33.3%      12.5%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?
                                                Office of the                             PMU/                                       Financial
                                                 President/    Office of   Employee of Consultant on  Local            Private        Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                        Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry  WBG project Government          Sector      Private Bank   Civil Society Academia     Other
 Yes                                               91.7%        57.1%        76.7%        93.3%      85.7%             81.0%           75.0%         75.0%        97.5%      82.8%
 No                                                 8.3%        42.9%        23.3%         6.7%      14.3%             19.0%           25.0%         25.0%        2.5%       17.2%

Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites?
                                                  Office of the                              PMU/                                    Financial
                                                   President/     Office of   Employee of Consultant on  Local         Private        Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                           Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry  WBG project Government       Sector      Private Bank   Civil Society Academia     Other
 Yes                                                  25.0%        42.9%        10.3%        23.3%      28.6%          19.0%           8.3%          12.5%        25.0%      13.8%
 No                                                   75.0%        57.1%        89.7%        76.7%      71.4%          81.0%           91.7%         87.5%        75.0%      86.2%


                                                                                          84
                                                                                                                                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                       Office of the         Office of      Employee of a      PMU/Consultant on                                               Financial
                                    President/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry           WBG project       Local Government    Private Sector     Sector/Private Bank           Civil Society           Academia             Other
                                      N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD               N      Mean SD         N      Mean SD       N    Mean       SD
When I need information from the
                                     7     8.14   1.77   5    5.80   1.64   9    6.44   2.51    14   7.50   2.93    1    4.00    .     10   6.40   2.41     2       8.50    2.12   12      5.83   2.52     22    6.05   2.68    14   7.29       1.73
WBG I know how to find it
The WBG’s social media channels
are valuable sources of              11    7.91   1.45   5    5.00   2.74   26   7.08   2.65    30   8.20   2.37    7    7.29   2.22   19   6.63   2.59     8       6.88    2.95   13      6.62   2.87     35    6.17   2.51    26   7.12       2.39
information about the institution
The World Bank Group is
responsive to my information         8     8.13   2.03   3    6.00   1.00   17   8.18   1.94    27   8.63   1.93    6    8.83   0.75   13   7.62   1.39     6       7.67    1.75    8      8.63   1.41     15    6.47   2.30    16   8.44       1.71
requests and inquiries*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups



H. Background Information

Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group (IBRD, IFC, or MIGA) in your country?*
                                                   Office of the                                   PMU/                                                                        Financial
                                                    President/     Office of    Employee of Consultant on        Local                                      Private             Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                           Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry       WBG project Government                                       Sector           Private Bank         Civil Society Academia              Other
 Yes                                                   42.9%        11.1%           35.3%          69.4%         50.0%                                      47.6%                53.8%               28.6%        5.8%                31.4%
 No                                                    57.1%        88.9%           64.7%          30.6%         50.0%                                      52.4%                46.2%               71.4%        94.2%               68.6%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily engage with in Brazil?* (Select only ONE response)
                                                   Office of the                                   PMU/                                                                        Financial
                                                    President/     Office of    Employee of Consultant on        Local                                      Private             Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                           Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry        WBG project Government                                      Sector           Private Bank         Civil Society Academia              Other
 The World Bank (IDA)                                 92.3%         57.1%          90.6%           88.9%        100.0%                                      42.9%                  -                 72.2%        76.9%               68.8%
 The International Finance Corporation (IFC)           7.7%            -            3.1%           2.8%            -                                        57.1%                92.3%               11.1%        7.7%                3.1%
 The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
                                                         -             -              -            2.8%            -                                            -                   -                      -                -               -
 (MIGA)
 Other                                                   -          42.9%           6.3%           5.6%            -                                            -                  7.7%                  16.7%          15.4%         28.1%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?
                                                   Office of the                             PMU/                                                                              Financial
                                                    President/    Office of   Employee of Consultant on  Local                                              Private             Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                           Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry  WBG project Government                                            Sector           Private Bank         Civil Society Academia              Other
 Yes                                                  28.6%           -         11.8%         5.6%      10.0%                                                9.5%                15.4%                9.5%        8.2%                8.8%
 No                                                   71.4%        100.0%       88.2%        94.4%      90.0%                                               90.5%                84.6%               90.5%        91.8%               91.2%


                                                                                                                   85
                                                                                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


H. Background Information (continued)

If yes, what was your view of how the two institutions work together in Brazil?* (Select only ONE response)
                                                    Office of the                                    PMU/                                Financial
                                                     President/     Office of      Employee of Consultant on     Local     Private        Sector/
  Percentage of Respondents                           Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry         WBG project Government   Sector      Private Bank   Civil Society Academia     Other
  The two institutions work well together              50.0%          50.0%            25.0%         50.0%      100.0%     100.0%          50.0%             -        50.0%      50.0%
  The way the two institutions work together needs
                                                       25.0%             -             50.0%           -           -          -              -           50.0%        25.0%        -
  improvement
  The two institutions do not work well together          -              -                -            -           -          -           50.0%            -          25.0%        -
  Don't know                                           25.0%          50.0%            25.0%         50.0%         -          -             -            50.0%          -        50.0%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Brazil? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                   Office of the                                  PMU/                                   Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                          President/     Office of    Employee of Consultant on       Local      Private        Sector/
 (Responses combined)                                Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry      WBG project Government       Sector      Private Bank   Civil Society Academia     Other
 Observer*                                            14.3%          87.5%          9.4%          5.7%         10.0%       42.9%           41.7%         42.9%        34.6%      23.5%
 Use World Bank Group reports/data*                   14.3%          25.0%         15.6%          8.6%         40.0%       38.1%           25.0%         19.0%        65.4%      29.4%
 Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored
                                                      50.0%          0.0%          68.8%          62.9%        60.0%       23.8%          16.7%          42.9%        23.1%      38.2%
 events/activities*
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties*       50.0%          0.0%          37.5%          68.6%        50.0%       19.0%          25.0%          19.0%        7.7%       32.4%
 Use World Bank Group website for information,
                                                      14.3%          37.5%         15.6%          22.9%        10.0%       23.8%          16.7%          28.6%        40.4%      23.5%
 data, research, etc.
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

What’s your gender?*
                                                      Office of the                             PMU/                                     Financial
                                                       President/    Office of   Employee of Consultant on  Local          Private        Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                              Minister Parliamentarian a Ministry  WBG project Government        Sector      Private Bank   Civil Society Academia     Other
 Female                                                  50.0%        87.5%        50.0%        41.7%      30.0%           23.8%           15.4%         23.8%        36.5%      71.4%
 Male                                                    50.0%        12.5%        50.0%        58.3%      70.0%           76.2%           84.6%         76.2%        63.5%      28.6%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                          86
                                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



Appendix C: Responses to Indicator Questions by Location18
Southeast N=103              Center-West N=92                Other Areas N=52

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group


                                                                             Southeast              Center-West            Other Areas
                                                                            N Mean SD              N Mean SD              N Mean SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank
                                                                           97      6.13   2.35    90     6.53   2.60     49      6.78    2.68
Group in Brazil?
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)


                                                                                Southeast           Center-West               Other Areas
                                                                            N     Mean SD          N Mean SD              N      Mean SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank
                                                                           85      6.42   1.98    70     7.09   1.81      46     7.52    1.93
Group’s effectiveness in Brazil.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between locations.



                                                                                Southeast           Center-West               Other Areas
                                                                            N     Mean SD          N Mean SD              N      Mean SD

To what extent do you believe the WBG's staff is well
prepared to help Brazil solve its most complicated                         79      7.51   1.71    78     7.31   2.00      46     7.91    1.66
development challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Brazil?

                                                                             Southeast              Center-West            Other Areas
                                                                            N Mean SD              N Mean SD              N Mean SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
                                                                           86      5.84   2.16    81     5.98   2.19     46      7.24    1.83
relevant role in development in Brazil*
The WBG’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                           85      5.94   2.11    80     5.76   2.21     43      7.79    1.54
development priorities for Brazil*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between locations.




18Only 247 respondents provided the information about their geographic location. Thus only these respondents were included in the analysis
presented in this appendix.

                                                                           87
                                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Brazil, in terms of each of the following?

                                                                            Southeast                   Center-West        Other Areas
                                                                           N Mean SD                   N Mean SD          N Mean SD
Responsiveness to needs*                                                  65      6.08    1.95         58   6.57   2.29   36     7.81   1.70
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
                                                                          66      5.86    1.91         61   6.05   1.86   41     6.68   1.94
services)
Flexibility (in terms of changing country
                                                                          69      5.46    2.03         64   6.09   1.84   41     7.00   1.90
circumstances)*
Being inclusive*                                                          64      5.64    2.10         64   6.25   2.20   36     7.64   1.74
Openness (sharing data and other information)                             80      6.85    2.19         70   7.20   1.82   40     7.75   2.13
Collaboration with the Government*                                        68      6.68    1.92         70   7.34   1.94   42     8.36   1.53
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the
                                                                          69      5.68    2.19         56   6.29   1.99   40     7.02   2.07
ground*
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group
                                                                          60      6.32    2.31         63   6.71   2.31   41     7.95   2.12
who are making decisions important to my work*
Collaboration with civil society*                                         68      5.59    2.22         61   6.03   2.11   36     7.25   1.86
Staff accessibility                                                       67      6.73    2.31         61   7.07   2.07   37     7.81   2.09
Collaboration with other donors and development
                                                                          43      6.37    1.90         42   6.69   1.80   19     7.00   1.86
partners
Collaboration with the private sector                                     56      6.77    1.97         39   6.46   1.73   24     7.04   1.94
Straightforwardness and honesty*                                          70      7.63    2.20         62   7.65   2.03   40     9.10   1.19
Being a long-term partner*                                                75      8.17    1.88         72   8.71   1.56   44     9.27   1.23
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations.




C. World Bank Group’s Sectoral Effectiveness and Results


                                                                               Southeast                Center-West           Other Areas
                                                                           N     Mean SD               N Mean SD          N      Mean SD

To what extent does the WBG’s work help to achieve
                                                                          77      6.19    1.78         71   6.18   2.03   37     7.70   1.47
development results in Brazil?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations.

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Brazil?

                                                                            Southeast                   Center-West        Other Areas
                                                                           N Mean SD                   N Mean SD          N Mean SD
The World Bank Group's financial instruments meet the
                                                                          74      5.72    1.96         57   5.84   2.37   34     6.91   1.75
needs of Brazil*
The World Bank Group meets Brazil’s needs for
                                                                          77      6.04    2.13         67   6.25   2.09   37     7.59   1.26
knowledge services*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between locations.




                                                                          88
                                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

In Brazil, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:

                                                                                Southeast               Center-West                   Other Areas
                                                                            N     Mean SD              N Mean SD                  N      Mean SD
Are adaptable to Brazil’s specific development
                                                                           71      6.01     1.92       66     6.44     2.23      33      7.52     1.44
challenges and country circumstances*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations.


                                                                                Southeast               Center-West                   Other Areas
                                                                            N     Mean SD              N Mean SD                  N      Mean SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe
the WBG's knowledge work and activities make to                            75      6.60     2.01       66     6.82     2.13      38      8.05     1.14
development results in your country?*
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the
                                                                           77      7.60     1.56       70     7.77     1.84      36      8.47     1.30
World Bank Group's knowledge work and activities?*
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality) *Significantly different between locations.



E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)

                                                                                Southeast               Center-West                   Other Areas
                                                                            N     Mean SD              N Mean SD                  N      Mean SD
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in
                                                                           56      6.39     2.04       42     6.21     2.35      34      7.35     1.70
Brazil*
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank
                                                                           34      7.62     2.00       39     6.69     2.43      31      8.10     1.80
Group makes appropriate use of them*
*Significantly different between locations.




                                                                           89
                                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



Appendix C: Responses to Select Questions by Collaboration with the WBG19
Currently collaborating with the WBG N=86                        Not collaborating with the WBG N=159

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

How familiar are you with the work of these organizations in Brazil?
                                                                                              Collaborating              Not Collaborating
                                                                                              with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                            N     Mean      SD           N     Mean      SD
World Bank Group (WBG)*                                                                    84       6.98      2.54      150      6.09      2.47
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB/BID)                                                  84       6.19      2.61      151      6.05      2.36
Latin American Development Bank (CAF)                                                      84       3.69      2.72      148      3.79      2.39
Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI/BCiE)                                83       2.16      1.94      150      2.45      1.81
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

Overall, please rate your impression of the effectiveness of these organizations in Brazil.
                                                                                     Collaborating                       Not Collaborating
                                                                                    with the WBG                           with the WBG
                                                                                  N      Mean      SD                    N     Mean      SD
World Bank Group (WBG)*                                                                    76       7.41      1.97      123      6.57      1.88
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB/BID)*                                                 69       7.20      1.95      125      6.42      1.89
Latin American Development Bank (CAF)                                                      46       5.22      2.37       85      5.08      2.19
Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI/BCiE)                                34       3.65      2.36       62      3.87      2.33
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.


                                                                                              Collaborating              Not Collaborating
                                                                                              with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                            N     Mean      SD           N     Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe the WBG's staff is well prepared to help Brazil
                                                                                           81       7.91      1.70      120      7.24      1.86
solve its most complicated development challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




19Only 245 respondents provided the information about their levels of collaboration with the World Bank Group (question H3 in the questionnaire).
Thus only these respondents were included in the analysis presented in this appendix.

                                                                        90
                                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Brazil, in which sectoral
areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services)
in Brazil? (Choose no more than THREE)
  Percentage of Respondents                                              Currently collaborating     Not collaborating
  (Responses combined)                                                        with the WBG             with the WBG
  Health                                                                          15.5%                    19.7%
  Crime and violence*                                                              2.4%                     9.2%
  Transport*                                                                      16.7%                     7.9%
  Agricultural development*                                                        4.8%                     0.7%
  Global/regional integration                                                      3.6%                     7.2%
  Job creation/employment                                                          8.3%                    13.8%
  Public sector governance/ reform                                                34.5%                    28.9%
  Social protection                                                                3.6%                     2.0%
  Rural development                                                                9.5%                     5.3%
  Foreign direct investment                                                        0.0%                     0.7%
  Education                                                                       36.9%                    46.7%
  Energy                                                                           3.6%                     2.0%
  Gender equity*                                                                   0.0%                     4.6%
  Financial markets                                                                1.2%                     0.0%
  Urban development                                                               14.3%                    10.5%
  Environmental sustainability                                                    20.2%                    15.1%
  Economic growth                                                                 28.6%                    25.0%
  Private sector development                                                       3.6%                     3.9%
  Water and sanitation                                                            25.0%                    15.8%
  Welfare of the vulnerable population                                             3.6%                     8.6%
  Climate change                                                                  11.9%                     7.2%
  Information and communications technology                                        1.2%                     1.3%
  Trade and exports                                                                2.4%                     2.0%
  Equality of opportunity*                                                         8.3%                    19.1%
  Law and justice                                                                  1.2%                     2.0%
  Regulatory framework                                                             0.0%                     1.3%
  Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                           0.0%                     0.0%
  Natural resource management*                                                    10.7%                     3.9%
  Poverty reduction                                                               15.5%                    21.1%
  Anti-corruption                                                                  7.1%                     6.6%
  Disaster management                                                              0.0%                     1.3%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Brazil?
                                                                               Collaborating           Not Collaborating
                                                                               with the WBG             with the WBG
                                                                             N     Mean      SD       N     Mean       SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                                         79       6.87     2.17      132      5.75   2.06
development in Brazil*
The WBG’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities
                                                                                         77       6.94     2.11      129      5.81   2.12
for Brazil*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                      91
                                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Brazil, in terms of each of the following?
                                                                                 Collaborating            Not Collaborating
                                                                                with the WBG                with the WBG
                                                                             N        Mean      SD       N      Mean      SD
Responsiveness to needs*                                                                69    7.10     2.02     88     6.26    2.15
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*                      68    6.65     1.86     98     5.74    1.88
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                               69    6.71     1.93    103     5.59    1.95
Being inclusive*                                                                        67    6.88     2.03     95     5.89    2.23
Openness (sharing data and other information)                                           74    7.47     2.05    114     6.95    2.07
Collaboration with the Government*                                                      71    7.90     1.94    107     6.93    1.87
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground                            72    6.51     2.35     91     5.96    1.97
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                        77    7.47     2.27     85     6.32    2.30
decisions important to my work*
Collaboration with civil society*                                                       64    6.92     2.10     99     5.56    2.08
Staff accessibility*                                                                    75    7.68     2.04     88     6.58    2.23
Collaboration with other donors and development partners                                48    6.98     1.83     56     6.30    1.83
Collaboration with the private sector                                                   48    6.98     1.96     71     6.55    1.83
Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                        74    8.78     1.37     96     7.33    2.24
Treating clients and stakeholders in Brazil with respect*                               77    8.68     1.62     97     7.99    1.77
Being a long-term partner*                                                              77    8.97     1.50    112     8.37    1.76
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                     92
                                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


C. World Bank Group’s Sectoral Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Brazil?
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                              Collaborating       Not Collaborating
                                                                                              with the WBG          with the WBG
                                                                                            N     Mean      SD    N     Mean      SD
Crime and violence                                                                      55        5.93    3.00   99     6.66    2.62
Financial markets                                                                       59        6.44    2.50   100    6.36    2.38
Transport                                                                               66        7.85    1.85   108    7.62    1.98
Anti-corruption                                                                         62        7.19    2.60   96     7.29    2.44
Law and justice                                                                         53        5.77    2.86   95     6.24    2.55
Urban development                                                                       69        7.90    1.93   113    7.81    2.05
Environmental sustainability                                                            74        8.31    1.81   116    7.80    2.00
Trade and exports                                                                       58        6.81    2.49   93     6.92    2.31
Information and communications technology                                               61        7.48    2.35   101    7.34    2.17
Poverty reduction                                                                       73        8.05    2.15   118    8.04    2.18
Gender equity                                                                           59        7.20    2.57   104    7.29    2.45
Private sector development                                                              60        6.90    2.39   101    6.88    2.36
Foreign direct investment                                                               57        7.09    2.41   95     7.01    2.27
Water and sanitation                                                                    67        8.10    2.05   106    8.12    2.09
Regulatory framework                                                                    59        6.66    2.54   90     6.60    2.38
Economic growth                                                                         66        7.94    2.11   108    7.58    2.37
Energy                                                                                  64        7.61    2.33   102    7.35    2.51
Disaster management                                                                     64        7.22    2.33   90     6.61    2.58
Public sector governance/ reform                                                        68        7.63    2.29   110    7.29    2.77
Job creation/employment                                                                 61        7.52    2.31   103    7.28    2.24
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                  55        6.75    2.41   96     6.72    2.50
Equality of opportunity                                                                 65        7.43    2.32   104    7.35    2.44
Social protection                                                                       59        6.51    2.58   94     6.48    2.43
Rural development                                                                       68        7.50    2.26   103    7.30    2.37
Global/regional integration                                                             63        7.59    2.43   104    7.45    2.32
Welfare of the vulnerable population                                                    65        7.49    2.46   97     6.67    2.78
Natural resource management*                                                            68        7.84    2.12   100    7.00    2.51
Health                                                                                  60        7.68    2.51   99     7.55    2.27
Climate change                                                                          67        7.90    2.30   107    7.43    2.30
Agricultural development                                                                65        7.57    2.35   104    7.01    2.43
Education                                                                               60        8.28    2.13   109    8.09    2.34
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                     93
                                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


C. World Bank Group’s Sectoral Effectiveness and Results (continued)
How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Brazil? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                Collaborating           Not Collaborating
                                                                                with the WBG              with the WBG
                                                                              N     Mean       SD       N     Mean      SD
Gender equity                                                                           32    6.97     2.09     41     6.41    2.37
Information and communications technology                                               31    7.26     2.03     39     6.56    2.14
Transport                                                                               44    7.59     2.07     51     6.98    1.88
Crime and violence                                                                      18    5.28     1.81     32     5.59    2.14
Law and justice                                                                         20    5.60     2.68     31     5.90    2.37
Urban development                                                                       46    7.33     1.84     58     7.09    2.00
Environmental sustainability                                                            60    7.38     2.10     65     7.20    1.81
Regulatory framework                                                                    28    6.39     2.59     37     6.05    2.03
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                  19    6.79     2.44     35     6.51    2.05
Poverty reduction                                                                       51    7.18     2.45     66     7.12    1.97
Anti-corruption*                                                                        34    7.03     2.37     33     5.61    2.24
Private sector development                                                              39    7.28     1.82     46     6.74    1.93
Foreign direct investment                                                               31    7.06     2.03     43     6.93    1.71
Water and sanitation                                                                    51    7.29     1.95     57     7.39    1.47
Trade and exports                                                                       25    6.56     2.12     41     6.95    1.73
Economic growth                                                                         45    7.29     2.24     55     7.36    1.90
Health                                                                                  32    6.84     2.55     52     7.40    1.91
Disaster management                                                                     30    6.63     2.62     41     6.54    2.11
Public sector governance/ reform                                                        42    6.83     2.32     56     6.13    2.42
Job creation/employment                                                                 38    7.03     2.16     52     6.73    2.00
Financial markets                                                                       30    6.83     2.48     43     6.79    2.04
Equality of opportunity                                                                 38    7.08     2.41     52     6.87    1.95
Energy                                                                                  40    7.50     2.25     54     6.93    1.82
Rural development                                                                       44    7.45     2.14     54     6.76    2.05
Global/regional integration                                                             38    7.13     2.48     54     6.76    2.19
Welfare of the vulnerable population*                                                   47    7.15     2.49     46     6.13    2.34
Education                                                                               38    7.05     2.28     65     7.38    2.00
Social protection                                                                       27    6.26     2.67     41     6.22    2.07
Climate change                                                                          49    7.14     2.34     61     7.03    1.98
Agricultural development                                                                43    7.58     2.37     56     7.14    1.97
Natural resource management                                                             47    7.11     2.32     57     7.02    2.06
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                     94
                                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


C. World Bank Group’s Sectoral Effectiveness and Results (continued)

                                                                                            Collaborating              Not Collaborating
                                                                                            with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                          N     Mean      SD           N     Mean      SD
To what extent does the WBG’s work help to achieve development results in
                                                                                         73       6.71     2.06      110      6.30   1.78
Brazil?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Brazil?
                                                                               Collaborating                           Not Collaborating
                                                                               with the WBG                              with the WBG
                                                                             N     Mean      SD                        N     Mean      SD
The WBG's financial instruments meet the needs of Brazil*                                66       6.50     2.07       97      5.63   2.08
The WBG meets Brazil’s needs for knowledge services*                                     74       6.89     1.86      105      6.09   2.13
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

                                                                                            Collaborating              Not Collaborating
                                                                                            with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                          N     Mean      SD           N     Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe that Brazil received value for money from the
                                                                                         51       6.73     2.15       65      6.38   1.93
World Bank Group’s Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

                                                                                            Collaborating              Not Collaborating
                                                                                            with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                          N     Mean      SD           N     Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe the WBG measures and corrects its work in
                                                                                         64       6.50     2.12       81      5.96   2.12
real time in Brazil?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

In Brazil, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                                                Collaborating                          Not Collaborating
                                                                                with the WBG                             with the WBG
                                                                              N     Mean       SD                      N     Mean      SD
Are timely                                                                               73       7.58     1.96       98      7.31   1.87
Lead to practical solutions                                                              72       6.78     2.12       96      6.55   1.89
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                     74       7.28     1.98      100      7.16   1.88
Are translated enough into local language                                                70       6.56     2.13       93      6.89   2.14
Are adaptable to Brazil’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                         70       6.69     1.98       98      6.30   2.09
circumstances
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                      95
                                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

                                                                                                   Collaborating         Not Collaborating
                                                                                                   with the WBG            with the WBG
                                                                                                 N     Mean      SD      N     Mean      SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the WBG's knowledge
                                                                                                74        7.19   2.01   103    6.81    1.96
work and activities make to development results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                                76        7.93   1.72   105    7.74    1.61
knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)



E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                   Collaborating             Not Collaborating
                                                                                  with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                               N       Mean       SD         N     Mean      SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                                   63        6.43   2.53   58     6.19    2.24
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                                72        7.47   2.08   84     7.19    2.13
programs it supports
The WBG’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                                    67        6.91   2.39   64     6.77    2.05
The WBG’s “Safeguard Policy” requirements are reasonable                                        64        6.94   2.27   68     6.78    2.01
The WBG’s conditions on its lending are reasonable                                              59        7.22   2.06   71     6.59    2.23
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Brazil                                          67        6.76   2.34   63     6.35    1.80
Working with the WBG increases Brazil’s institutional capacity                                  73        7.99   1.81   94     7.71    2.36
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                                                51        7.61   2.30   52     7.17    2.05
appropriate use of them
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support                                  65        7.68   2.17   77     7.27    1.80

                                                                                                   Collaborating        Not Collaborating
                                                                                                   with the WBG           with the WBG
                                                                                                 N     Mean      SD     N     Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe that the WBG’s work helps to find solutions
                                                                                                51        7.06   1.77   76     6.91    1.81
that promote private public partnerships in Brazil?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



G. Communication and Information Sharing

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                    Collaborating                        Not Collaborating
                                                                                   with the WBG                            with the WBG
                                                                                N       Mean       SD                    N     Mean      SD
When I need information from the WBG I know how to find it                                      35        7.00   2.53   61     6.46    2.41
The WBG’s social media channels are valuable sources of information
                                                                                                74        7.68   2.36   106    6.54    2.58
about the institution*
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                                                63        8.46   1.75   56     7.52    1.98
inquiries*
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

                                                                            96
                                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil



Appendix D: Responses to Select Questions by Year20
Comparing responses across Country Surveys reflect changes in attitudes over time, but also changes in respondent
samples and changes to the survey instrument itself. To reduce the influence of the latter factor, only those
questions with similar response scales/options were analyzed. Although the FY13 and FY16 samples were fairly
similar, the samples from both years were weighted to have equivalent stakeholder groups.

                                                                                                Original Distribution
 Percentage of Respondents                                                   FY13                      FY16
 Office of the President/ Minister                                           5.1%                      5.7%
 Government institutions (includes office of Parliamentarian,
 employees of ministries, independent government institutions,              50.0%                      34.3%
 PMU/Consultants on WBG supported projects, and judiciary)
 Bilateral/multilateral agencies                                             1.0%                      1.2%
 Private sector (includes financial sector/private banks)                   13.8%                      13.9%
 Academia                                                                    3.1%                      21.2%
 Civil society (includes NGOs/CBOs, private foundations, trade
                                                                             3.6%                      8.6%
 unions, faith-based groups, and youth groups)
 Local government                                                            7.7%                      4.1%
 Total Number of Respondents (Un-Weighted)                                    196                       245
(Note, there were too few respondents from Media in FY16 to be included here and respondents who indicated Other were
excluded.)

The weighted stakeholder breakdown is presented below:
                                                                                               Weighted Distribution
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                 FY13                            FY16
 Office of the President/Minister                                                          7.5%                            7.9%
 Government Institutions                                                                   46.7%                           45.5%
 Bilateral/Multilateral Agency                                                             1.4%                            1.6%
 Private Sector                                                                            18.7%                           18.4%
 Academia                                                                                  13.6%                           13.3%
 Civil Society                                                                             5.3%                            6.6%
 Local Government                                                                          6.8%                            6.6%
 Total Number of Respondents (Weighted)                                                     144                             185

All data presented in this appendix are weighted. As a result, means of the FY16 data and the total number of
respondents indicated will be slightly different from the aggregated responses in Appendix A. Similarly, responses
from FY13 respondents and the total number of respondents indicated may differ from those reported in the FY13
COS report.


A. General Issues facing Brazil

In general, would you say that Brazil is headed in...?*

 Percentage of Respondents                                                                         FY13                        FY16
 The right direction                                                                               66.8%                       32.0%
 The wrong direction                                                                               25.8%                       43.0%
 Not sure                                                                                          7.3%                        25.0%
*Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.




20
     Only those questions that were asked in the FY ’13 and FY ’16 country opinion surveys, with similar response scales/options, are presented.

                                                                          97
                                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
How familiar are you with the work of these organizations in Brazil?
                                                                                                    FY13                     FY16
                                                                                            N       Mean       SD       N    Mean    SD

World Bank Group (WBG)*                                                                    142       5.84    2.701     176   6.45   2.551
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB/BID)                                                  142       5.78    2.433     177   6.12   2.482
Latin American Development Bank (CAF)                                                      136       3.98     3.04     175   3.87   2.60
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.

Overall, please rate your impression of the effectiveness of these organizations in Brazil.
                                                                                                    FY13                     FY16
                                                                                            N       Mean       SD       N    Mean    SD
World Bank Group (WBG)*                                                                    124       6.21    2.141     149   7.17   1.93
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB/BID)*                                                 123       6.31    2.091     144   6.98   1.942
Latin American Development Bank (CAF)                                                       68       4.64     2.36     98    5.31   2.25
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.


                                                                                                    FY13                     FY16
                                                                                            N       Mean       SD       N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared
                                                                                           119       7.16     1.76     155   7.57   1.80
to help Brazil solve its most complicated development challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Brazil?
                                                                                                    FY13                     FY16
                                                                                            N       Mean       SD       N    Mean    SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                                           124       5.83     2.05     161   6.37   2.17
development in Brazil*
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                                           122       5.71     2.04     158   6.41   2.18
development priorities for Brazil*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Brazil in terms of each of the following?
                                                                                                    FY13                     FY16
                                                                                            N       Mean       SD       N    Mean    SD
Responsiveness to needs*                                                                   108       6.15     1.93     125   6.84   2.07
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)                          110       5.83     1.99     129   6.31   1.92
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                                  104       5.74     1.90     130   6.26   2.04
Being inclusive*                                                                           108       6.01     2.00     124   6.57   2.16
Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                             110       6.08     2.17     144   7.27   2.07
Collaboration with the Government*                                                         111       6.97     1.94     136   7.48   1.96
Collaboration with civil society                                                           100       6.11     2.03     122   6.29   2.16
Staff accessibility*                                                                       113       6.42     2.19     130   7.41   2.05
Collaboration with other donors and development partners*                                   67       5.92     1.93     80    6.70   1.86
Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                           108       6.41     2.13     132   8.20   1.89
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.


                                                                        98
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Brazil? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                    FY13                     FY16
                                                                              N     Mean      SD       N     Mean      SD
Gender equity*                                                               78      5.30    2.54     57      6.77    2.26
Information and communications technology*                                   91      6.04    2.00     53      6.89    2.07
Transport*                                                                   88      5.94    2.08     74      7.34    1.95
Crime and violence                                                           78      4.63    2.08     37      5.42    1.90
Law and justice*                                                             75      4.05    2.24     37      5.70    2.52
Urban development*                                                           94      6.11    2.07     82      7.15    1.97
Environmental sustainability*                                                97      6.12    2.11    100      7.35    1.94
Regulatory framework*                                                        78      5.08    2.17     52      6.19    2.37
Communicable/non-communicable diseases*                                      84      5.63    2.49     42      6.60    2.22
Poverty reduction*                                                           98      5.88    2.27     93      7.19    2.25
Anti-corruption*                                                             79      4.46    2.77     51      6.69    2.41
Private sector development*                                                  70      4.88    2.32     65      7.11    1.89
Foreign direct investment*                                                   74      5.63    2.59     58      6.95    1.89
Water and sanitation*                                                        89      6.58    2.13     85      7.32    1.76
Trade and exports*                                                           79      5.78    2.43     51      6.72    1.89
Economic growth*                                                             84      6.33    2.29     79      7.33    2.08
Health*                                                                      102     6.19    2.22     67      7.15    2.22
Disaster management*                                                         75      4.95    2.51     58      6.64    2.36
Public sector governance/ reform*                                            91      5.28    2.73     78      6.56    2.43
Job creation/employment*                                                     84      5.53    2.02     69      6.93    2.05
Financial markets*                                                           79      5.70    2.30     55      6.90    2.33
Equality of opportunity*                                                     82      5.41    2.52     71      6.97    2.19
Energy                                                                       81      6.57    2.05     73      7.20    2.08
Rural development*                                                           81      5.93    2.24     77      7.23    2.15
Global/regional integration*                                                 83      5.62    2.55     67      6.91    2.30
Education*                                                                   101     5.85    2.00     79      7.28    2.12
Social protection                                                            83      5.58    2.49     52      6.40    2.38
Climate change*                                                              75      5.40    2.48     87      7.12    2.18
Agricultural development*                                                    83      6.14    2.17     77      7.42    2.12
Natural resource management*                                                 75      5.55    2.44     82      7.10    2.16
*Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.




                                                              99
                                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

                                                                                                    FY13                       FY16
                                                                                            N       Mean       SD       N      Mean    SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
                                                                                           123      6.02      2.17     143      6.55   1.89
development results in Brazil?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Brazil?
                                                                                                    FY13                       FY16
                                                                                            N       Mean       SD       N      Mean    SD
The World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the needs of Brazil                      121      5.83      2.11     127      6.06   2.17
The World Bank Group meets Brazil’s needs for knowledge services                           117      6.11      2.12     139      6.48   2.05
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)


                                                                                                    FY13                       FY16
                                                                                            N       Mean       SD       N      Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe that Brazil received value for money from the
                                                                                            49      6.22      2.46     90       6.57   1.97
World Bank Group’s Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?

 Percentage of Respondents                                                                       FY13                       FY16
 Weekly*                                                                                         3.8%                       12.6%
 Monthly*                                                                                        9.0%                       17.7%
 A few times a year                                                                              42.9%                      49.4%
 Rarely*                                                                                         29.5%                      19.0%
 Never*                                                                                          14.8%                      1.3%
*Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.

In Brazil, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                                                                    FY13                       FY16
                                                                                            N       Mean       SD       N      Mean    SD
Are timely*                                                                                120      6.71      1.96     134      7.56   1.89
Lead to practical solutions                                                                119      6.65      2.08     130      6.71   2.02
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)*                                      118      6.21      2.32     136      7.26   1.91
Are translated enough into local language                                                  113      6.31      2.14     126      6.75   2.06
Are adaptable to Brazil’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                           113      6.87      2.01     129      6.53   2.06
circumstances
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.




                                                                       100
                                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

                                                                                                         FY13                   FY16
                                                                                                 N       Mean    SD      N      Mean    SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the WBG’s knowledge
                                                                                               129        6.58   2.20   136      7.02   1.99
work and activities make to development results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                               122        7.57   1.76   141      7.83   1.74
knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)



E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                                                                         FY13                   FY16
                                                                                                 N       Mean    SD      N      Mean    SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly*                                                  105       5.18   2.21   103      6.50   2.41
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                                113       6.79   2.17   127      7.41   2.09
programs it supports*
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                       97        6.51   2.02   108      6.84   2.23
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy” requirements are reasonable                           88        6.24   2.10   107      6.84   2.20
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable                                 100       6.32   2.22   106      6.91   2.20
Working with the WBG increases Brazil’s institutional capacity*                                 115       6.96   1.86   134      7.95   2.10
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                                                96        6.47   2.09   85       7.41   2.18
appropriate use of them*
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support*                                 104       6.84   2.13   114      7.51   2.02
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.



G. Communication and Information Sharing

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the WBG will now disclose any information
in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?*
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                            FY13                   FY16
 Yes                                                                                                  22.6%                  36.9%
 No                                                                                                   77.4%                  63.1%
*Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                            FY13                   FY16
 Yes                                                                                                  56.4%                  84.6%
 No                                                                                                   43.6%                  15.4%
*Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.

Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites (e.g., blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                            FY13                   FY16
 Yes                                                                                                  13.6%                  19.6%
 No                                                                                                   86.4%                  80.4%




                                                                           101
                                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.
                                                                                                  FY13                   FY16
                                                                                           N      Mean    SD     N       Mean    SD
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it*                 117       5.69   2.79   69       6.72   2.50
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                                          78       6.38   2.71   96       8.09   1.86
inquiries*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.



H. Background Information

Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group (IBRD, IFC, or MIGA) in your country?*
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                     FY13                   FY16
 Yes                                                                                           19.5%                  41.9%
 No                                                                                            80.5%                  58.1%
*Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Brazil?
(Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses combined)                                                                          FY13                   FY16
 Observer*                                                                                     34.8%                  24.5%
 Use World Bank Group reports/data*                                                            18.1%                  27.5%
 Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities*                               19.5%                  46.0%
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                                 29.0%                  35.4%
 Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                            26.0%                  22.7%
*Significantly different between FY16 and FY13 respondents.




                                                                      102
                                                                                                                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


Appendix E: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the World Bank Group
                                                                                    Which of the following
                                                                                                                  Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Brazil? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                                     describes your level of
                                                                                  interaction with the WBG?          Observer            Use WBG reports/data   Engage in WBG activities       Collaborate        Use WBG website
                                                                                       Not        Currently
                                                                                                                No Mean       Yes Mean   No Mean    Yes Mean     No Mean     Yes Mean      No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean   Yes Mean
Indicator Question                                                                Collaborating Collaborating
Overa l l , pl ea s e ra te your i mpres s i on of the Worl d Ba nk Group’s
                                                                                      6.57          7.41         7.12           6.23       7.03       6.72         6.62         7.38        6.70        7.38      7.06       6.56
effecti venes s i n Bra zi l .
Overa l l the Worl d Ba nk Group currentl y pl a ys a rel eva nt rol e i n
                                                                                      5.75          6.87         6.31           5.87       6.39       5.81         5.81         6.73        5.95        6.72      6.45       5.55
devel opment i n Bra zi l
The Worl d Ba nk Group’s work i s a l i gned wi th wha t I cons i der
                                                                                      5.81          6.94         6.41           5.84       6.45       5.90         6.12         6.49        6.03        6.80      6.48       5.77
the devel opment pri ori ti es for Bra zi l
Res pons i venes s to needs                                                           6.26          7.10         6.78           6.13       6.91       6.02         6.40         6.97        6.24        7.34      6.84       6.18
Fl exi bi l i ty (i n terms of the i ns ti tuti on’s products a nd s ervi ces )       5.74          6.65         6.36           5.19       6.33       5.69         5.82         6.56        5.87        6.63      6.16       6.08
Fl exi bi l i ty (i n terms of cha ngi ng country ci rcums ta nces )                  5.59          6.71         6.29           5.09       6.30       5.57         5.67         6.60        5.71        6.71      6.23       5.67
Bei ng i ncl us i ve                                                                  5.89          6.88         6.47           5.61       6.56       5.77         5.91         6.78        5.98        6.96      6.63       5.55
Opennes s (s ha ri ng da ta a nd other i nforma ti on)                                6.95          7.47         7.23           7.03       7.34       6.89         7.07         7.35        7.07        7.43      7.30       6.92
Col l a bora ti on wi th the Government                                               6.93          7.90         7.53           6.45       7.56       6.81         7.01         7.73        7.00        7.94      7.60       6.70
The s peed i n whi ch i t gets thi ngs a ccompl i s hed on the ground                 5.96          6.51         6.50           4.97       6.32       5.98         5.75         6.77        5.94        6.69      6.22       6.23
Ea s e of a cces s to the peopl e a t the Worl d Ba nk Group who a re
                                                                                      6.32          7.47         6.96           6.35       7.21       6.00         6.35         7.38        6.40        7.57      7.09       6.25
ma ki ng deci s i ons i mporta nt to my work
Col l a bora ti on wi th ci vi l s oci ety                                            5.56          6.92         6.29           5.44       6.33       5.60         5.66         6.66        5.71        7.02      6.42       5.40
Sta ff a cces s i bi l i ty                                                           6.58          7.68         7.19           6.54       7.43       6.24         6.57         7.66        6.71        7.75      7.35       6.44
Col l a bora ti on wi th other donors a nd devel opment pa rtners                     6.30          6.98         6.74           6.19       6.83       6.23         6.25         7.13        6.37        7.13      6.92       5.93
Col l a bora ti on wi th the pri va te s ector                                        6.55          6.98         6.70           6.96       7.11       5.94         6.66         6.91        6.54        7.22      6.79       6.69
Stra i ghtforwa rdnes s a nd hones ty                                                 7.33          8.78         8.19           7.30       8.28       7.27         7.58         8.58        7.55        8.81      8.40       7.04
Bei ng a l ong-term pa rtner                                                          8.37          8.97         8.68           8.46       8.91       7.98         8.38         8.95        8.41        9.06      8.92       7.90
To wha t extent does the Worl d Ba nk Group’s work hel p to
                                                                                      6.30          6.71         6.63           6.00       6.56       6.33         6.30         6.72        6.45        6.57      6.56       6.28
a chi eve devel opment res ul ts i n Bra zi l ?
The WBG's fi na nci a l i ns truments meet the needs of Bra zi l                      5.63          6.50         6.11           5.58       6.18       5.61         5.66         6.45        5.87        6.25      6.08       5.77
The WBG meets Bra zi l ’s needs for knowl edge s ervi ces                             6.09          6.89         6.62           5.67       6.69       5.84         6.12         6.79        6.16        6.90      6.51       6.17
Are a da pta bl e to Bra zi l ’s s peci fi c devel opment cha l l enges a nd
                                                                                      6.30          6.69         6.62           5.85       6.66       6.07         6.04         6.97        6.30        6.76      6.59       6.11
country ci rcums ta nces
Overa l l , how s i gni fi ca nt a contri buti on do you bel i eve the
Worl d Ba nk Group’s knowl edge work a nd a cti vi ti es ma ke to                     6.81          7.19         7.19           6.22       7.07       6.84         6.63         7.44        6.89        7.17      7.08       6.74
devel opment res ul ts i n your country?
Overa l l , how woul d you ra te the techni ca l qua l i ty of the Worl d
                                                                                      7.74          7.93         8.01           7.32       7.88       7.82         7.67         8.09        7.74        8.08      7.87       7.83
Ba nk Group's knowl edge work a nd a cti vi ti es ?
The Worl d Ba nk Group ta kes deci s i ons qui ckl y i n Bra zi l                     6.35          6.76         6.69           5.95       6.73       6.09         6.26         6.89        6.44        6.71      6.53       6.69
Where country s ys tems a re a dequa te, the Worl d Ba nk Group
                                                                                      7.17          7.61         7.43           7.50       7.40       7.58         7.30         7.58        7.61        7.22      7.46       7.39
ma kes a ppropri a te us e of them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No means.



                                                                                                                        103
                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


Appendix F: Brazil FY 2016 Questionnaire




                            World Bank Group Country Survey FY16 – Brazil



The World Bank Group is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Brazil or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following survey
will give the World Bank Group’s team that works in Brazil, greater insight into how the Bank’s work is perceived.
This is one tool the World Bank Group uses to assess the views of its stakeholders, and to develop more effective
strategies that support development in Brazil.

The online questionnaire ensures anonymity and confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid.

Finally, the survey relates to the World Bank Group’s work. The World Bank Group consists of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), the International Development
Association (IDA), the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency (MIGA), and the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID). When
responding to the survey, please consider the area of the World Bank Group with which you are most
familiar.

To complete the survey, please click on the response that most accurately reflects your opinion. If you
prefer not to answer a question, please leave it blank. If you feel that you do not have an adequate
amount of information on a subject, please check “Don’t know”.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING BRAZIL

  A1. In general would you say that Brazil is headed in ... ?
  1   The right direction
  2   The wrong direction
  3   Not sure




                                                       104
                                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

 A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Brazil.
 Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Brazil?
 (Choose no more than THREE)
  1    Global/regional integration                                       17   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
       Welfare of the vulnerable population (indigenous,
  2                                                                      18   Poverty reduction
       quilombolas, and other traditional communities)
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  3    effectiveness, public financial management, public                19   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
       expenditure, fiscal system reform, fiscal adjustment)
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  4                                                                      20   Education
       assistance)
  5    Gender equity                                                     21   Agricultural development
  6    Private sector development                                        22   Trade and exports
  7    Foreign direct investment                                         23   Crime and violence
  8    Urban development                                                 24   Anti corruption
  9    Energy                                                            25   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 10    Job creation/employment                                           26   Regulatory framework
 11    Rural development                                                 27   Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 12    Financial markets                                                 28   Natural resource management
 13    Water and sanitation                                              29   Economic growth
 14    Environmental sustainability                                      30   Disaster management
 15    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity, social inclusion)          31   Information and communications technology
 16    Health

 A3. The World Bank Group has committed itself to twin goals: ending extreme poverty by 2030 and
 boosting shared prosperity. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different
 areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing
 poverty in Brazil? (Choose no more than THREE)
  1    Water and sanitation                                         16   Anti corruption
       Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity, social
  2                                                                 17   Education
       inclusion)
  3    Rural development                                            18   Foreign direct investment
  4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                19   Energy
                                                                         Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  5    Global/regional integration                                  20   effectiveness, public financial management, public
                                                                         expenditure, fiscal system reform, fiscal adjustment)
  6    Gender equity                                                21   Private sector development
  7    Economic growth                                              22   Natural resource management
  8    Urban development                                            23   Environmental sustainability
  9    Regulatory framework                                         24   Health
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  10                                                                25   Agricultural development
       assistance)
  11   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                      26   Disaster management
  12   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)             27   Job creation/employment
  13   Crime and violence                                           28   Financial markets
  14   Communicable/non-communicable diseases                       29   Trade and exports
                                                                         Welfare of the vulnerable population (indigenous,
  15   Information and communications technology                    30
                                                                         quilombolas, and other traditional communities)


                                                                  105
                                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A4. The World Bank Group’s “Shared Prosperity” goal captures two key elements, economic growth
 and equity. It will seek to foster income growth among the bottom 40 percent of a country’s
 population. Improvement in the Shared Prosperity Indicator requires growth and well-being of the
 less well-off. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity” in your country, which of the
 following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Brazil? (Choose no more than
 TWO)
  1    Sustained economic growth
  2    More reliable social safety net
  3    Greater access to micro-finance for the poor
  4    Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability
  5    Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens
  6    Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized businesses)
  7    A growing middle class
  8    Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas
  9    Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas
  10   Better employment opportunities for young people
  11   Better employment opportunities for women
  12   Greater equity of fiscal policy
  13   Education and training that better ensure job opportunity
  14   Better quality public services
  15   Other (please specify):_____________________________________

 A5. Do you think the gap between the rich and the poor is a very big problem, a moderately big
 problem, a small problem or not a problem at all in Brazil?           (Select only ONE response)
  1    A very big problem
  2    A moderately big problem
  3    A small problem
  4    Not a problem at all
  5    Don’t know

 A6. In your view, is global climate change a very serious problem, somewhat serious, not too
 serious, or not a problem?        (Select only ONE response)
  1    A very serious problem
  2    A somewhat serious problem
  3    Not too serious problem
  4    Not a problem
  5    Don’t know




                                                             106
                                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 How familiar are you with the work of these organizations in Brazil?
                                                          Not familiar
                                                                                                                       Extremely familiar
                                                          at all
  B1    World Bank Group (WBG)                              1      2                3      4      5    6       7       8       9        10
  B2    Inter-American Development Bank (IDB/BID)           1      2                3      4      5    6       7       8       9        10
  B3    Latin American Development Bank (CAF)                 1             2       3      4      5    6       7       8       9        10
        Central American Bank for Economic
  B4                                                          1             2       3      4      5    6       7       8       9        10
        Integration (CABEI/BCiE)

  Overall, please rate your impression of the effectiveness of these organizations in Brazil.
                                                          Not effective                                              Extremely      Don't
                                                          at all                                                      effective     know
  B5    World Bank Group (WBG)                              1      2                3      4      5    6   7       8   9    10
  B6    Inter-American Development Bank (IDB/BID)             1             2       3      4      5    6   7       8       9   10
  B7    Latin American Development Bank (CAF)                 1             2       3      4      5    6   7       8       9   10
        Central American Bank for Economic
  B8                                                          1             2       3      4      5    6   7       8       9   10
        Integration (CABEI/BCiE)

 B9. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
 knowledge) to help Brazil solve its most complicated development challenges?
          1             2      3      4     5      6      7             8          9              10                           
                                                                                         To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                                       Don't know
                                                                                                      degree

 B10. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development
 results in Brazil, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its
 resources (financial and knowledge services) in Brazil? (Choose no more than THREE)
  1    Health                                                      17           Economic growth
  2    Crime and violence                                          18           Private sector development
  3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)            19           Water and sanitation
                                                                                Welfare of the vulnerable population (indigenous,
  4    Agricultural development                                    20
                                                                                quilombolas, and other traditional communities)
  5    Global/regional integration                                 21           Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
  6    Job creation/employment                                     22           Information and communications technology
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
       effectiveness, public financial management, public
  7                                                                23           Trade and exports
       expenditure, fiscal system reform, fiscal
       adjustment)
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  8                                                                24           Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity, social inclusion)
       assistance)
  9    Rural development                                           25           Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 10    Foreign direct investment                                   26           Regulatory framework
 11    Education                                                   27           Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 12    Energy                                                      28           Natural resource management
 13    Gender equity                                               29           Poverty reduction
 14    Financial markets                                           30           Anti corruption
 15    Urban development                                           31           Disaster management
 16    Environmental sustainability


                                                                  107
                                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 B11. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest
 VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Brazil?
                                                                         Greatest Value            Second Greatest Value
                                                                     (Choose only ONE)            (Choose only ONE)
  1   Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                                      
  2   Data and statistics                                                                                   
  3   Convening/Facilitating                                                                                
  4   Financial resources                                                                                   
  5   Capacity development                                                                                  
  6   Technical assistance                                                                                  
      Help to bring discipline/effective supervision to
  7                                                                                                         
      implementation of investment projects
  8   Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                            
  9   Donor coordination                                                                                    
      Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South
 10                                                                                                         
      knowledge sharing)
 11   Other (please specify): ________________________                                                      

 B12. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its
 work in Brazil? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1   Too influenced by developed countries
  2   Not exploring alternative policy options
  3   Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the Government
  4   Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving
  5   Not enough public disclosure of its work
  6   Arrogant in its approach
  7   Not client focused
  8   The credibility of its knowledge/data
  9   World Bank Group’s processes too complex
 10   Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 11   Staff too inaccessible
 12   Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 13   World Bank Group’s processes too slow (e.g., too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures)
 14   Not aligned with other donors’ work
 15   Not aligned with country priorities
 16   Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Brazil
 17   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 18   Don’t know




                                                               108
                                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 B13. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty
 in Brazil? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1     Trust Fund management
  2     Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
  3     Capacity development
  4     Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)
  5     Investment lending (financing specific projects)
  6     Policy based lending / budget support to the Government
  7     Multi-sectoral approaches
  8     Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
  9     Don’t know

 B14. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support help the poorest in
 Brazil? (Select only ONE response)
 1     To a fully sufficient degree
 2     To a somewhat sufficient degree
 3     To a somewhat insufficient degree
 4     To a very insufficient degree
 5     Don’t know

 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in
 Brazil?
                                                                    Strongly                                     Strongly   Don't
                                                                    disagree                                        agree   know
        Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
 B15                                                                1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9       10      
        relevant role in development in Brazil
        The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
 B16                                                                1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9       10      
        consider the development priorities for Brazil




                                                              109
                                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Brazil, in terms of each of
 the following?
                                                                     To no                                      To a very
                                                                                                                             Don't
                                                                     degree at                                 significant
                                                                                                                             know
                                                                     all                                          degree
 B17     Responsiveness to needs                                     1      2     3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10       
         Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
 B18                                                                 1      2     3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10       
         services)
         Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B19                                                                 1      2     3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10       
         circumstances)
 B20     Being inclusive                                             1      2     3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10       
 B21     Openness (sharing data and other information)               1      2     3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10       
 B22     Collaboration with the Government                           1      2     3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10       
         The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
 B23                                                                 1      2     3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10       
         the ground
         Ease of access to the people at the World Bank
 B24     Group who are making decisions important to my              1      2     3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10       
         work
 B25     Collaboration with civil society                            1      2     3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10       
 B26     Staff accessibility                                         1      2     3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10       
         Collaboration with other donors and development
 B27                                                                 1      2     3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10       
         partners
 B28     Collaboration with the private sector                       1      2     3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10       
 B29     Straightforwardness and honesty                             1      2     3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10       
         Treating clients and stakeholders in Brazil with
 B30                                                                 1      2     3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10       
         respect
 B31     Being a long-term partner                                   1      2     3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10       


 B32. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the
 following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    The Government works inefficiently
  2    Poor donor coordination
  3    The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
  4    Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
  5    There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
  6    The World Bank Group works too slowly
  7    The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
  8    Political pressures and obstacles
  9    Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 10    Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                               110
                                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C1. In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
 areas of development in Brazil?
                                                                    Not important                                Very    Don't
                                                                    at all                                   important   know
  1    Crime and violence                                           1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  2    Financial markets                                            1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)             1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  4    Anti corruption                                              1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  5    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                      1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  6    Urban development                                            1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  7    Environmental sustainability                                 1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  8    Trade and exports                                            1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  9    Information and communications technology                    1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  10   Poverty reduction                                            1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  11   Gender equity                                                1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  12   Private sector development                                   1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  13   Foreign direct investment                                    1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  14   Water and sanitation                                         1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  15   Regulatory framework                                         1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  16   Economic growth                                              1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  17   Energy                                                       1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  18   Disaster management                                          1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  19   effectiveness, public financial management, public           1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
       expenditure, fiscal system reform, fiscal adjustment)
  20   Job creation/employment                                      1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  21   Communicable/non-communicable diseases                       1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  22   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity, social inclusion)     1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  23                                                                1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
       assistance)
  24   Rural development                                            1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  25   Global/regional integration                                  1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
       Welfare of the vulnerable population (indigenous,
  26                                                                1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
       quilombolas, and other traditional communities)
  27   Natural resource management                                  1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  28   Health                                                       1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  29   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  30   Agricultural development                                     1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     
  31   Education                                                    1      2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9     10     




                                                              111
                                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C2. How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following
 areas of development in Brazil? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in working in any of the sectors
 listed below, please respond “Don’t know”)
                                                                    Not effective                                    Very    Don't
                                                                    at all                                       effective   know
  1    Gender equity                                                 1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  2    Information and communications technology                     1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)              1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  4    Crime and violence                                            1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  5    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                       1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  6    Urban development                                             1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  7    Environmental sustainability                                  1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  8    Regulatory framework                                          1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  9    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                        1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  10   Poverty reduction                                             1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  11   Anti corruption                                               1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  12   Private sector development                                    1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  13   Foreign direct investment                                     1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  14   Water and sanitation                                          1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  15   Trade and exports                                             1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  16   Economic growth                                               1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  17   Health                                                        1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  18   Disaster management                                           1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  19   effectiveness, public financial management, public            1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       expenditure, fiscal system reform, fiscal adjustment)
  20   Job creation/employment                                       1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  21   Financial markets                                             1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  22   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity, social inclusion)      1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  23   Energy                                                        1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  24   Rural development                                             1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  25   Global/regional integration                                   1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       Welfare of the vulnerable population (indigenous,
  26                                                                 1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       quilombolas, and other traditional communities)
  27   Education                                                     1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  28                                                                 1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       assistance)
  29   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                 1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  30   Agricultural development                                      1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  31   Natural resource management                                   1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      




                                                              112
                                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS

 C3. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in
 Brazil?
        1            2      3      4       5       6        7       8        9                   10                        
 To no degree at                                                                        To a very significant
                                                                                                                    Don't know
 all                                                                                                 degree


 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Brazil?
                                                        Strongly                                                Strongly       Don't
                                                        disagree                                                   agree       know
        The World Bank Group's financial
        instruments (i.e., investment lending, equity
        investment, trade finance, guarantees,
  C4                                                    1       2       3   4       5     6    7      8     9       10          
        Development Policy Loan, Trust Funds,
        Program 4 Result, etc.) meet the needs of
        Brazil
        The World Bank Group meets Brazil’s needs
  C5    for knowledge services (e.g., research,         1       2       3   4       5     6    7      8     9       10          
        analysis, data, technical assistance)


 C6. To what extent do you believe that Brazil received value for money from the World Bank Group’s
 Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)?
        1            2      3      4       5       6        7       8           9               10                         
 To no degree at                                                                        To a very significant
                                                                                                                    Don't know
 all                                                                                                 degree


 C7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its work in real time
 in Brazil?
        1            2      3      4       5       6        7       8           9               10                         
 To no degree at                                                                        To a very significant
                                                                                                                    Don't know
 all                                                                                                 degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                            113
                                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S KNOWLEDGE WORK AND ACTIVITIES (i.e., ANALYSIS,
STUDIES, RESEARCH, DATA, REPORTS, CONFERENCES)
 D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you
 do?
 1     Weekly
 2     Monthly
 3     A few times a year
 4     Rarely
 5     Never

 In Brazil, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                         To no degree at                                            To a very   Don't
                                                         all                                               significant degree   know
  D2     Are timely                                       1         2       3      4    5     6        7     8    9      10        
  D3     Lead to practical solutions                      1         2       3      4    5     6        7     8    9      10        
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
  D4                                                      1         2       3      4    5     6        7     8    9      10        
         understand)
  D5     Are translated enough into local language        1         2       3      4    5     6        7     8    9      10        
         Are adaptable to Brazil’s specific
  D6     development challenges and country               1         2       3      4    5     6        7     8    9      10        
         circumstances

 D7.Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group's knowledge work and
 activities make to development results in your country?
         1             2      3       4      5       6         7        8         9               10                          
 Not significant at
                                                                                            Very significant          Don't know
 all

 D8. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge work and
 activities?
         1             2      3       4      5       6         7        8         9              10                           
 Very low                                                                                Very high technical
                                                                                                                      Don't know
 technical quality                                                                                   quality




                                                              114
                                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                            Strongly                                                   Strongly   Don't
                                                            disagree                                                      agree   know
         The World Bank Group disburses funds
  E1                                                        1         2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
         promptly
         The World Bank Group effectively monitors
  E2     and evaluates the projects and programs it         1         2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
         supports
         The World Bank Group’s approvals and
  E3                                                        1         2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
         reviews are done in a timely fashion
         The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy”
  E4                                                        1         2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
         requirements are reasonable
         The World Bank Group’s conditions on its
  E5                                                        1         2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
         lending are reasonable
         The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly
  E6                                                        1         2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
         in Brazil
         Working with the World Bank Group
  E7                                                        1         2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
         increases Brazil's institutional capacity
         Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
         financial management, etc.) are adequate,
  E8                                                        1         2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
         the World Bank Group makes appropriate use
         of them
         The World Bank Group provides effective
  E9     implementation support (i.e., supervision of       1         2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
         projects)

 E10. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find solutions that
 promote private public partnerships in Brazil?
           1              2      3       4      5       6        7        8        9               10                        
                                                                                           To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                                    Don't know
                                                                                                        degree

 E11. Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in Brazil?
 (Select only one response)
       The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses on the most important development challenges in
 1
       Brazil
 2     The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in Brazil, and it is involved in too many areas of development.
 3     Don’t know




                                                                115
                                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


SECTION F: RECENT TRENDS AND THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN BRAZIL
 F1. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in
 Brazil? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Offer more innovative financial products
  2    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
  3    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Brazil’s economy
  4    Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, other terms)
  5    Reach out more to groups outside of Government
  6    Increase the level of capacity development in the country/ Invest in capacity building
  7    Improve the quality of its experts as related to Brazil’s specific challenges
  8    Offer more innovative knowledge services
  9    Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., national, state, local)
  10   Work more on the federal level
  11   Work more on the state level
  12   Work faster
  13   Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing
  14   Increase availability of Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)
  15   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________

 F2. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Brazil, and
 taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the
 World Bank Group should offer more of in Brazil? (Select only ONE response)
  1    Financial services
  2    Knowledge products
  3    Convening services
  4    None of the above
  5    The combination is appropriate for Brazil
  6    Don’t know




                                                           116
                                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING
 G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in
 Brazil? (Choose no more than TWO)
       Social media (e.g., Facebook, blogs, Twitter,
  1                                                         6     International television
       YouTube, Flickr)
  2    International newspapers                             7     Local newspapers
  3    Local radio                                          8     Internet
  4    International radio                                  9     Periodicals
  5    Local television                                    10     Other (please specify): ____________________

 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
       Direct contact with World Bank Group (i.e., face
  1                                                         5     World Bank Group’s website
       to face meetings/discussions)
                                                                  Social media (e.g., Facebook, blogs, Twitter,
  2    Mobile phones                                        6
                                                                  YouTube, Flickr)
       World Bank Group’s
  3                                                         7     e-Newsletters
       seminars/workshops/conferences
       World Bank Group’s publications and other
  4                                                         8     Other (please specify): ____________________
       written materials

       Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policies under which the
 G3    World Bank Group discloses any information in its possession that is not on a list of              Yes     No
       exceptions? (If YES please go to Question G4; if NO please go to G5)

 G4. If yes, from which of the following sources did you learn about the World Bank Group's Access
 to Information Policies? (Select only ONE response)
  1    World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences
  2    World Bank Group’s website
  3    World Bank Group’s e-Newsletters
  4    News/Media
  5    Colleagues/Friends/Peer organizations
  6    Other (please specify): _____________________

       Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past
 G5                                                                                                       Yes     No
       year? (If YES please go to Question G6; if NO please go to G7)
 G6    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                          Yes     No
 G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group website?                                             Yes     No
       Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites (e.g., Facebook, blogs,
 G8                                                                                                       Yes     No
       Twitter, YouTube, and Flickr)?

 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.
                                                                   Strongly                          Strongly     Don't
                                                                   disagree                             agree     know
        When I need information from the World Bank Group I
  G9    know how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach     1    2      3   4   5    6 7 8    9    10      
        them, etc.)
        The World Bank Group’s social media channels (e.g.,
 G10    blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr) are valuable     1    2      3   4   5    6 7 8    9    10      
        sources of information about the institution
        The World Bank Group is responsive to my information
 G11                                                                1    2      3   4   5    6 7 8    9    10      
        requests and inquiries


                                                           117
                                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?               (Select only ONE response)
 1    Office of the President, Prime Minister           11        NGO/Community Based Organization
 2    Office of Minister                                12        Media (press, radio, TV, web, etc.)
                                                                  Independent Government Institution (i.e.,
 3    Office of Parliamentarian                         13        Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight
                                                                  institution)
      Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department
 4                                                      14        Trade Union
      or Implementation Agency
      Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing
      implementation of project/
 5                                                      15        Faith-Based Group
      Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank
      Group supported project/program
 6    Local Government Office or Staff                  16        Youth Group
 7    Bilateral/Multilateral Agency                     17        Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 8    Private Sector Organization                       18        Judiciary Branch
 9    Private Foundation
                                                        19        Other (please specify): ________________
 10   Financial Sector/Private Bank


 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Select only ONE response)
 1    Water                                            12    Gender
 2    Social protection and labor                      13    Transport and ICT
 3    Fragility, conflict and violence                 14    Urban, rural, and social development
 4    Environment and natural resources                15    Governance
 5    Public-private partnerships                      16    Poverty
 6    Education                                        17    Jobs
 7    Health, nutrition, and population                18    Agriculture
 8    Energy and extractives                           19    Climate Change
 9    Macroeconomics and fiscal management             20    Generalist (specialized in multiple sectors)
 10   Trade and competitiveness                        21    Other (please specify): ____________________
 11   Finance and markets


 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group (IBRD/IDA, IFC, or
 MIGA) in your country? (Select only ONE response)
 1    Yes
 2    No




                                                            118
                                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2016: Brazil


SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION
 H4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily engage with in
 Brazil? (Select only ONE response)
 1   The World Bank (IBRD)
 2   The International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
 3   The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
 4   Other (please specify):___________________________

 H5. Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?
 (If YES please go to Question H6; If NO please go to H7)
 1   Yes
 2   No

 H6. If yes, what was your view of how the two institutions work together in Brazil?
 (Select only ONE response)
 1   The two institutions work well together
 2   The way the two institutions work together needs improvement
 3   The two institutions do not work well together
 4   Don’t know

 H7. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Brazil?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 1   Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2   Use World Bank Group reports/data
 3   Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities
 4   Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5   Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.

 H8. What’s your gender?
 1   Female
 2   Male

 H9. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1   North
 2   South
 3   Southeast
 4   Northeast
 5   Center-West


                              Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                            119
