 TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016




TDRP Quarterly Report
   FY15-16: APRIL–JUNE 2016




                                         1
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


Table of Contents

Acronyms ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3
Summary of Activities..................................................................................................................................................... 4
Technical Assistance and Financing of Reinsertion/Reintegration Operations ........................................... 4
  African Union DDR Capacity Program ............................................................................................................... 4
  Central African Republic ......................................................................................................................................... 5
  Democratic Republic of Congo .............................................................................................................................. 6
  Republic of Mali ......................................................................................................................................................... 7
  Republic of South Sudan .......................................................................................................................................... 9
  Republic of Yemen .................................................................................................................................................. 10
Knowledge Management ............................................................................................................................................ 10
  Federal Republic of Nigeria: Recovery and Peace-building Assessment ................................................ 10
Program Management and Status of Trust Fund ................................................................................................ 11
  Progress of No-Cost Extension ............................................................................................................................. 11
  World Bank Staff and Consultants ..................................................................................................................... 13
  Status of Trust Fund and Disbursement Rate .................................................................................................. 13




                                                                                          2
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


ACRONYMS

 AU      African Union
 AUDDRCP African Union DDR Capacity Program
 APSA    African Peace and Security Architecture
 BICC    Bonn International Center for Conversion
 CAR     Central African Republic
 CMU     Country Management Unit
 DDR     Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
 DDRR    Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration and Reinsertion
 DfID    Department for International Development
 DFM     Directorate of Finance and Material
 DRC     Democratic Republic of Congo
 ESMF    Environmental and Social Management Framework
 FAO     Food and Agriculture Organization
 ICRS    Information, Counselling and Referral System
 INPP    Institut National de Préparation Professionnelle
 MDTF    Multi Donor Trust Fund
 MINUSCA United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
         African Republic
 MINUSMA United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
 MIS     Management Information Systems
 MONUSCO United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
         Congo
 NDDRC   National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission
 PAD     Project Appraisal Document
 PIU     Project Implementation Unit
 PSO     Peace Support Operation
 RBPA    Recovery and Peace Building Assessment
 REC     Regional Economic Communities
 RM      Regional Mechanism
 ToR     Terms of Reference
 UEPNDDR Unité d’Exécution du Programme National de Désarmement, Démobilisation et
         Réintégration
 UNDPA   United Nations Department of Political Affairs
 UNDPKO  United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations




                                             3
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


I.     Summary of Activities

During the third quarter, TDRP activities covered technical assistance, operational and financial
support in Central African Republic [CAR], Democratic Republic of Congo [DRC], Republic of Mali
and Republic of South Sudan, in addition to the ongoing assistance provided to the African Union
[AU] Peace and Security Department in coordination with the United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

Activities delivered through the African Union DDR Capacity Program [AUDDRCP] centered on
coordination for Phase II of the program and ongoing knowledge management activities. In CAR,
preparations are currently underway for Bank involvement through a community-based socio-
economic reinsertion program. Reinsertion processes are being operationalized in DRC and for their
respective projects. Meanwhile, the task team is also currently preparing for technical assistance on
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration [DDR] to South Sudan and lending expertise to
similar processes in Yemen.

In addition, upon invitation from the United Nations, the TDRP Manager attended the Eighth Annual
United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations /Special Political Missions Senior DDR
Officers’ Meeting during June 13-15th 2016 in New York, NY with the following objectives:
i.      Convene with DDR Chiefs of Mali, CAR and DRC as well as the Desk Officer for Yemen on
        steps going forward.
ii.     Lead session on June 14, 2016 on “Working with Partners” to clarify working relations with
        DDR partners and how to identify and broaden partnerships.

II.    Technical Assistance and Financing of Reinsertion/Reintegration Operations:

African Union DDR Capacity Program
Based on internal review of the first phase of AUDDRCP, the objective for the next phase has been
determined to enable increased leadership role of institutions belonging to the African Peace and
Security Architecture [APSA] in addressing DDR issues in the continent. This direction would
encapsulate a shift towards providing operational support to member states based on the capacity
built during Phase I. Moving forward, this support will continue to promote engagement on planned
activities and collaborate with other stakeholders, emphasizing particularly on the role of AU field
missions.

The technical planning meeting on Phase I of AUDDRCP held between the AU, UNDPKO and the
TDRP team of the World Bank on February 8-12, 2016 in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia led to the
development of the three-year DDR plan for Phase II of the program. Following this, the task team
outlined the new project objective, outcomes to measure implementation as well as output indicators
guiding the development of activities. The project document was due for a presentation to solicit
further inputs at the Experts’ Workshop on New Priorities and Emerging Issues on DDR, initially
                                                 4
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


scheduled for May 2016 in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. However, given funding constraints, the workshop
has been postponed to a later date and the draft document will be finalized by the team instead, with
a task team mission being tentatively planned for September.

The AU DDR Progress and Practice Brief summarizing best practices and lessons from the past three
years of implementing AUDDRCP has been finalized and published. Currently, the task team is
working to disseminate copies to various embassies based in Addis Ababa, Peace Support Operations
and Regional Economic Communities.

The theme of the Sixth Issue of the AU DDR Newsletter is “Linkages with DDR and Other Peace and
Security Initiatives.” It highlights initiatives intertwined with the implementation of DDR activities in
the region. This includes Peace Support Operations [PSO] such as the African Union-led Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the LRA, the Multinational Joint Task Force Against Boko
Haram and control of circulation of small arms and light weapons during national transitions to
post-conflict. The newsletter is currently being finalized and will be made available during the first
week of July 2016.

Additionally, the Operational Guidance Notes on “Foreign Fighters” and “Countering Violent
Extremism” have been drafted by the World Bank task team. They will now be subjected to a peer
review process by a panel drawn from the Centers of Excellence and APSA institutions prior to
finalization. Beyond its current work plan, the task team continues to support AU Peace and Security
Department in analyzing and responding to the current situation in South Sudan and Central African
Republic on their respective peace agreements, implications on peace-building and opportunities
and challenges in light of upcoming DDR programming.

Central African Republic
During this quarter, TDRP team undertook a mission in CAR during June 11–29, 2016 to provide
technical support to the Government for the implementation of an inclusive Disarmament,
Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation [DDRR] program.

The mission met with the Government, United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in CAR [MINUSCA], armed group signatories, as well as other bilateral donor partners. The
objective of this mission was to discuss the challenges hindering the implementation of the planned
DDRR program and propose relevant solutions to move the project preparation forward. Major
identified priorities for the Government include developing a clear communication strategy on DDRR
action plan, as well as enabling a dialogue with armed groups and host communities and sensitizing
them to DDRR. TDRP team also emphasized the need for the Government to formulate synergies
between DDRR and Security, Sector Reforms [SSR] to leverage the success of both activities, and to
define a roadmap on integration and repatriation components.



                                                   5
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


The reintegration component will include vocational training and assistance to host-communities
and local authorities through livelihoods support, rehabilitation of economic infrastructure, with
particular emphasis on vulnerable groups and those displaced. The project is estimated to cost 30M
USD, of which the Bank would provide 15M USD to support socio-economic reintegration for
approximately 7,000 beneficiaries, including communities. The remainder will be channelled
through further donor coordination.

In order to define the legal and institutional framework on DDRR, the TDRP team and MINUSCA
provided some technical assistance to the Government to finalize two decrees for approval prior to
initiating DDRR operations. The first draft decree defines the organization, status and responsibilities
of the relevant committees making key strategic and political decisions on DDRR, Security Sector
Reform [SSR] and National Reconciliation, as well as their linkages to each other. The second describes
and organizes the structure, role and responsibilities of the DDRR Project Technical Implementation
Unit. The team is currently providing recommendations on the content of the draft legislative decrees,
especially on reintegration and fiduciary obligations.

A comprehensive DDRR plan, as requested by the government, approved by all the parties is expected
to be submitted by the end of July. To that end, the TDRP team together with MINUSCA and CAR
technical officials were tasked by the Country Management Unit (CMU) and the Minister for DDR,
SSR and Reconciliation to develop Terms of Reference [ToR] for a small working group comprised of
experts from the World Bank, MINUSCA and the Government to finalize the DDRR strategic
document and initiate inclusive dialogue with armed groups over a span of two weeks. The ToR was
finalized by the team on June 30, 2016, and presented to the President by the World Bank Country
Manager on July 1, 2016. Upcoming actions include organizing a DDRR workshop during September
2016 in Bangui, and drafting relevant project documents. That being said, there is still further
groundwork to be done to have the representatives of armed groups fully engaged in the preparation
of the DDR and SSR programs.

Democratic Republic of Congo
This quarter, TDRP team undertook two implementation support missions to Kinshasa in April 18-
22 and June 28-July 4 respectively to support the DRC Reinsertion and Reintegration Project.

Whilst the project is progressing according to the initial plan devised during the preparation phase,
continued disturbances in Eastern DRC hindered its implementation during the quarter. As of June
28, the Project had disbursed 39% of the total grant amount of 21.5M USD— 56% of the 6.5M USD
Swedish contribution through TDRP and 31% of the 15M USD IDA allocation. Given delays in
disbursement, the grant deadline of the TDRP funding was extended from June 30, 2016 to August
31, 2016.

The first mission conducted a review of the procurement, financial management and safeguards
components of the project. The World Bank specialist assigned to the project rated its procurement
                                                   6
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


performance as moderately satisfactory and validated the updated procurement plan. Financial
management was marked moderately satisfactory whilst risk remains substantial owing to
uncertainties and inherent variables associated with the project. With regards to safeguards, the
project finalized the process of recruiting a consultant to produce the Environmental and Social
Management Framework [ESMF], scheduled to begin in early July alongside the baseline study.

As of June 2016, a total of 4,800 demobilized ex-combatants had completed their training in the
Reinsertion Preparation Centers and are ready to move back to their communities and begin their
reintegration process. However, security concerns and disturbances in Eastern DRC prevented the
government from returning those demobilized back to their communities of origin. The extended
period of time spent by ex-combatants during demobilization and government delays in enabling
the transfer led to resentment and escalated violence in the region. As of June 20, 2016, the
government determined that the situation was sufficiently stable to transfer the demobilized ex-
combatants to their communities of their choice.

Consequently, Unité d’Exécution du Programme National de Désarmement, Démobilisation et
Réintégration [UEPNDDR] held technical discussions with the government, United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo [MONUSCO], the Bank
and other donor partners to coordinate transport, communication and reintegration activities for the
assigned group of demobilized ex-combatants. It is currently finalizing the procurement process for
implementing partners in their assigned communities and begin implementation by late-July to
early-August. In addition, with regards to family support for the dependents of ex-combatants,
UEPNDDR is currently preparing strategies and ToRs for firms in charge of relevant activities.

Given the political sensitivities, a coordination meeting was held between donors, UEPNDDR and
MONUSCO, DDRRR to share information and align communications on DDRIII. The Deputy Special
Representative to the UN Secretary General and the World Bank Country Director joined these
discussions to lend their support to discussions with the government as well.

Republic of Mali
During April 1–16, a TDRP team visited Bamako to conduct an Appraisal Mission and a Decision
Meeting, for the Mali Reinsertion of Ex-Combatants Project, that was chaired by the Country Director
Paul Noumba on April 8. The team was authorized to move on to project appraisal subject to:
i.     Clarifying the implementation arrangements to allow proper assessment of the capacity of
       the Project Implementation Unit [PIU], and
ii.    Seeking clarity on engagement from the Government in mobilizing funds by inviting donors
       to a round table.

The first requirement on implementation arrangements was fully achieved. Following the DM
recommendations, the Bank task team has worked with the Government on two fronts:
i.     Verifying the status of institutional arrangements, and
                                                 7
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


ii.    Assessing the fiduciary capacity of the ministry that will be hosting the PIU for the project.

Given that the National Commission for DDR will report to the Prime Minister, as per its decree
signed in December 2015, it was agreed with the Government that the PIU will be housed at the
Office of the Prime Minister. The assessment of the Financial Management and Procurement
capacities of the assigned Directorate of Finance and Material [DFM] was completed by the World
Bank in June 2016. The WB FM specialist rated the overall financial management risks as substantial,
while the overall unmitigated risk for procurement has been rated high due to the low capacity of
the DFM to manage the procurement activities of the project. It is worth mentioning that an action
plan to address the identified risks for procurement has been designed by the WB Procurement
specialist in order to reach a moderate residual risk level.

The second condition was not fully satisfied by end of June 2016, although the situation continues to
improve. The proposed IDA allocation of 15M USD cannot cover the total estimated cost of US$ 50
million to support reinsertion activities for 10,000 beneficiaries and their communities. Therefore,
the government intends to call for donor support through a fundraising round table by end of July
2016 to address the financial gap, as advised by the Country Director. Some multilateral and bilateral
development partners have already expressed interest in supporting DDR. To that end, with technical
support from TDRP and MINUSMA, the interim DDR Working Group has finalized the DDR Program
Document and its accompanied presentation, which were made available to the Government. The
World Bank task team also was asked by the Minister of Defence to assist his officials in preparing a
conceptual document for organizing the donors round table. The Bank stands ready to administer a
new multi-donor trust fund [MDTF] or utilize an existing MDTF program such as the TDRP to
channel donor contributions.

An appraisal completion note, accompanied with the revised Project Appraisal Document [PAD], will
be shared as soon as the second requirement is met, should the donors round table occur by end of
July 2016 as advised.

To inform the project design, TDRP commissioned two different local NGOs for the following
deliverables:
i.      A representative sample survey was conducted by Nouveaux Horizons, through close
        collaboration with traditional and local communities, to obtain preliminary profile
        information on combatants and armed group leaders in Timbuktu, Gao, Kidal, Taoudeni,
        Menaka and Mopti. The final report, completed in early-April 2016, informs on the
        prevailing trends pertaining to the profile of combatants— their perception of reinsertion
        activities, concerns and interests, as well as their social and educational background.
ii.     A market analysis report on the cost of reinsertion activities in the 5 northern regions of Mali
        —Timbuktu, Gao, Kidal, Taoudeni and Menaka— was completed by the Association
        Malienne pour la Survie au Sahel in May 2016. The data from this report underlines average
        start-up kits and training costs for identified income-generating activities including
                                                   8
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


       agriculture, livestock rearing, merchandise trade, handicraft, masonry, carpentry, and
       transportation.

In addition, the World Bank has been providing technical support to MINUSMA in Management
Information Systems [MIS] since April to develop an advanced and user-friendly data system called
the Information, Counselling and Referral System [ICRS]. This system will capture biometrics as well
as the individual ex-combatants’ biographical data and aspirations for reinsertion. The TDRP team
has been collaborating with MINUSMA, DDR Working Group, as well as technical representatives of
Government and armed groups, to identify information needed to be captured for the project. The
system is expected to be ready by August 2016.

Republic of South Sudan
During 2011-14, TDRP coordinated with the South Sudan National Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Commission [NDDRC] to manage the reintegration component of its pilot DDR
program. The program served 290 former SPLA soldiers across the four states in the country’s
Northwest region. Following the most recent conflict, the Bank supported NDDRC in drafting a new
Harmonized Reintegration Strategic Plan providing specific recommendations targeting various sub-
categories of ex-combatants and conflict-affected groups. Given continued demand for Bank
engagement in DDR in South Sudan, TDRP has been preparing a technical assistance project funded
through TDRP and bank allocation to provide demand-driven technical and advisory support to the
South Sudan NDDRC and concerned parties on DDR.

Aforementioned objective can be realized through the following activities:
i.    Technical engagement with the NDDRC and other partners to develop an appropriate
      approach towards DDR in South Sudan by also reflecting on ‘non-traditional’ DDR policy
      options
ii.   Engagement with development partners such as the United Nations Department of Political
      Affairs [UNDPA], UNDPKO, United States State Department, UK Department for International
      Development [DfID], Bonn International Center for Conversion [BICC] and others to align
      communication and support ongoing efforts towards a common DDR strategic plan. This
      includes Bank participation in outreach, discussions and activities guiding the ‘security
      transition’ in South Sudan to ensure readiness for DDR operation.
iii.  Upgrading the ICRS to facilitate registration and verification of ex-combatants and provide
      vital briefing, orientation, casework, counselling and referral for ex-combatants throughout
      the DDR process. The previous ICRS will be modified to cover a larger caseload across
      approximately 36 cantonment sites, after a national DDR strategic plan is agreed upon.

The TDRP task team also prepared a note on “Understanding DDR in South Sudan” that aims to
provide an understanding of DDR efforts in South Sudan from the Bank’s perspective since 2013.
This internal note provides a general overview of DDR programmes and their importance in post-
conflict transitions. It provides details on previous DDR efforts during 2008-2011 and 2011-2014,
                                                 9
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


with emphasis on lessons learned, recommendations and stakeholder engagement for a common
DDR approach. To that end, assuming national ownership, integrating DDR-SSR into broader
stabilization agenda, using innovative technologies, aligning communication strategies and
exploring non-standard approaches are critical to developing the new DDR approach in South
Sudan.

The TDRP was represented at the workshop on International Support to Cantonment and DDR in
South Sudan during May 17-18, 2016 in Washington, DC. The workshop elaborated principles for
support to cantonment and DDR, and objectives and activities for a long-term DDR program. This
session followed on previous efforts that developed the concepts and constraints under which DDR
in South Sudan should be conducted. Participants included the U.S. State Department, USAID, DfID,
BICC, the World Bank, and the UNDPA. A potential DDR program will be conducted in four stages—
initial cantonment and registration of forces [6-12 months], wider rollout of programs to support
both individual and community-focused demobilization, reunification and reduction in forces.

Republic of Yemen
The TDRP team received a request to provide cross-sectoral support to the World Bank MENA region
to plan for DDR in Yemen. The TDRP team responded to this request by:
i.      Providing input on moving forward in line with international best practice and experiences
        in a brainstorming session lead by Yemen’s Country Management Unit [CMU] at the World
        Bank and,
ii.     Composing a short note on potential DDR engagement framework in Yemen based on past
        TDRP experiences

III.   Knowledge Management

Federal Republic of Nigeria: Recovery and Peace-building Assessment
Upon official request from the Government of Nigeria, a Recovery and Peace Building Assessment
[RPBA] was launched in January 2016 to conduct a rapid assessment of the crisis recovery and peace-
building needs in the region. In accordance with the 2008 Joint EU-UN-WB Declaration on Post
Crisis Assessments and Recovery Planning, the European Union and United Nations partnered in this
assessment.

The RPBA sought to inform a collective vision and strategy on peace building and recovery, and to
provide a framework for coordinated and coherent support to assist conflict affected people in the
North East Nigeria. It covered the six conflict-affected North East states, including Borno, Yobe,
Adamawa, Gombe, Taraba and Bauchi. The assessment was conducted across three interlinked
components, namely:
   i.       peace-building, stability and social cohesion;
   ii.      infrastructure and social services; and
   iii.     economic recovery.
                                                10
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016



The TDRP team, based on its rich experience in de-radicalization and DDR in conflict and post-
conflict scenarios, provided valuable inputs to the peace-building, stability and social cohesion
component of the assessment. The TDRP team supported the joint RPBA team in completing the
detailed needs analysis and implementation strategy of the above-mentioned component.
Operational responses suggested by the TDRP team regarding reconciliation, peace-building,
community cohesion and violence prevention were also included in the overall recovery framework
of the assessment. On 12 April 2016, the Office of the Vice President in Nigeria official endorsed the
assessment findings and recognized the successful completion of the RPBA assessment for the North
East.

IV.    Program Management and Status of Trust Fund

Progress of No-Cost Extension
During this quarter, the TDRP task team proposed and began executing a year-long no-cost
extension to the Trust Fund from December 31, 2016 to December 31, 2017. The World Bank has
provided internal clearances and the administrative agreements have been received by donor
partners for counter-signatures.

Below is the action plan for the proposed extension of the Trust Fund and achievement of its
objectives:
a. Plan for Transfer of AUDDRCP Activities to the African Union:
    From the first phase of the World Bank support through AUDDRCP since 2013, the TDRP task
    team created the core capacity of the AU Defense and Security Division to emphasize DDR
    activities. AU’s plans for the upcoming fiscal year are centered on providing operational support
    to its Member States, Regional Economic Communities [REC] and Regional Mechanisms [RM],
    and PSOs; institutional training and partnerships; and knowledge development and management.
    The following activities are planned for the proposed TDRP extension period with the funds
    earmarked for transfer to the African Union:
       i.    Prepare Communication Strategy for Knowledge Products: The task team will support AU
             in preparing the strategy to disseminate evidence-based knowledge materials. The task
             team will further coordinate to identify suitable knowledge architecture to store, access
             and share DDR experiences worldwide.
      ii.    Produce Training Program and Manual: The task team will continue to design trainings
             for RECs, the APSA, Centers of Excellence and member states. To ensure that best practices
             are embedded across AU and APSA partners, the program will utilize a knowledge
             management system to develop operational guidance and policy on important thematic
             areas. In addition, it will train experienced staff, conduct capacity-building through
             Training of Trainers programs, collaborate to publish training manuals and identify gaps
             in learning that will enable the division to initiate its own training programs.


                                                  11
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


      iii.  Strengthening cross-institutional knowledge transfer through joint assessment, planning
            and mentoring: The task team will assist the AU towards creating mechanisms for
            mentoring missions for RECs and member states, and selecting staff for secondment to
            PSOs or placement within Liaison Offices to lend expertise to member states.
     Whilst the task team expects to transition its various responsibilities and deliverables to AU
     following the proposed extension period, it remains available to provide technical support later
     as needed.

b. Technical Assistance to Republic of Mali
   Through seed technical assistance funded by the TDRP Trust Fund, the task team has made
   significant progress in enabling government and stakeholder readiness in launching the DDR
   Program. The Bank is planning to provide IDA support to the national DDR program in Mali.
   Budget earmarked for Mali will finance technical assistance missions, developing programmatic
   documents, and supporting the Government in the preparation of the national program.

c. Technical Assistance to Central African Republic
   The TDRP task team has been collaborating with the UN Peacekeeping Mission in CAR, MINUSCA,
   on establishing a DDR program prior to the signing of “Republican Pact for Peace, national
   reconciliation and reconstruction in the Central African Republic” and “Agreement on the
   Principles of Disarmament, Demobilizations, Reintegration and Repatriation [DDRR]” between
   the government and armed groups. Given government prioritization of DDR, during the
   proposed extension period, the funds earmarked for CAR will finance technical assistance and
   provide support to the development of an IDA-financed socio-economic reintegration operation
   in CAR.

d. Technical Assistance to South Sudan
   The TDRP task team had worked alongside the South Sudan National DDR Commission on
   redesigning the National DDR Strategy and Program. Whilst conditions for new DDR program
   in South Sudan are yet to be conducive, there exists international support and demand for Bank
   involvement in the dialogue and technical assistance to DDR affairs in South Sudan. In this
   context, the earmarked funds will be used to ensure ongoing technical engagement with
   stakeholders in South Sudan.

e. Additional Requests
   Past successes in responding to technical assistance requests in Libya and Somalia raises further
   demand in affected countries to deliver quality technical work as a rapid response mechanism
   and the program will continue to address demands as they arise.

f.   Trust Fund Administration



                                                 12
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


   Minimal trust fund administrative costs have been allocated to continue regular reporting to
   donors, disseminate communication materials to showcase end-results, and conduct donor
   meetings.

World Bank Staff and Consultants
 Staff Members                                                Notes
 Abderrahim Fraiji TDRP Manager & Senior Operations
                     Officer, Washington D.C.
 Benjamin            Social    Development      Specialist,
 Burckhart           Washington D.C.
 Caroline Guazzo     Language       Program      Assistant,   50% of task time towards TDRP
                     Washington D.C.                          Operations
 Murat Onur          Social    Development      Specialist,   30% of task time towards TDRP
                     Washington D.C.                          Operations
 Consultants
 Djeina Kalidi       Social Development Analyst, Bamako,      DDR Operations in Mali and CAR
                     Mali
 Faizaa Fatima       Social    Development    Consultant,      TDRP Focal Point and other
                     Washington, D.C.                          Operations
 Farwah Qasim        Social    Development    Consultant,      DDR Activities in CAR, South
                     Washington, D.C.                          Sudan, Nigeria and others as
                                                               requested
 Jinghua Zhou          Social    Development      Consultant, 50% of task time towards
                       Washington D.C.                         deliverables based on client
                                                               demand
 Lina Abdullahi        Liaison Officer, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia AUDDRCP
 Linda Kiriinya        Social    Development      Consultant, DDR Operations in South Sudan,
                       Nairobi, Kenya                          DRC and Somalia
 Olivier Mukarji       Senior Advisor, Copenhagen, Denmark AU and other tasks as demanded by
                                                               the client
 Graham                Senior Advisor to Dr. Tarek A. Sharif,
 Carrington            Head of Defense and Security Division,
                       African Union, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
N.B.: Consultants are not paid entirely by the TDRP Trust Fund, but as well as through bank budget
for DDR operations across UN-WB Trust Fund, CAR, DRC, Mali, South Sudan etc.

Status of Trust Fund and Disbursement Rate
During this quarter, contributions to TDRP trust fund remained at 42,583,887.89 USD, with
disbursement reaching 92.3 percent at 39,312,311 USD. The remaining balance of 3,271,576 USD



                                               13
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


includes 2,832,603 USD of the Government of Sweden’s contribution to co-finance the DRC
Reinsertion and Reintegration Project activities.

 $40,000,000
 $38,000,000
 $36,000,000
 $34,000,000
 $32,000,000
 $30,000,000
 $28,000,000
 $26,000,000
 $24,000,000
 $22,000,000
 $20,000,000
 $18,000,000
 $16,000,000
 $14,000,000
 $12,000,000
 $10,000,000
  $8,000,000
  $6,000,000
  $4,000,000
  $2,000,000
          $0
               Mar-10




                                          Mar-11




                                                                     Mar-12




                                                                                                Mar-13




                                                                                                                           Mar-14
                                                                                                                                    Jul-14


                                                                                                                                                      Mar-15




                                                                                                                                                                                 Mar-16
                        Jul-10
                                 Nov-10


                                                   Jul-11
                                                            Nov-11


                                                                              Jul-12
                                                                                       Nov-12


                                                                                                         Jul-13
                                                                                                                  Nov-13




                                                                                                                                             Nov-14


                                                                                                                                                               Jul-15
                                                                                                                                                                        Nov-15




                                                                                                   14
