An Integrated Framework
   for Jobs in Fragile
 and Conflict Situations
Acknowledgment
Prepared by Jan von der Goltz, Mary Hallward-Driemeier (Jobs Group) and Nadia Piffaretti (FCV CCSA)
under the guidance of Mary Hallward-Driemeier (Senior Principal Economist, Jobs Group Management
Team), Michal Rutkowski (Senior Director, Social Protection, Labor and Jobs) and Saroj Kumar Jha
(Senior Director, Fragility, Conflict and Violence). Substantive comments from David Robalino, peer
review comments from Alan Gelb, Martin Rama, and Albert Zeufack, as well as feedback and inputs
from Kathleen Beegle, Najy Benhassine, Nancy Benjamin, Hana Brixi, Kevin Carey, Vandana Chandra,
Luc Christiaensen, Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies, Joanna De Berry, Thomas Farole, Silvia Fuselli, Roberta
Gatti, Alvaro Gonzalez, Elena Ianchovichina, Arthur Karlin, Nandini Krishnan, Mattias Lundberg, Alex-
andre Marc, Dino Merotto, Peter Mousley, Stefano Paternostro, Mary Porter Peschka, Laura Ralston,
Cristobal Ridao-Cano, Ivan Rossignol, Parmesh Shah, John Speakman, Stavros Stavrou, Andrew Stone,
Maurizia Tovo, Stephan Wegner, and Giuseppe Zampaglione are gratefully acknowledged.

This report has been made possible through a grant from the World Bank’s Jobs Umbrella Trust Fund,
which is supported by the Department for International Development/UK AID, and the Govern-
ments of Norway, Germany, Austria, the Austrian Development Agency, and Swedish Development
Agency SIDA.




The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views
of the World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. The World Bank
does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denomina-
tions, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of
the World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
boundaries.
Nothing herein shall constitute or be considered to be a limitation upon or waiver of the privileges and
immunities of the World Bank, all of which are specifically reserved.
An Integrated Framework for Jobs
in Fragile and Conflict Situations

Jobs are a high priority for development and stability in fragile and
conflict-affected situations. Jobs play a very important role in fragile
environments, given their contribution to poverty reduction; productivity
and economic growth; and their effect on social cohesion and reducing
the risk of violence. However, the jobs environment is particularly chal-
lenging in situations affected by fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV),
with various combinations of high political, economic and social risks,
weak institutional capacity, a difficult political economy, and significant
constraints on financial resources to support recovery and reconstruction.
Thus, fragile situations have an urgent need for well-structured assistance
to address these challenges and create job opportunities.
   To help strengthen its engagement on jobs in FCV, the World Bank
Group (WBG) has developed an integrated jobs framework.1 The pur-
pose of this note is to describe the framework, which has been adapted
from the WBG’s general jobs framework to incorporate the above dimen-
sions of fragility and instability, and to outline the policy and operational
implications for both the short and long run. Ultimately, the aim is to
improve the support the WBG can offer to expand job opportunities
across the range of FCV contexts.
  The integrated jobs framework has four policy implications:
•	 Jobs can have important social externalities in FCV contexts, and
   integrated policy approaches are needed to help realize them. The
   potential benefits on social cohesion and stability need to be factored
   into evaluations of the broader effectiveness of policy choices. The tra-
   ditional siloed approach misses the potential for synergies across poli-
   cies that can reinforce success.
•	 Interventions at the level of economy-wide ‘fundamentals’ need a
   ‘jobs and fragility lens’ to make visible how reforms impact the cre-
   ation, quality and accessibility of jobs. Failing to take into account
   potential trade-offs will not avoid their impact; at issue is whether

                                                                                1
An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



                                policy choices are being informed by the potential trade-offs—and
                                thus, whether or not supporting adjustments are made. Explicitly tak-
                                ing into account the expected impact on jobs is integral to expanding
                                economic opportunities and promoting stability.
                             •	 Short-term, targeted interventions need to be designed with an eye
                                both on the nature of FCV challenges in the short run, and on
                                longer term goals. Progress on jobs in fragile situations is hard-won,
                                and interventions with limited reach are crucial tools for emergency
                                relief, stabilization, and starting momentum in private sector recovery.
                                But they must be designed to facilitate, and not constrain, structural
                                reforms and economic transformations. This is true for livelihood pro-
                                grams, as well as programs targeting investments in certain sectors,
                                regions or firms.
                             •	 The WBG needs to do more to re-establish domestic markets,
                                address risks, and increase expected rates of return on private invest-
                                ments, including those of smaller domestic actors. This will help to
                                leverage additional resources and know-how to accelerate productiv-
                                ity and expand job opportunities. Targeted actions to support private
                                sector jobs need not wait for investment climate reforms to take hold.
                                However, they must guard against capture, and aim at investments that
                                yield externalities, are potentially competitive, and are jobs-intensive.
                             The paper is organized as follows. Section A discusses why progress on jobs
                             is a crucial development challenge for FCV, describes how fragility weak-
                             ens the business and political environment for creating job opportunities,
                             and argues that, while WBG engagement is critical, such support needs to
                             be more effective. Section B develops a simple framework for structuring
                             jobs programs in FCV. Section C discusses the operational implications
                             across four major areas of engagement: reforms of the fundamentals, emer-
                             gency and livelihood projects, private sector development, and support to
                             the displaced and host communities, and Section D outlines next steps in
                             the forward agenda.


                         A Jobs in fragile situations: Needs, challenges,
                           and the case for WBG support
                             Progress on jobs is a crucial development challenge in fragile situations,
                             but there are major obstacles to shared growth and job opportunities
                             Progress on jobs is particularly crucial in FCV. Jobs are consistently a
                             priority for clients in FCV, as they are foremost on the mind of policy mak-
                             ers, and among the most urgent aspirations of citizens. As the WDR 2013
                             notes, “for policy makers . . . in countries affected by conflict, expanding
                             job opportunities has urgency for social and political reasons, as well as
                             for economic reasons” (140). This sense of urgency is borne out by the

2
                                        An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations




    WDR 2011 and 2013 key messages
    Security WDR 2011                       Jobs WDR 2013
    Investing in citizen security, jus-     Jobs are transformational—
    tice, and jobs is essential to reduc-   providing income, productivity,
    ing violence. And when markets          and social cohesion.
    do not provide job opportuni-
    ties, the likelihood of violence
    increases.



numbers, reflecting the pressure youth demographics exert on job creation
in FCV. Thus, in Afghanistan, the projected annual increase in the labor
force is 500,000 through 2020; and for South Sudan, the annual increase
is 220,000, straining the capacity of these economies to ensure sustainable
access to livelihoods to all new entrants.2 And these statistics do not even
reflect the needs of the underemployed and those out of the labor market.
Box 1 discusses the importance of setting goals for jobs in FCV.
    More, better, and inclusive jobs in FCV are necessary in achieving
the twin goals. Good jobs are decisive in increasing household earnings
and reducing poverty. This dynamic is particularly critical in FCV; if cur-
rent dynamics persist, by 2030, 46% of the poor may live in the 35 coun-
tries the WBG currently considers to be fragile (World Bank, 2014). More
and better jobs will also have profound implications for aggregate eco-
nomic growth in situations of fragility and conflict, as well as for inequal-
ity. Indeed, economies grow as more people work, as each job becomes
more productive, and as people move from lower to higher productivity



    Box 1  Setting goals for jobs in fragile situations
    As in non-fragile environments, FCV jobs pro-          •	 Restoring livelihoods affected by conflict and
    grams aim to make available more, better, and             violence, and jump-starting economic activity
    inclusive jobs. However, in fragile situations, jobs      and domestic investment; and
    can serve a range of more specific purposes that       •	 Building confidence in institutions and the
    respond to each country’s fragility and develop-          social contract.
    ment challenges (WDR 2013). Thus, important
                                                               Depending on a country’s circumstances, these
    goals to pursue with a jobs strategy include:
                                                           goals may best be thought of as rebuilding social
    •	 Reintegrating ex-combatants and the dis-            capital lost to conflict, or as generating social capi-
       placed, reconnecting people’s networks torn         tal that was not previously available.
       apart by conflict and violence, and giving
       everybody—women, men, excluded groups—
       a stake in society;


                                                                                                                     3
An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



                             jobs. In those situations where incentives currently are distorted toward
                             rent-seeking, the gains to be realized from shifting peoples’ efforts toward
                             more productive activities are all the greater.
                                Jobs in some situations can help promote stability and reduce the
                             risk of conflict recurrence.3 Policy makers perceive a strong link between
                             economic opportunity and stability: “conventional wisdom is that having
                             a job is what matters for social cohesion” (WDR 2013: 140). Because jobs
                             and shared opportunity are important to social cohesion, the need for short-
                             run progress on the jobs agenda can be pressing—for instance, in meeting
                             expectations of a peace dividend, or in staving off the immediate risk of
                             social discontent that could fuel instability. Good jobs raise the opportunity
                             cost of engaging in violence (Collier and Hoeffler, 1998), and are sources
                             of social status and self-regard that can counteract anger and alienation
                             (Cramer, 2010). Empirical work has shown that greater well-being is linked
                             with less conflict and violence at the national (e.g., Miguel et al., 2004) and
                             sub-national level (e.g., Berman and Couttenier, 2015). Limited experi-
                             mental evidence also suggests that job opportunities can affect individual
                             motivations to engage in violence and destabilizing activities.4 Economic
                             opportunity may not help calm all kinds of conflict, however (Beath et al.,
                             2016; Berman et al., 2011). In particular, there is support for the idea that
                             “motivations for terror are unrelated to economic status or economic griev-
                             ances” (Blattman and Ralston, 2015: 27f ). The agenda discussed in this
                             paper goes beyond ‘jobs for peace’, but this potential dynamic—even if the
                             empirical evidence for it remains limited—does reinforce the importance
                             of what is at stake in improving job opportunities in situations of fragility.
                                Situations of fragility, conflict, and violence are highly diverse. In
                             terms of their income, FCV situations include countries with $600 gross
                             national income (GNI) per capita based on purchasing power parity (e.g.,
                             the Central African Republic), as well as Lebanon at $17,590 (World
                             Development Indicators, 2016). The differences are similarly large in
                             other characteristics of the economies, such as the sectoral composition of
                             output, the degree to which the private sector is formalized, and the skills
                             of the work force. Countries facing fragility challenges include those that
                             have just ended highly destructive civil wars, but also those that remain
                             mired in low growth and low capacity, while enduring cycles of less intense
                             violence. They encompass countries on very different trajectories: those
                             well on the road toward stability, as well as those experiencing a gradual
                             but worrisome erosion of social cohesion. The arguments developed in this
                             framework also aim to be relevant to countries that are stable as a whole,
                             but harbor regions of unrest, or are affected by conflict in neighboring
                             countries. However, given this diversity of conditions, it is clear that the
                             framework cannot address every individual situation, but rather will need
                             to bring out how key dimensions of fragility and conflict affect the policy
                             priorities and feasible options to address them. (Figure 1 provides a catego-
                             rization of situations based on the level of FCV.)

4
                                    An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



Figure 1

                                    FCV Challenges

                                     E.g., Iraq,
     Immediate post-conflict       [Syria, Yemen]     Active or recent open conflict


                                 E.g., Afghanistan,   Very low capacity, high FCV risks.
           Deep fragility        DRC, South Sudan     Potentially, continued violence

                                   E.g., Bosnia-
                                   Herzegovina,       Ongoing FCV risks, but on a
            Transition
                                   Madagascar         trajectory toward stability


                                   E.g., Algeria,     Higher level of stability, but with
      FCV risks (prevention)
                                   Egypt, Malawi      increasing FCV risks


                                   E.g., Nigeria,     Stable countries with regions facing
        Sub-national FCV             Pakistan         pronounced FCV challenges


      Spillovers from conflict     E.g., Jordan,      Stable countries affected by fragility
       (e.g., displacement)       Kenya, Lebanon      among their neighbors




    Regardless of the country, fragility, conflict and violence can affect
all levels of society—people and communities, firms and entrepreneurs, as
well as institutions. Many times, the consequences are devastating and plain
to see. War destroys lives, inflicts trauma, and rends the ties that bind com-
munities; it wrecks machinery and roads, bridges, and markets, and breaks
the networks of suppliers, customers and workers that businesses rely on.
It also leaves institutions with little capacity and few resources to support
economic recovery. Elsewhere, the impact across society is less obvious but
still destructive: young people lack opportunities and lose their aspirations;
businesses lose customers and struggle to overcome investor fears of conflict
resurgence; and administrative offices are hamstrung by personal agendas
and patronage. (Figure 2 lists the potential effects of FCV.)
    From the point of view of workers, these impacts can mean reduced
opportunities for wage and self-employment, and reduced human
capital. As economic activity slows and firms struggle to grow, fewer jobs
are likely to be created. The loss of assets or constrained access to credit
reduces opportunities in self-employment or small-scale entrepreneurship.
Higher unemployment, underemployment or inactivity rates can then
gradually depreciate skills and reduce human capital—and depress aggre-
gate demand. These effects can be compounded by fiscal and institutional
constraints and loss of qualified personnel that affect the coverage and
quality of education, training, and active labor market programs. Young


                                                                                                     5
An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



Figure 2

                        People and communities          Firms and entrepreneurs      Government and institutions

    Potential effects   • Trauma, loss of trust in      • Risk of violence and       • Low capacity
    of fragility,         neighbors, institutions,        political risk             • Elite capture and
    conflict, and         future prospects              • Corruption, uncertain        rent-seeking
    violence            • Loss of human capital—          regulatory environment     • Macro-fiscal imbalances
                          skills, health, drive         • Low and uncertain            and burdens
                        • Loss of assets, social          domestic demand            • Misallocation of resources
                          safety nets, and the            (private and public)
                          ability to bear basic risks   • High operating cost—
                        • Loss of information             transport, power, credit
                          and connections to            • Loss of capital assets
                          employers, colleagues
                                                        • Loss of business
                                                          networks and information
                                                          —employees, suppliers,
                                                          customers, financiers
                                                        • Elite capture in
                                                          lucrative sectors




                               workers looking to enter the labor market are particularly at risk of severe
                               and lasting consequences.
                                  From the private sector perspective, fragility results in a highly risky
                               business environment shaped by pervasive market and government
                               failures, which increases costs, reduces demand, and compromises the
                               appropriability of investment returns due to policy uncertainty or cor-
                               ruption.5 High risk, high cost, and low and uncertain demand imply a
                               substantially reduced rate of return on investment, and hence, lead to low
                               overall investments and job creation. Indeed, it is not only foreign inves-
                               tors who are discouraged. While the private sector will continue to oper-
                               ate, investments in almost all sectors will decline and hiring will be put on
                               hold; capital flight can become a major drain on resources (Collier, 2009).
                                  Equally importantly, the sectoral composition of investment is
                               changed in ways that pose challenges for jobs and shared growth.
                               Elite capture can lead to high private returns at the expense of broader
                               social benefits. The connected few can use their favored treatment and
                               greater insulation from the risk of physical violence, macroeconomic
                               risks, and poor infrastructure and services to raise prices or extract rents
                               (Chekir and Diwan, 2014; Earle and Gehlbach, 2015). These benefits are
                               greater in sectors with concentrated ownership and where rents are likely
                               to be high, for instance mining, telecommunications, hotels, or select
                               cash crops (Rijkers et al., 2014). The relative lack of job creation means
                               the gap with the potential social return is all the greater, with the lim-
                               ited resources being tilted away from core labor-intensive sectors, notably
                               non-commercial agriculture, as well as light manufacturing and services.
                               This sectoral investment pattern may translate into GDP growth, but
6
                                     An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



not into jobs and shared opportunity. In addition to sectoral imbalances,
FCV can also distort spatial development: because insecurity imposes
costs, businesses gravitate toward relatively safe areas—whether these are
the main cities, or stable parts of the country.
    Adverse dynamics can become self-sustaining, with a further reduc-
tion in job opportunities and an increased likelihood of more conflict.
Distorted incentives and investment patterns misallocate production fac-
tors and leave a large pool of labor underutilized. In turn, this can lead to
deeper entrenchment of patronage, elite capture, and inequality due to
pervasive rent-seeking. The erosion of social cohesion due to underemploy-
ment and inequality, and depressed domestic demand due to low incomes
is one channel through which fragility self-perpetuates. The ultimate con-
sequence is that citizens of fragile states have less economic opportunity
and, all too often, endure renewed conflict: post-conflict countries face
a 40% probability of new strife within the first decade of peace (Collier
et al., 2008).


The case for more effective WBG engagement on jobs is strong
in FCV environments
Because of the factors discussed above, the WBG has an important
role in promoting jobs in FCV environments. The social externalities
of jobs creation in FCV lend urgency to the need for WBG support. At
the same time, with private sector-generated employment hampered by
pervasive market and governance failures, there is a stronger rationale for
public policies and programs than in countries not affected by conflict.
The WBG can support the design of these policies and programs through
its analytical and technical assistance work, and their implementation
through grant (IDA), lending (IBRD), and investment (IFC) operations.
    It is important, however, to manage expectations and avoid unin-
tended consequences. For instance, public works or training programs
alone are unlikely to be sufficient to have a significant impact on inactiv-
ity, unemployment, or underemployment (Kluve et al., 2014). In addi-
tion, there is a risk that, rather than reaching the intended beneficiaries,
these programs may benefit participants linked into patronage networks
in low-capacity contexts, or well-connected formal sector workers in
higher-capacity environments (Dudwick and Srinivasan, 2013). Similarly,
interventions that target certain sectors or businesses must guard against
capture and rent-seeking in a weak institutional environment. Policies that
provide incentives for investments must avoid the concentration of capital
in enclave activities with weak linkages to jobs. Finally, it is important to
note that, while some states have emerged rapidly from conflict, building
stability, resilience, and institutional capacity is more often than not a gen-
erational task, and progress can be exceptionally hard-won. Operational
experience shows that even targeted jobs interventions with limited goals

                                                                                                      7
An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



                             Figure 3

                                                               WBG jobs projects in fragile and non-fragile states
                                                                USD as of June 2016—IDA/IBRD and other sources
                                                     24




                              log commitment (USD)
                                                     22


                                                     20


                                                     18


                                                     16

                                                          10                           15                            20
                                                                                  log population
                                                                                  FCV      non-FCV



                             may deliver over the time frame of a decade, rather than over the project
                             planning horizons more common in non-fragile environments (Rossignol
                             and Salmon, 2016).
                                 Going forward, it is necessary to increase the resources allocated
                             to jobs interventions in fragile situations. Today, in most fragile and
                             conflict-affected states (FCS), there is at least one jobs related project (see
                             top panel in Figure 4). But even in those countries where there are jobs
                             related operations, their size remains modest relative to the needs and
                             relative to investments in non-conflict countries (Figure 3). The average
                             jobs portfolio in FCS with a population of more than one million6 invests
                             only half of what programs spend in non-fragile states per capita ($9 as
                             compared to $22 p.c. in all countries with a jobs program; $8 compared
                             to $16 p.c. in IDA countries).
                                 It is also important to rethink the analytical framework guiding the
                             WBG’s choice and design of new operations. In 2013, IEG reviewed the
                             WBG’s engagement in FCS and concluded that operations had focused
                             too heavily on investment climate reform, a “necessary but not sufficient
                             condition for the growth of the private sector and of jobs” (IEG 2014: 78).
                             It advocated for an integrated approach to support for jobs in fragility and
                             conflict, and suggested that support to strategic sectors should take place
                             on a greater scale to make a decisive difference, notably in infrastructure
                             and small-scale agriculture. The review of the current portfolio of lend-
                             ing operations also shows that a large share of investments has focused
                             on the supply side of the labor market (social protection and education)
                             and that less has been done on the demand side (agriculture, trade and

8
                                             An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



  Figure 4
                   Active IDA/IBRD FCV jobs projects


                                                 Democratic Republic
                                                 of Congo
                   9
                             7                   Afghanistan
                                     5           Côte d’Ivoire
                                         5       Lebanon
                                                 Liberia
            33                           5       Madagascar
                                         4       Mali
                                 4               Republic of Yemen
                         4
                                                 Other


                   IDA/IBRD commitments by sector-
                 active FCV jobs portfolio (million USD)


            37                                   Social Protection
      63
    93                                           and Labor
                       646                       Social, Urban, Rural
                                                 and Resilience
      164
                                                 Education
      172                            496         Agriculture
                                                 Finance and Markets
        320
                                                 Environment and
                             461                 Natural Resources
                 371
                                                 Transport and ICT
                                                 Energy and Extractives
                                                 Trade and
                                                 Competitiveness
                                                 Other




  competitiveness, transport, finance and markets) (see bottom panel in Fig-
  ure 4). As discussed above, this approach is unlikely to address the jobs
  challenges facing fragile situations on a sustainable basis.


B Rethinking the jobs framework in FCV
  The Jobs World Development Report 2013 offers useful policy les-
  sons for the FCV context. Its framework draws upon public economics
  to stress that jobs bring social and economic externalities, and that some
  jobs are better than others for development. The framework suggests that
  any jobs strategy needs to consider three types of interventions (Figure 5).

                                                                                                              9
An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



Figure 5
     The Jobs World Development Report 2013 offers a useful starting point for thinking about a policy framework for jobs in FCS

     WDR 2013 framework: key policies for delivering jobs                                  Messages for FCV contexts

                                    Jobs with positive social or
                                    economic externalities:              The scope for positive externalities is potentially much larger
                                    ‘good jobs for development’          in FCV. Indeed, many interventions precisely aim to address
                                    – undersupplied without              stability and to generate dynamic gains by targeting key population
                                    public support                       groups, locations, and sectors.


                                                                         The WDR’s message to ‘avoid the cliffs’ of too little or too
                                                                         much regulation is particularly appropriate: scarce political
                                    Policies directed specifically at    capital should not go toward reforms that simply move ‘on the
                                    labor: labor regulations and         plateau.’ But active labor market policies could have greater
                                    active labor market policies         scope, given the likelihood of positive externalities.



                                                                         In monitoring fundamentals and proposing reforms, add a ‘jobs
                                    Economy-wide polices to support      and fragility lens’ to keep an eye on impact on jobs, including in
                                    growth and jobs: macro-fiscal        the short run, not just growth. Growth can contribute to job creation,
                                    stability, regulatory environment,   but not all growth is equally job rich. Treating jobs as an afterthought
                                    infrastructure, human capital        can adversely affect the ability to create more and better jobs.




                                     First, ‘fundamentals’ or economy-wide policies that are necessary to pro-
                                     mote investment, growth, and job creation. These are policies that ensure:
                                     macro-economic stability, good governance and the rule of law; business
                                     regulations that reduce transaction costs and promote competition and
                                     innovation; the development of appropriate infrastructure; and sufficient
                                     investment in human capital. The second set of policies—labor regula-
                                     tions and active labor market programs—aim to improve the functioning
                                     of labor markets by helping workers connect to jobs and by protecting
                                     workers from abuse, exploitation, or unhealthy working conditions.
                                     Finally, job strategies involve targeted interventions to address market and
                                     government failures at the local level and promote ‘good jobs for develop-
                                     ment’. These could, for instance, be jobs that increase activity and employ-
                                     ment rates for women, and empower them to serve as role models for the
                                     next generation and invest in their daughters’ health and education. Or in
                                     the FCV context, they could be jobs that give opportunities to young men
                                     or other groups at risk of engaging in violence, and hence may reduce the
                                     risk of conflict recurring. The externalities related to these jobs are usually
                                     not taken into account by the private sector and therefore justify public
                                     interventions.
                                        Three insights emerge when applying the general jobs framework
                                     to FCV contexts (Figure 5):
                                     1.	 The fundamentals must be monitored and policy reforms designed
                                         and recommended with an eye on their impacts on jobs and on
                                         stability, including in the short run—what one might call a ‘jobs
                                         and fragility lens.’ Too often, policy aims simply to reduce fiscal

10
                                      An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



    imbalances, ensure macroeconomic stability, and promote investments
    and growth. The link between growth and jobs, however, is complex:
    growth can take place without creating many jobs, or while destroying
    jobs in certain sectors, or without creating the jobs necessary to improve
    living standards among vulnerable workers, or jobs that promote social
    cohesion. Adopting a ‘jobs and fragility lens’ may make explicit new
    trade-offs in policy making by highlighting the impact of fiscal or mon-
    etary reforms on employment. However, the trade-offs themselves are
    not new or created by this framework; it is just that a focus on jobs
    brings them out and includes them directly in weighing the choices—
    rather than implicitly giving jobs considerations a zero-weight. In any
    setting, it is important to be mindful of the effects of reforms on jobs;
    in fragile states it is essential, because jobs can be decisive for stability.
2.	 Labor regulations are unlikely to be a priority in FCV countries,
    but active labor market programs might have a more important
    role to play. As illustrated by the Arab Spring, there may be some
    middle income countries where labor regulations are seen as a central
    component of the call for reforms. However, it is not recommended to
    use scarce political capital to undertake reforms that simply move on a
    ‘plateau’ where labor regulations are neither too onerous nor too loose.
    On the other hand, a number of labor market problems that active
    labor market programs (ALMPs) can address are likely to be acute in
    some fragile situations: inadequate skills, insufficient information about
    job opportunities, and limited mobility. The scope for well-designed
    ALMPs could therefore be greater, particularly when targeted to vulner-
    able workers and given the humanitarian urgency that can be present in
    some conflict and post-conflict situations.
3.	 Targeted public policies that promote job creation or increase the
    quality of jobs are likely to be more appropriate given more perva-
    sive market failures, and the larger social externalities of jobs. Social
    externalities are likely to be powerful, for instance, where jobs can help
    address the obstacles facing priority groups such as women at risk of
    being cut out of the labor market, ex-combatants and youth at risk of
    engaging in violence, or the forcibly displaced. At the same time, since
    value chains and sectors are more likely to be beset by market failure,
    public spending to open opportunities for private sector development
    will more often yield economic externalities, particularly if (as discussed
    in more detail below) designed taking potential government failures
    into account. The implication is that, while economy-wide reforms
    have a role to play, it is important to give attention to interventions
    aimed at improving job opportunities for specific populations, by pro-
    moting investments and growth in certain sub-sectors, value chains, or
    geographic regions.
  The needs, opportunities, and obstacles that characterize fragile
contexts can affect entry points for support on jobs, and often tilt

                                                                                                      11
An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



                             interventions toward targeted rather than economy-wide approaches.
                             The WDR differentiates between policies that are targeted and those that
                             are economy-wide; targeted actions can directly support jobs that have
                             positive externalities. This distinction is useful in thinking about jobs
                             programs in FCV, where in the short run, there is a propensity to favor
                             targeted approaches. As argued, this is in part because interventions to
                             support good jobs for development make particular sense in situations of
                             conflict and violence, given humanitarian needs, and given that economic
                             and social externalities are likely to be greater. But targeted approaches may
                             also be the only feasible ones. For instance, economy-wide investment cli-
                             mate reforms may be highly desirable in principle. But the very factors that
                             make them important—weak governance and capacity—often also make
                             it hard to achieve progress. Rather than wait for economy-wide reforms
                             to take effect, the pragmatic approach is then to seek windows of oppor-
                             tunity to give targeted support. Similarly, targeting infrastructure, credit
                             programs or regulatory reforms on a particular sub-population, sector or
                             region will generally require less capacity and resources than rolling them
                             out across the board. Hence, the degree of risk of renewed conflict, the
                             level of capacity, the (re)construction needs, the prevalence of market fail-
                             ure, and the governance of the country can all affect feasible entry points
                             and where, along the targeted spectrum across the economy, the chosen
                             policies will be focused. (See Appendix Table 1 for further illustration.)
                                 The risk inherent in targeted approaches for jobs in fragile situa-
                             tions is that short-run actions may be poorly aligned with long-term
                             goals, and that different short-run actions may be poorly aligned with
                             each other. While short-run entry points favor targeted approaches, there
                             are two inherent risks to a portfolio that emphasizes targeted actions. The
                             first concern is that short-term measures may become disconnected from
                             longer-run goals, or even introduce distortions that exacerbate barriers to
                             more sustained progress. For instance, beneficiaries of interventions can
                             develop vested interests that block reforms that promise wider benefits:
                             direct job creation for certain population groups (such as ex-combatants
                             or youth) can reduce incentives to seek or create private sector jobs; and
                             support to certain sectors or firms can become barriers to competition and
                             innovation over the long run. Even humanitarian programs can create dis-
                             tortions that, for instance, impede the development of local food markets.
                             The second concern is that synergies can be lost between different targeted
                             actions. Interventions in many areas of development matter for jobs—from
                             agriculture to macro-fiscal management, governance, private sector develop-
                             ment, transport and power sector support, social protection measures, and
                             beyond. However, teams pursuing relatively narrowly-focused interventions
                             on different development issues may find it hard to coordinate with each
                             other; if interventions targeting specific sub-populations or sectors are to be
                             followed, it is still important that integrated approaches are followed.
                                 It is crucial that short-run programs on jobs in FCV are designed
                             with medium and long-run goals in mind, and take an integrated view
12
                                           An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



  Figure 6

                     Building from short-run FCV entry points toward long-term goals


                        Short-term                                                 Long-term
                        feasible actions                                           desirable goals


                        CONSTRAINED                   PRIORITY
     Targeted           ENTRY POINTS                                                                    DESIRED GOAL
                                                   ENTRY POINTS
     interventions      Low capacity and                                                                 Good jobs for
                                                  Actions targeted at
                        high risk can limit                                                            development with
                                                  social cohesion and   To build sustainably
                          entry points to                                                              positive economic
                                                   economic revival.       on priority entry
                         targeted action.                                                                  and social
                                                                         points, increasingly            externalities
                                                                        align different portfolio
                                                                          elements, improve
                                                                           targeting, deepen
                                                                              potential for
                                                                              externalities




     Interventions         To address gaps between                                                  DESIRED GOAL
     with economy-       constrained entry points and                                               Foundations for
     wide scope            longer term goals, policies                                              more, better, and
                           should aim to enable further                                              inclusive jobs
                        reform and avoid inconsistencies
                                and disincentives.



  of actions across development issues. It is important that interventions
  that seize targeted short-run opportunities do not preclude more funda-
  mental reforms over the medium and long term. What is needed and fea-
  sible in the immediate term may be far from the desired medium-term
  goal; policy makers should be explicit about the size of the gap and how
  policies should evolve over time to support broader development goals as
  the risks and costs of fragility decline. Second, interventions should be
  designed with a clear awareness of actions taken in other development
  areas to support jobs, and with an eye on seizing complementarities and
  avoiding contradictions between them (Figure 6).


C Operational implications
  This section discusses the operational implications that flow from the
  framework developed above, across four key types of intervention:
  (1) programs that strengthen economy-wide fundamentals, (2) emer-
  gency recovery and livelihoods programs, (3) support to the private sector,
  and (4) the crucial cross-cutting challenge of addressing the jobs angle
                                                                                                                        13
An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



                             of forced displacement. The right combination of these operational ele-
                             ments, and the programmatic emphasis within each policy area, will vary
                             among countries facing different sets of fragility and jobs challenges. For
                             the sake of conciseness, this section limits itself to presenting general con-
                             siderations, and giving examples of how interventions may be shaped by
                             different contexts. Appendix Table 2 provides a more complete stylized
                             overview of the relationship between different FCV challenges and pro-
                             gramming choices.


                             Macro-fiscal environment, regulation, and other fundamentals: Apply a jobs
                             and fragility lens, and strike the right level of ambition
                             Addressing key fundamentals is likely to be a prerequisite for other
                             reforms to be successful, but perfection could very much be the enemy
                             of the good. Reducing macro-fiscal instability can be critical, but should
                             not be the only goal. The application of a jobs and fragility lens is impor-
                             tant in making explicit the potential trade-offs in how much fiscal consoli-
                             dation to seek in the short run, given the impacts on aggregate demand
                             and employment. If capacity, resources, or governance is limited, reform-
                             ers need to keep the appropriate level of ambition in mind in setting the
                             policy environment that will shape the incentives and ability to invest and
                             hire. Reforms should also aim to be inclusive, to remove—and not erect
                             new—barriers to participation, by gender, ethnic or religious group, or
                             location.

                             Macro-fiscal policy
                             Macro-fiscal policy, even when it addresses significant imbalances, has
                             real implications for jobs, makes winners and losers, and can ulti-
                             mately affect stability. Sensitivity to such potential effects—what one
                             might call a ‘jobs and fragility lens’—must inform operations in FCV. In
                             almost any country, the policy debate around significant monetary, fiscal
                             or trade reform would include an analysis of the impact on employment.
                             In FCV, these considerations are all the more important because jobs and
                             opportunity matter for stability. Yet, they are all too easily neglected, given
                             the often acute fiscal pressures. Macroeconomic stability is needed, and
                             where a concern over jobs prompts changes in the path taken, there are
                             costs, at least in the short run. But how stability is achieved has impor-
                             tant implications for its sustainability and the distribution of economic
                             opportunities. Failing to look at the employment impacts does not mean
                             there will not be impacts, just that the choices are not being informed by
                             them—and supporting adjustments may not be made.
                                With strong political pressures, limited resources, and low capac-
                             ity in many situations of fragility, macro-fiscal policy will as a rule be
                             far from perfect, but WBG operations can help guard against costly
                             mistakes that impact on economic opportunity, jobs, and stability. Some
                             of the most consequential misalignments include currency overvaluation,
14
                                      An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



overprotection in non-traded input sectors, or poorly targeted trade restric-
tions. In public expenditure, a particular danger lies in rash reforms of the
entities involved in providing security. Another trap is to fail to recognize
that with fragility and violence, volatility is the norm. The WBG should
track foreseeable sources of shocks, and be positioned to help not only in
handling their fiscal and growth implications, but also their impact on jobs.
   Taking jobs impacts into account may shift the trade-offs that will
be made or the time frame of reforms. For instance, public expenditure
reform may be a necessity. But it requires sensitivity to the reality that,
while public employment (and employment in state-owned enterprises—
SOEs) can sometimes stress budgets, reinforce patronage systems, and
distort incentives to enter the private sector, it can also promote stability,
build skills, and provide important services. It may be desirable to pursue a
path that brings reform at a steadier pace and preserves job opportunities.
In settings where there is an acute risk of conflict and low capacity, a more
achievable goal may be to nudge public employment toward services that
promote productivity and human capital, or at least to move it away from
overtly oppressive or rent-seeking purposes. Where there is more stability
and higher capacity, governments can offer retraining or early retirement
programs, as one would in non-fragile countries, but it must be recognized
that additional resources may be needed to transition those on the public
payroll into private employment without endangering stability, particu-
larly in the case of SOEs affiliated with the military. More broadly, when
jobs and stability are taken into account, the path for fiscal adjustment
might call for a more gradual reduction in primary deficits and a larger
role for external debt.
   Where the economy-wide reform agenda is stalled, a jobs lens
can help to clarify the trade-offs inherent in inaction. In some
countries, despite the clear interest in job creation, the challenge is to




    Box 2  Avoiding the ‘resource curse’ through a focus on jobs-intensive growth
    The importance of adopting a broader ‘jobs lens’      the cost of education, irrigation, fertilizer, and
    in macro-fiscal policy is evident in the experi-      infrastructure. This supported livelihoods and
    ence of resource-rich countries that have avoided     food security in agriculture, while increasing the
    the ‘resource curse’ and successfully embarked on     productivity of labor intensive industries, ulti-
    industrialization, such as Chile, Indonesia, Malay-   mately creating jobs. Measures for containing cost
    sia, Sri Lanka, and Thailand (Coxhead 2007). In       also spanned well-calibrated macro-economic pol-
    Indonesia, resource revenue was used to support       icies, and overall policies supportive of the busi-
    the agricultural sector and reduce costs in the       ness environment. Overall, exploitation of natural
    industrial sector. Fiscal spending of revenue from    resources was instrumental in supporting high lev-
    oil and gas was used strategically to increase pro-   els of savings and investment.
    ductivity of capital in non-rent sectors, lowering


                                                                                                                15
An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



                             initiate action on severe and deeply entrenched constraints on shared
                             growth. Such policies—for instance, stringent trade restrictions—exist
                             for a reason: they are often pivotal to short-term stability or may reflect
                             entrenched special interests that have built up considerable economic
                             and political power over time. Rapid progress in changing the social
                             bargain they embody may be rare. Nonetheless, the WBG can provide a
                             service in offering a candid analysis of the cost for jobs and livelihoods
                             (and ultimately, longer-term stability) inherent in maintaining the sta-
                             tus quo, rather than trying to solve the political stalemate.

                             Business regulations
                             A jobs and fragility lens is equally important when assessing busi-
                             ness regulation reforms and enforcement. Certain regulations are really
                             important for encouraging private sector investment and hiring, and for
                             helping to provide needed property rights and dispute resolution mecha-
                             nisms, as well as basic safeguards for the public interest. But more sophis-
                             ticated reforms can often wait; political capital and institutional capacity
                             can be better used on other areas in the short run.
                                Beyond what is on the books, how governments enforce regulations
                             also has impacts on job opportunities. As a stylized fact, enforcement
                             is weak in many low-income fragile situations; the informal sector plays a
                             very large role in providing livelihoods. This shifts the trade-offs in regula-
                             tion. For instance, over the short term, governments might try to broaden
                             regulatory enforcement as a way of expanding the number of firms that
                             need to pay taxes. However, this can stifle informal activity that is essential
                             to livelihoods or backfire by encouraging more firms to evade the authori-
                             ties, creating further distortions. A more appropriate approach may be
                             to reduce the cost—and increase the benefits—of formality by reviewing
                             which regulations can be relaxed and more gradually building up the tax
                             base. The general rule should be to aim for simplification of regulations,
                             avoid their use in cordoning off high-quality jobs for favored groups or
                             codifying rents (including by ensuring transparency in financial markets
                             by meeting AML/CFT standards7), and encourage entry, open access and
                             competition. In the meantime, as a careful reform agenda proceeds, infor-
                             mal businesses deserve support to raise their productivity.
                                Regulations and government programs that, on the surface, appear
                             neutral across population groups, should still be evaluated on whether
                             the effects will be neutral in practice. This can be true for women, par-
                             ticularly where safety concerns and mobility restrictions may dispropor-
                             tionately limit their ability to travel to government offices for permits or
                             licenses or to seek protection of property rights. The allocation of prop-
                             erty itself will affect how regulations protecting it will distribute oppor-
                             tunities. Those agencies or individuals enforcing regulations or selecting
                             beneficiaries for government programs need to be aware that differences
                             in the underlying constraints people may face can lead to non-inclusive


16
                                   An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



outcomes, unless regulatory and program design takes these deeper con-
straints into account.
   The end of conflict can sometimes be a moment of opportunity
for progress on priority regulatory issues that can impose severe lim-
its on growth and be causes of conflict themselves. These issues nota-
bly include land rights, resource revenue management, and energy sector
reform. The end of conflict and other sharp changes in the fragility envi-
ronment can present an opportunity to tackle them. While capacity may
be low, willingness to tackle deeply entrenched regulatory problems may
be greater at a moment of change, in particular since meaningful progress
in overcoming them holds the promise of delivering a real peace dividend
(Collier, 2009).8

Infrastructure
In investments in infrastructure, as well, real trade-offs are inherent
in how sectors and locations are prioritized. Investments can, at the
extreme, focus strongly on infrastructure that supports capital-intensive
industries that generate foreign exchange (for instance, power, railways or
ports serving mining operations; or providing the infrastructure for a spe-
cial zone that attracts capital-intensive manufacturing). On the other hand,
it may be preferable to support network infrastructure that can sustain a
wider set of activities, including targeting key value chain bottlenecks or
jobs-intensive sectors, or broaden participation, e.g., by connecting sec-
ondary towns or facilitating the sharing of information through ICT.


Emergency response and livelihoods programs: Seek consistency
of actions with long-term goals, and advance the knowledge base
The WBG has an established toolbox for emergency jobs and liveli-
hoods interventions. The right mix and ambition of programs hinges
upon country circumstances. Elements of effective support include:9
•	 Support to re-establish livelihoods not just for short-run income but to
   expand productivity and reduce vulnerability over time and to build up
   basic social safety net functions;
•	 Labor intensive public works programs to respond to the immediate need
   for employment, and provide improved infrastructure that itself will also
   support expanding job opportunities in the private sector; and
•	 Active labor market programs to connect people with jobs, delivered
   where possible by private sector providers.
   The mode of engaging in these activities can itself make a critical
contribution; social dialogue, community driven development and early
engagement with the private sector reinforce broader development goals.
   A key task is to advance practices that will use short-term targeted
interventions to build long-term linkages, and avoid adverse effects.
Programs need to be able to respond to the pressing short-term priorities
                                                                                                   17
An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations




                             that are characteristic of fragile situations—supporting livelihoods, inte-
                             grating groups at risk of engaging in violence, or fostering social cohesion.
                             At the same time, it is important that short-term actions enable medium
                             and long-term reforms (Figure 7 gives a stylized example). Country context
                             will determine the ways in which longer-term goals can best be integrated.
                             For instance, in middle-income countries with fragility risks, programs
                             intended to maintain social cohesion in the short run can be designed
                             with durable systems in mind; similarly, in countries hosting large dis-
                             placed populations, the need to address the displacement crisis can be an
                             opportunity to put in place systems that can sustainably serve host popula-
                             tions. In lower-capacity settings, such as in states in deep fragility, the gap
                             between feasible programs to respond to short-term needs and sustainable
                             systems can be much larger, and a sequence of follow-on interventions
                             may be needed to bridge it.
                                 There are key building blocks that need to be taken into account:
                                 Building systems for identification, registration, and profiling. Emergency
                             programs can be devised in a way that helps build systems to support the
                             design of steady state social assistance and social insurance programs. In
                             low-capacity contexts, this could mean fostering the capacity to conduct
                             basic means testing, or expanding systems that can handle payments. In
                             higher-capacity settings, important systems include identification and
                             proper registries of the population of beneficiaries, and profiling systems
                             that can then inform about the type of additional services that would be
                             required to improve their earnings opportunities and connect them to
                             wage or self-employment. At any level of capacity, these systems are also
                             important to make sure that programs do not lead to renewed exclusion—
                             for instance, by ensuring that participation of women in training and pub-
                             lic works programs is safe and feasible.
                                 Strategic choices around public works and services. Other than ensuring
                             that these programs minimize distortions in private labor markets, it is
                             important to prioritize investments and delivery modalities that can, indi-
                             rectly, enable the creation of private sector jobs. For instance, public works
                             that focus on basic infrastructure, irrigation, environmental services, or
                             market spaces can help make self-employment more productive. In higher-
                             capacity fragile situations, there is often considerable demand for social
                             services that can be provided by social entrepreneurs and NGOs, and these
                             can constitute a reliable source of jobs.
                                 Explicit graduation strategies. Emergency interventions need to have as
                             a medium-term objective strategies to ‘graduate’ beneficiaries by improv-
                             ing their job opportunities. In a low-capacity context, this could imply
                             connecting interventions that provide cash or in-kind assistance with
                             counseling, financial literacy programs and savings groups, as well as pro-
                             grams that build skills. In higher-capacity contexts, it might also involve
                             interventions to improve incentives to search for and take jobs, provide
                             information about opportunities for wage or self-employment, and help
18
                                        An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



individuals connect to these jobs. These programs, if well designed, can
have an important role to play in integrating the displaced, returnees, or
combatants into the labor force. It is important that these programs be
gender informed to ensure they are inclusive. One particularly important
dimension is to address potential gender sorting across sectors and occupa-
tions so that women can build their potential to work in higher-earning
activities.
    Improving service delivery through appropriate contracting and payments
systems. Although ALMPs have an important role to play in FCV, institu-
tional capacity and governance arrangements often pose challenges. Some
programs in low capacity contexts rely entirely on NGOs for delivery to
avoid government capacity constraints. Where this direction has been



    Box 3  From emergency interventions toward lasting systems
    Efforts are under way across many situations             emerge. While no single evaluation can provide
    of conflict and violence to chart the path from          the answer, data points will keep being added,
    emergency responses toward lasting systems               and begin to form a picture. One such data point
    and emulate best practice in a way that works in         comes from an impact evaluation of the Emergency
    a low-income FCV setting. The Safety Nets Proj-          Youth Employment and Skills Development proj-
    ect in Mali illustrates this approach. The first stage   ect (PEJEDEC) in Cote d’Ivoire (Bertrand et al.,
    of the project offered an emergency cash trans-          2016). A randomized sub-set of urban youths par-
    fer program—but designed not as a temporary              ticipating in a six-month temporary employment
    scheme, but as a long-term safety net program. A         program in roads rehabilitation received (i) basic
    second stage broadens the focus toward increasing        entrepreneurship training, or (ii) training in job
    household productivity and resilience by offering        search skills and wage employment opportunities
    labor-intensive public works to rebuild productive       to facilitate access to wage jobs. One year after the
    community assets (e.g., water pumps and irriga-          program concluded, positive impacts on earnings
    tion canals), training and mentoring, as well as         persisted, mostly driven by higher productivity
    funding for small business initiatives. Importantly,     in non-agricultural self-employment activities.
    the project seeks to build the recipient database        Importantly, while job search training and self-
    compiled for the emergency cash transfer into a          employment training contributed to youths’
    Social Registry—a national system to register poor       skills, the sustained gains in earnings are mostly
    households and individuals. The goal is to ensure        driven by youths who received complementary
    that vulnerable households do not only benefit           basic entrepreneurship training. The findings
    from a single intervention, but can access health        highlight that short-term interventions combined
    and education services, as well as support for pro-      with graduation elements can facilitate transitions
    ductive activities that will provide them the chance     into more productive employment, in particular
    to make lasting improvements in their lives. The         self-employment, after exit from the program.
    registry is designed not as a static database, but       Additional work is needed to better understand
    as an information system to allow government to          potential trade-offs between maximizing short-
    keep track of delivery of a range of social policies,    and long-term benefits, including to find program
    and allow for transparent resolution of grievances.      modalities that are cost-effective.
       Evidence from impact evaluation on effec-
    tive graduation strategies is beginning to


                                                                                                                     19
An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



                             taken, an essential element has been the building of government capacity
                             to oversee delivery, such that government can take ownership, and services
                             delivered can come to be seen as the beginning of a new positive social
                             contract. Even in higher-capacity contexts, existing employment services
                             or other ALMPs often fail to reach targeted population groups and are
                             unable to deliver the types of services needed to connect individuals to
                             jobs. Most programs are supply driven and disconnected from the needs
                             of beneficiaries and prospective employers. A promising approach is to
                             rely on private providers of services (NGOs or social enterprises) that are
                             paid based on services delivery (e.g., training) or results (e.g., internships,
                             apprenticeships, jobs).
                                FCV environments pose additional trade-offs and risks in target-
                             ing programs. The goal of reaching those most in need of support and
                             most likely to benefit from interventions remains important. However, in
                             some FCV settings—in particular when there is an acute risk of conflict or
                             unrest—the most pressing priority in supporting the vulnerable may be to
                             prevent the outbreak of violence. The best way to pursue this priority may
                             then not be to target programs directly to the poorest. Rather, it may be to
                             target opportunities toward those most at risk of committing violence—
                             ex-combatants or restive young men—or toward population groups at
                             risk of taking the lead in initiating unrest—for example, urban middle-
                             class youths disaffected with their life prospects. These trade-offs are dif-
                             ficult, and the right balance will vary by context; but the trade-offs must
                             be addressed head-on, and close monitoring is needed to track whether
                             the targeting choices made are borne out by the evidence. Even where
                             targeting objectives are clear, there are additional risks to be considered in
                             an FCV environment: to avoid redoubling grievances, it is often crucial
                             that programs not be seen as providing patronage to specific groups. Thus,
                             targeting criteria will have to be chosen carefully, and the process for ben-
                             eficiary selection must be transparent beyond reproach.
                                The way emergency and livelihoods programs are implemented
                             matters in increasing their impact on social cohesion. In particular
                             in fragile and conflict affected situations, community-driven develop-
                             ment (CDD) is a mainstay among delivery approaches, because it holds
                             the promise not only of ensuring that the projects that are selected gen-
                             erate broad benefits, but also of fostering social cohesion through joint
                             decision making. If designed with the long run in mind, CDD programs
                             can lay the foundations for government-led participatory planning, rather
                             than stand apart as a permanent parallel process (World Bank, 2013b). In
                             higher-capacity settings, social dialogue and public-private dialogue can
                             play a similar role.
                                Emergency and livelihood interventions can be delivered in a way
                             that builds bridges to private sector development. Support to re-
                             establishing livelihoods can begin to build capacity among farmers and
                             small entrepreneurs to raise productivity, particularly through capital
                             inputs, training, and capacity building, alongside programs to forge links
20
                                       An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations




    Box 4  Agriculture recovery—connecting livelihood programs to markets
    and value chains
    Livelihood programs are crucial to raising incomes      In Afghanistan, a successful approach has been to
    and the well-being of households—particularly in        begin working on longer-term objectives alongside
    the agriculture sector, which still supports 70% of     assistance to early recovery, facilitating learning
    the world’s rural poor (World Development Indi-         about the challenges ahead and leverage points to
    cators, 2016). The initial recovery of agriculture      address them. The experience also reinforces the
    often makes an essential early contribution in          need to keep inclusion goals in mind; the choice
    post-conflict settings; as outright violence recedes,   of crops and value chains to support have differ-
    people return to farms, land is planted again, and      ent potential for inclusive impacts, given gender
    markets re-open. But a pivotal challenge has been       and income sorting across activities. As recovery
    to sustain growth and income generation beyond          proceeds, it also becomes important to support
    first gains, and bridge the gap between livelihood      diversification into off-farm, non-farm activities,
    interventions and private sector development.           both to provide new opportunities, and to allow
    In agriculture, this can involve connecting farm-       for portfolios of activities that allow households to
    ers to value chains, and enabling them to move          spread risk. Mobile phones can be a key enabler,
    from producing goods that are either consumed           and help replace missing or captured markets;
    or only sold in small local markets to producing        rural communities need to be empowered with the
    and processing goods with higher value added.           skills to seize these opportunities.




with value chains. Public works can target projects that raise private sec-
tor productivity. There also are opportunities to engage domestic private
firms in delivering training, job search assistance, or transfer programs
where there is sufficient private sector capacity to deliver good services,
thereby not only providing business opportunities, but also reducing the
labor market segmentation and wage distortions that can result from the
large presence of international agencies.


Private sector development: Engage early, seek leverage points
for jobs-intensive action, and advance WBG products and practices
to suit the needs of fragile contexts
Beyond basic investment climate reforms, jobs programs in FCV
should make an early effort to revitalize the private sector through
targeted support, where the potential for having a catalytic role is
high. Early engagement is a crucial part of ensuring that short-term action
is in line with long-run goals. This is also essential in order to leverage
additional resources in a timely manner, to draw in private sector ideas
and know-how, and to ensure that country programs develop the knowl-
edge and capacity to lend effective support to the private sector as fragility
risks recede. In addition, engaging businesses early can ensure that the
private sector becomes a full stakeholder that constructively contributes to

                                                                                                                    21
An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



Figure 7

                Policies can evolve over time to build from feasible entry points to long-term goals



                      Short-term                                              Long-term


                       Feasible entry point –     E.g., training and
     Targeted job      E.g., cash grant-based     access to finance
                          emergency rural                                E.g., training and grants to help
     priorities                                    for cooperatives
                         recovery program                                emerging agribusiness connect
                                                                             with global value chains


                                                                                    E.g., power sector reform
                                                                                      helping agribusiness
                                                                                        raise productivity




                           Ensure consistency with                                                 Consider the need for
                         long-run goals—for instance,                                               follow-up programs
                            avoid distorting wage                                                    across sectors to
                        expectations, and seek to guard                                            ensure gains persist
     Economy-wide            against elite capture
     fundamentals
                                                                       Improving the way markets
                                                                       work may be the long-term
                                                                       goal—but there may not be
                                                                           an effective way to
                                                                         immediately act upon it




                                   shaping long-term solutions for peace and a more stable society. Targeted
                                   action provides possible entry points to revive markets without waiting for
                                   the economy-wide framework to be improved. Overcoming some of the
                                   constraints on businesses—for instance, political risk and the risk of con-
                                   flict resurgence—may be a long-term task. But in the short run, targeted
                                   investments can help make a start in easing demand risk and the high cost
                                   of operations. The selection of such support needs to be informed by gov-
                                   ernance risks and the potential for these investments to have positive spill-
                                   overs on other private sector investments and entrepreneurship. (Box 6
                                   describes opportunities for private sector involvement in the earliest stages
                                   of post-conflict reconstruction.)
                                     If entry points are for more targeted private sector support, while
                                   keeping in mind the longer-run goal of establishing a broad-based
                                   foundation for more and better jobs, activities should:
                                   1.	 Provide benefits for broader private sector development and
                                       expanded job opportunities, while guarding against capture or unin-
                                       tended consequences for stability;
                                   2.	 Conduct delivery through an engagement mode that addresses the
                                       needs of investors, both domestic and foreign;
22
                                   An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



3.	 Be potentially competitive, but presently subject to market, coordina-
    tion, or governance failure;
4.	 Be jobs-intensive in themselves or through linkages along the value
    chain.

  (1) Targeted interventions naturally risk creating distortions, and
  should be undertaken where they generate externalities and not
  simply benefits for the specific recipients. While there is no general
  answer as to ‘which investments work best’, the choice must be guided
  by the fundamental rationale for public investment in private sector
  support, namely, the opportunity to generate economic externalities
  that result from overcoming market and governance failure, and social
  externalities from good jobs for development. As argued above, both
  are expected to be more ubiquitous in FCV. Targeted support needs
  to guard against the real risk of creating enclave industries with few
  linkages—particularly as they can create special interests that block fur-
  ther reform efforts. Investments that yield network externalities, such
  as roads, ICT, and particularly power, present a clear case for public
  investment, and are also often attractive options for PPP that can help
  spur broader private sector development. Yet, beyond these traditional
  investments, programs can also seek to tackle pervasive coordination
  failures or first-mover concerns in developing a viable sector can help
  crowd-in additional investments and the entry of new enterprises.
  (2) The needs of domestic as well as foreign investors need to be
  addressed. Foreign investment can be particularly attractive for bring-
  ing in additional resources to the country. They can also bring in new
  technologies and improved access to external markets. As foreign inves-
  tors have choices as to where to locate, their investment in fragile situ-
  ations may be dependent on risk sharing or subsidies. The selection
  of which investments to support needs to keep the balance of distor-
  tions and externalities in mind; playing a catalyzing role and developing
  linkages with local firms is important in ensuring that externalities get
  realized. In addition, the self-employed and local businesses in fragile
  situations also face profound demand risk, high transaction costs due to
  weak business networks and limited access to finance. There may there-
  fore be important externalities to interventions that help make connec-
  tions, build skills, or demonstrate ways to coordinate among smaller
  enterprises and not just to focus on large multinational investments.
  With limited access to finance, cash-flow bottlenecks deserve increas-
  ing attention alongside investment capital needs, particularly for local
  investors. Programs also need to look at collateral requirements at a time
  when property rights may be in dispute and to ensure access is inclusive,
  including for women who often face greater credit constraints. Among
  more well-established businesses, trade finance may have a useful role
  to play.

                                                                                                   23
An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



                                (3) Targeted entry points around value chains, sectors, or geo-
                                graphic regions can help limit the complexity of implementation,
                                deliver results, and offer workable ways to guard against capture.
                                Programs that target particular sectors or value chains—often with a
                                geographic focus, as well—can help limit political and operational com-
                                plexities that might arise from broader interventions. These approaches
                                can also mitigate some of the governance risks that could accompany
                                targeting individual recipients with more limited linkages to the local
                                economy. The greater focus on addressing coordination and informa-
                                tion failures would have the aim of expanding participation in the sec-
                                tor or value chain, ensuring both more openness to opportunities and
                                competition to encourage improved performance. Sectors such as agri-
                                business and agro-processing are likely to offer more pro-poor opportu-
                                nities for a wider set of people in many fragile countries. The selection
                                of particular sectors, value chains or locations should also be informed
                                by their inclusivity, particularly if there are gender or ethnic gaps in
                                participation. Entry points that seek to develop more inclusive sectors
                                also offer a potential way to ‘graduate’ from interventions focused on
                                livelihoods, providing support to expand entrepreneurship and hiring
                                in enterprises rather than public works.
                                (4) Specific investments in private sector development should be
                                jobs-intensive, but also reach significant scale. These goals are not
                                easily achieved together, as capacity is low in the most labor-intensive
                                sectors in fragile situations, so that interventions must often work
                                intensely with individual program participants, and must be thoroughly
                                prepared, often requiring a heavy investment in understanding markets,
                                technologies, and political economy. Reaching scale will take patience
                                and commitment. Conversely, while some easily scalable investments,
                                notably in infrastructure, can target key bottlenecks and be jobs-inten-
                                sive, it has proven very hard to generate significant jobs impacts in other
                                sectors, notably the mining sector (IEG, 2013).
                                Approaches to supporting the private sector should address the
                             nature of FCV constraints and catalyze private investment.10 Countries
                             in conflict and fragility stand apart in the strain that significant (re)con-
                             struction needs put on available public resources. Hence, there is a pre-
                             mium on catalyzing both foreign and domestic private investment. The
                             sophistication of private sector firms determines the options for how this
                             can be attempted. Where there is a real prospect of attracting foreign invest-
                             ment into a formalizing private sector, instruments can directly reduce the
                             FCV risk premium, e.g., through MIGA guarantees or the crowd-in and
                             signaling effect of IFC commitments. Similarly, for countries that have
                             achieved a basic governance and investment climate capacity, even those
                             fairly recently in conflict, a broad range of private sector projects can be an
                             important part of developing the economy and creating good jobs. Besides
                             agricultural value chain programs, important private sector projects could
24
                                      An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations




    Box 5  Building SME capacity in difficult FCV environments
    Support to SME recovery in a shifting secu-            program worked with a range of private sector
    rity environment: the Economic Revitalization          implementation partners. In the gum arabic and
    project in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and the Feder-           fisheries sectors, the project focused on addressing
    ally Administered Tribal Areas of Pakistan. The        barriers to competitiveness identified in a value
    project successfully operated an SME matching          chain analysis. Training on better harvesting and
    grant program from 2011 to 2016, as the secu-          processing techniques for gums, and support to
    rity environment improved in the wake of insur-        business management and marketing allowed five
    gency, violence, and displacement. Over five years,    gum and resin firms to connect to export mar-
    the program disbursed 1,471 matching grants to         kets. Training in fishing techniques, processing
    SMEs, totaling US$12 million (about $8,000 per         hygiene, and quality control helped double the
    grant on average). Grants have been given for a wide   number of active vessels in the port of Berbera to
    range of investments—including run-of-the-river        197, employing 765 full-time fishermen, and led
    micro hydropower for reliable electricity in remote    to growth in fish sales of 290 percent and ice pro-
    areas. Funding has been accompanied by business        duction by 136 percent between 2012 and 2014.
    training sessions for 800 entrepreneurs active in a    Over the same time period, the Somaliland Busi-
    range of industries from quarrying to silk weaving.    ness Fund disbursed $9.6m in matching grants
    The project records 5,628 jobs directly created at     to 174 MSMEs (an average grant size of about
    participating SMEs, and the estimated generation       $55,000), and leveraged nearly $26m in private
    of an additional 10,000 indirect jobs.                 investment. Recipient firms were active in a broad
        Testing and scaling approaches to SME sup-         range of sectors, from livestock and fisheries to
    port: the Somalia Private Sector Development           alternative energy and manufacturing. After two
    Reengagement Program. To deliver in Somalil-           years of operation, 1,862 jobs were reported to
    and at a time when there was no recognized             have been created, mostly for youth, and includ-
    government counterpart, this Bank-executed             ing one-third of jobs that employed women.




include private infrastructure, SME finance and equity programs, trade
finance, retail value chains, manufacturing and services, and special eco-
nomic zones. Developing these projects will require extensive advisory and
due diligence work, and also require extensive work regarding corporate
governance, environmental and social issues, integrity due diligence, and
private company and government capacity building. By way of contrast,
where the private sector is nascent, a patient process of nurturing can begin
to tackle constraints and draw in domestic investment. The range of pos-
sible approaches is broad, from access to finance and matching grants to
wage subsidies, market information, business advisory services, and beyond.
Informal firms can show greater resilience in persisting through conflict and
a greater ability to rebound; particularly in the early stages of supporting
private sector recovery, it will be important to offer them support in raising
productivity. This can call for creative interventions—for instance, the use
of mobile money to help overcome problems of poor financial infrastruc-
ture. In principle, firm surveys can help identify constraints and direct the
choice; but in FCV environments where there is an urgent need for action,

                                                                                                                  25
An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



                                        little data (in particular, on informal firms), and many layers of market and
                                        governance failure, modalities may have to be tried out, monitored, and
                                        refined. Finally, in any setting, the provision of public goods (power, roads,
                                        and ICT) can lower risk for private investors (and can in turn offer an entry
                                        point for public-private partnerships).
                                            Given the risks attending private sector activity in fragility and con-
                                        flict, the way the WBG conducts private sector operations is crucial
                                        in raising the prospects of success. A substantial presence on the ground
                                        is required to find openings to help effect change, and to conduct serious
                                        political economy analysis and screening of possible private sector partners
                                        to lower financial and reputational project risk that could otherwise be pro-
                                        hibitive. This is true in particular where the goal is to consider afresh what
                                        may be useful leverage points, and to avoid basing policies simply on the
                                        idea of taking the private sector back to the status quo ex ante. (Investment
                                        is often drawn back to pre-crisis economic patterns; fresh thinking can be
                                        particularly important—but also particularly difficult—where these pat-
                                        terns were exclusionary and played a role in fueling conflict.) By the same
                                        token, engagement must be patient, but incorporate short feedback loops
                                        and the flexibility to learn from failure and re-adjust. Entry points outside
                                        of some enclave investments may initially be small and require a patient
                                        effort to build to scale. Operational experience shows that reversals are
                                        common, and progress can be slow. Programs in the DRC, Madagascar,
                                        and Somalia have transitioned from phases of good performance to stagna-
                                        tion or reversals, and still ultimately borne fruit (Rossignol and Salmon,
                                        2016; Speakman and Rysova, 2015).


Figure 8

                               Private sector needs and potential entry points vary widely across FCS

 Private sector stage   Nascent, often informal                                        Formalizing


                        Key need: encourage entry and achieve first gains in           Key need: continue (re)building productivity,
       Key need         productivity                                                   connect to global value chains

                        Linkages with livelihoods programs—e.g., A2F, cash             Sectors and value chains—investments to overcome
                        transfers for entrepreneurship, and safety nets to help        coordination failure.
                        overcome the grave personal risks that are often involved in   Special economic zones.
     Potential entry    even small investments to move up the value chain.
                                                                                       Fundamentals—power, macro-fiscal, and investment
         points         Value chain and sectors—skills training and matching grants    climate.
                        programs, for instance, in simple processing and aggregation
                        in agriculture.
                        Local demand or fundamentals—e.g., infrastructure.


      FCS groups        E.g., countries in deep fragility                              E.g., post-conflict IBRD countries




26
                                   An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations




Box 6  Post-conflict recovery is good business: Thinking about the private sector
from ‘day one’
In post-conflict recovery, action is needed in          domestic procurement); or (iii) facilitate recov-
the short run, but it will be more successful           ery of earnings and employment opportunities
if it aims at longer-term objectives. Short-term        in labor-intensive sectors, including for excluded
programs for stabilization and growth may not           groups. In this way, short-term revitalization may
lead to sustained productive employment creation        ultimately generate self-sustaining private sector-
and structural change in post-conflict situations,      led dynamics. Seizing this opportunity will require
unless they are designed with those goals in mind.      introducing development and employment lenses
The evidence from previous recoveries shows that        to reconstruction efforts as early as possible, and
long-term recovery finds its seeds, or fails to find    making sure that mechanisms employed in the
them, in short-term actions. Actions taken in the       humanitarian response facilitate (and do not sup-
first few weeks post-conflict have a major impact       press) the domestic supply response. It will also
on the overall recovery process (IEG 2006), so          require a detailed understanding of reconstruction
it is critical that longer-term development goals       needs and the private sector’s ability to respond.
are reflected in the initial decisions about how to         Information and clear implementation
address the recovery process from day one.              agreements are decisive in preparing for an
    For immediate post-conflict situations, the         effective response. Detailed strategies will be
relief and initial reconstruction phase is an           highly context-specific. Hence, it is fundamental
opportunity for increased employment, pro-              to success to acquire early on baseline data and a
vided the need to foster a domestic private             granular understanding of the status of the real
sector supply response is factored in from the          economy. Satellite images, remote surveys of firms
beginning. From rubble clearing to restoring            and households, and assessments of procurement
houses and basic services, there are important          capacity may offer ways to answer questions that
opportunities for the recovery of local business.       are critical to domestic procurement early on,
This ‘reconstruction value chain’ can form the          even before peace is reached. For instance, they
basis of a private sector strategy in immediate         might reveal whether there are cement factories
recovery, alongside finance to firms and cash for       still functioning, and what bottlenecks they might
work around communities. Initial investments            face in responding to demand. An immediate clar-
may hold high payoffs. With a large pool of             ification of institutional arrangements (‘the coop-
inexpensive labor in need of mobilization, scarce       erative infrastructure’, borrowing the term from
capital, and extremely low domestic savings, pri-       Mansuri and Rao (2013)) and donor coordination
ority should be given to short-term interventions       protocols for the early recovery will further help
that (i) ease constraints on the near-term supply       ensure a protracted emergency relief effort is not
response of domestic firms; (ii) facilitate domestic-   the only source of increased demand and supply in
led reconstruction (this should include support to      the immediate aftermath of conflict.




                                                                                                              27
An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



                             Supporting the forcibly displaced and host communities: A historic
                             challenge of our time
                             Enabling the displaced to find productive livelihoods and providing
                             opportunities for host communities are of the essence. Forced displace-
                             ment poses a historic challenge that the international community is scram-
                             bling to meet. UNHCR reported that nearly 65 million people lived in
                             forced displacement in 2015—the highest number since the aftermath of
                             the Second World War (UNHCR, 2016). Beyond its immediate toll on the
                             well-being of those fleeing their homes and communities, displacement is
                             one of the most immediate ways in which fragility anywhere affects stable
                             communities elsewhere. Host communities are concerned over the impact
                             of forced migration on their own employment prospects—a concern that
                             is always understandable and in some settings, justified.
                                 The experience to date has yielded some key principles in address-
                             ing the jobs implications of forced displacement that inform the
                             WBG’s response to the current crisis:
                             •	 Aim for self-reliance of the displaced, rather than a dependent life in
                                camp settings;
                             •	 Address jobs challenges for local populations in host communities
                                too, including both short-term opportunities and long-term develop-
                                ment issues; and
                             •	 Seek ways to provide public services to the displaced through host-
                                country systems (and to strengthen them).
                                Based on these insights, creative approaches are emerging to assist
                             the displaced and host communities across countries in ways that
                             respond to specific needs and opportunities. The scale and urgency of
                             the challenge calls for boldness, creativity, and a relentless effort to analyze
                             and learn. Government policies and attitudes are powerful forces in shap-
                             ing possible assistance; but key policies—for instance, with regard to work
                             permits—can also become a part of an assistance package that considers
                             host community concerns as well as the interests of the displaced.
                             •	 Shape interventions to respond to the way people move in flee-
                                ing conflict. For instance, in Africa’s Great Lakes region, where dis-
                                placed groups have remained away from their original homes for long
                                periods, support targets work permits and access to land titles. Where
                                people move frequently—either between their home communities and
                                safe spaces, or between different host communities—it targets skills
                                and tools that people can take with them. Support to displaced groups
                                is combined with targeted public works programs and investments in
                                private sector development intended to benefit both the displaced and
                                their hosts, namely regional trade facilitation, infrastructure, small-scale
                                agriculture productivity, and investment in human capital.



28
                                       An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



•	 In designing interventions, seek to seize specific local entry points.
   For instance, the response to the Syrian refugee crisis in Jordan uses
   Special Economic Zones that seek to capitalize upon favorable access
   agreements to the EU market, the availability of fully-serviced indus-
   trial land, and entrepreneurial know-how. In Lebanon, support to Syr-
   ian refugees is being rolled out in conjunction with a strengthening of
   the host country’s social safety net program.



    Box 7  There is a clear knowledge generation agenda on how targeted
    short-term interventions in FCV can best deliver, and how they can
    support longer term dynamics
    Given the importance of jobs in FCV and the                 (v) Results-based projects for both livelihoods
    accompanying challenges, this is an area where          and private sector development that tie support
    active learning is critical. Examples include:          to jobs outcomes (for instance, job placements
        (i) It is often argued that interventions can       after training, smallholder productivity increases,
    achieve a range of objectives, such as raise skills,    or hiring among grantee firms) hold promise
    generate income, connect participants to jobs, and      where conventional projects have struggled in
    build social cohesion, but evaluations rarely track     situations of fragility. More learning is needed on
    a broad range of outcomes, or long-term out-            their impact, and on how they can deliver most
    comes. More rigorous impact evaluations might           effectively.
    help build a clearer, realistic sense of what is fea-       (vi) Great strides have been made in measuring
    sible (e.g., Brück et. al., 2016).                      the direct and indirect jobs impacts of interven-
        (ii) Long-term follow up on job impacts is          tions and investments, and capturing the pro-
    still too rarely done in evaluations, and is hard to    ductivity and earnings of jobs. What still remains
    achieve in fragile situations—but the question of       challenging is capturing the magnitude of the
    whether results can be sustained matters deeply in      ‘social cohesion’ or the social externalities of jobs
    determining the development impact and cost-            on stability. Progress is needed to allow for better
    effectiveness of interventions.                         cost-efficiency analysis of jobs programs.
        (iii) While there is increasing evidence that           (vii) Data on informal firms is often much less
    cash transfers for entrepreneurship perform well as     readily available than for formal enterprises. In
    a short-term targeted intervention (e.g., Blattman      FCV, where informal businesses provide a large
    et al., 2014), there is an opportunity to explore       share of jobs—in particular during recovery—
    how they perform at scale, what their longer-term       better data is needed to understand the challenges
    contribution might be, whether they help pro-           informal firms face, and to ensure that they are
    mote stability, and whether or not they are best        not invisible in policy design.
    complemented by skills training.                            (viii) Finally, the scale and urgency of the forced
        (iv) In programs that involve short-term capital    displacement crisis puts a premium on identifying
    injections and hence, local demand shocks, e.g.,        lessons for effective support to the displaced and
    humanitarian cash transfers or DDR programs, it         host communities.
    is worth asking whether they could link with sup-
    port to local businesses to help seize opportunities
    arising from increased demand.




                                                                                                                      29
An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



                         D The path ahead in strengthening the WBG’s
                           engagement on jobs in FCV
                             Since the IEG’s 2013 evaluation of the WBG’s work in Fragile and Conflict
                             Affected Situations, the Bank has made progress in making more effective
                             its support for jobs in countries facing fragility challenges. Yet, stronger
                             engagement on jobs in FCV is needed both in the WBG’s analytical
                             work and its country programs. Box 8 discusses the question of whether
                             this is likely to require additional resources, in both the short and longer run.
                                The following six points can form an agenda for action:
                             1.	 Mainstream the application of a ‘jobs and fragility lens’ through-
                                 out country strategies and the WBG portfolio in FCV situations. The
                                 Systematic Country Diagnostics and Country Partnership Frameworks
                                 offer important opportunities, particularly as they are required to discuss
                                 the nature of countries’ FCV challenges—setting the stage for how they
                                 would then impact policy choices to expand job opportunities. Further
                                 elaboration of the guidelines provided in this framework may be needed
                                 in particular sectors to provide more specific assistance in identifying
                                 feasible entry points and in designing interventions, with due consider-
                                 ation of how they can evolve over time to close the gap between what is
                                 feasible in the short run and desirable in the medium run.
                             2.	 Collect, mainstream, and implement operational lessons from
                                 the WBG’s engagement, with particular emphasis on support to
                                 domestic private sector jobs and engagement in countries in deep
                                 fragility, including lessons on how best to navigate sensitive political
                                 economy dynamics. The WBG’s current engagement is too often ad
                                 hoc or simply opportunistic in approach, with one-off projects devised
                                 when there is an opening. As the framework is implemented, lessons
                                 from key engagements need to be made more readily available to teams,
                                 and pressure-tested and refined in the context of new operations.
                             3.	 Take steps to respond to the operational difficulty of working on
                                 jobs in situations of fragility, conflict and violence. This involves
                                 setting incentives, and providing resources for a patient and thorough
                                 engagement. Further analysis will need to pinpoint opportunities to
                                 innovate in instruments where needed (results-based approaches could
                                 hold particular potential), and to innovate on operational practices to
                                 allow for short feedback loops and flexibility in designing programs.
                             4.	 Strengthen tools for data collection and the analysis of jobs chal-
                                 lenges in FCV. Data-intensive analysis of jobs challenges, including
                                 through jobs diagnostics, is advancing the WBG’s ability to better sup-
                                 port jobs. However, these tools must be adapted in order to contribute
                                 in FCV environments that tend to be data poor and face fragility chal-
                                 lenges that are not easily approached in routinely collected data.
                             5.	 Improve monitoring and evaluation tools and results frameworks
                                 that capture both jobs and the impact of FCV. This will improve
30
                                        An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



    the ability to learn about what works in operation, even where rigorous
    randomized controlled trials are not feasible.
6.	 Continue building the experimental evidence base on the effective-
    ness and impact of interventions, programs and policies. Experi-
    mental evidence has added greatly to what is known about the merits
    of different interventions. This agenda should be expanded to cover
    issues of performance at scale, complementarity among different inter-
    ventions, effective modalities, long-term effects, and effects on stability
    alongside economic outcomes.



    Box 8  Does integrating a jobs and FCV lens require more resources?
    In FCV, adding a jobs lens may require greater              network infrastructure, would certainly take
    short-run investments, but with greater potential for       more resources upfront, but if chosen to sup-
    longer-run savings.                                         port a large number of potential beneficiaries,
        The context and nature of the jobs challenges will      could significantly help spur private sector
    affect the answer in any given situation, but there         development
    are a number of factors that can be identified. The
                                                                 However, by adding the jobs lens, these efforts
    best approach would likely frontload the need for
                                                             should be targeting externalities, crowding in pri-
    resources, both in terms of public resources/aid for
                                                             vate investment, and accelerating broader private
    the country, as well as in overhead costs of designing
                                                             sector activities and hiring, thus lowering the over-
    and implementing the interventions. But if success-
                                                             all amount of resources needed to put the country
    ful, the approach should lower the resources needed
                                                             on a sustainable path. To the extent that expand-
    overall. The resource-related factors are:
                                                             ing economic opportunities reinforces a virtuous
    •	 Adding a jobs lens to macroeconomic policy            cycle of reducing the risk of further conflict and
       choices could imply additional resources if           broadening the revenue base, the benefits could be
       additional stimulus spending is needed.               substantial indeed.
    •	 Costs will rise if livelihoods or public works            It should be expected that implementing a jobs
       programs are to be more than cash transfer            lens is more resource-intensive in situations of conflict
       programs that improve beneficiaries’ employ-          and fragility.
       ability by providing useful work experience               It must also be recognized that the costs of
       and/or training.                                      engaging will be higher. This is likely to be true
    •	 Support to the private sector (including local        for any project, but it could have particular con-
       and international investors), through address-        sequences for engagement with the private sec-
       ing risks and high costs of finance, would take       tor. Investments in many FCV contexts may also
       additional resources.                                 be smaller, and this compounds the challenge of
    •	 Relying more on the local private sector to           higher fixed costs for investment preparation, and
       meet (re)construction needs can be a way of           it is not realistic to require an even higher return
       spurring on greater local investments, and may        to cover these costs in a context where business
       take more resources if local costs are higher         success is that much harder to achieve. The need
       (although improving economies of scale may            for patience, acceptance of higher rates of failure,
       offset this).                                         and some cross-subsidizing of overhead costs must
    •	 Public investments, including those needed            be recognized in choosing the appropriate level of
       to complement private investment, such as             resources to allocate.



                                                                                                                         31
An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



Appendix Table 1  How does fragility shape feasible entry points for interventions
on jobs?
Risk of violence and conflict     Counteracting the risk of conflict recurrence is an overriding priority. Consider
                                  potential impacts on jobs and stability of macro-fiscal policy. Where possible,
                                  target opportunities to individuals and groups at risk of engaging in violence.
                                  Risk depresses investment. Look for mitigation measures, and support investments
                                  that catalyze other investments.
Weak governance                   Limited political capital for reforms (and the risk of destabilitzation) constrains
                                  what can be tackled and calls for a selective focus on high-impact reforms and on
                                  avoiding elite capture.
Low institutional capacity        Favor reforms, programs, and public investments that are simple and can
                                  realistically be implemented. Focusing support in limited sectors or regions can
                                  help manage operational complexity.
Limited revenue relative to       Limited resources for programs constrain public investments and scope of
(recovery) needs                  programs. Regulatory reforms may be more feasible (but may be constrained by
                                  governance and institutional capacity). Programs and public investments may
                                  need to be rolled out across locations and sectors over time.
Limited / disrupted markets       Addressing key market failures may require more targeted approaches, e.g., to
                                  build capacity, demonstrate feasibility or make information available.




32
     Appendix Table 2  How policy priorities can vary by the nature of FCV challenges
                                                                                                                     Policy priorities
     FCV challenge              Country examples     Key goals             Macro/economy-wide                Emergency and livelihoods         Private sector development
     Immediate post-conflict    Iraq, [Syria, Yemen] Stabilize,            Carefully watch jobs and          Emergency measures to             Involve private sector in
                                                     reconstruct           fragility impacts of macro        ensure sufficient consumption     reconstruction as much as
                                                                           stabilization and public          levels (targeted toward at risk   possible
                                                                           spending review; seek ‘peace      populations)
                                                                           dividend’ on key regulation;
                                                                           rebuild infrastructure
     Deep fragility             Afghanistan, DRC,    Avoid recurrence,     Regulations that avoid            Target support toward at          Begin building capacity in
                                South Sudan          build capacity,       deeper capture, allow some        risk populations; livelihood      agribusiness and other labor
                                                     build livelihoods     competition; meet the most        programs to raise productivity    intensive sectors; focus on
                                                                           pressing infrastructure needs     in agriculture (and other key     governance issues and avoid
                                                                                                             labor-intensive sectors)          elite capture
     Transition                 Bosnia-              Support shared        More attention to investment      Ensure programs include           Build capacity to connect to
                                Herzegovina,         growth and            climate; access to finance on     skills development and help       global value chains; broaden
                                Madagascar           structural            sustainable terms; broaden        individuals improve future        opportunities for wider set
                                                     transformation        network infrastructure            employability; transition         of enterprises (support entry,
                                                                                                             toward sustainable safety net     competition); look to expand
                                                                                                             systems                           regional trade
     FCV risks (prevention)     Egypt, Guinea,       Avoid                 Policies to promote growth;       Review targeting of support;      Address vested interests; build
                                Malawi               destabilization,      ensure tax, regulation, and       pursue skills and work            capacity; broaden access to
                                                     broaden               public investments support        experience to avoid exclusion     opportunities for wider set of
                                                     opportunities         jobs rich growth; avoid           of youth                          enterprises
                                                                           austerity that cuts back
                                                                           employment
     Sub-national FCV           Nigeria, Pakistan    Contain insecurity,   Public investments that           Target support toward at risk     Build linkages across economy
                                                     broaden growth        improve economic linkages         populations; enable mobility      (e.g., network infrastructure)
                                                     and inclusion         with sub-region; provide          for individuals to pursue
                                                                           security to avoid spreading       opportunities
                                                                           violence; support rule of law
                                                                           and institution building
     Spillovers from conflict   Jordan, Kenya,       Avoid instability,    Public investments to absorb      Target displaced individuals      Support expansion of private
     (e.g., displacement)       Lebanon              achieve growth        new migrants, aligned with        and host citizens that risk job   sector to absorb new labor;
                                                     despite burdens,      development needs beyond          or wage losses; aim to improve    expand access to credit; look to
                                                     address inclusion     those caused by spillovers;       employability; design to take     expand trade opportunities




33
                                                                                                                                                                                  An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations




                                                                           expand existing public services   advantage of range of skills
                                                                           where possible                    available
34
     Appendix Table 3  Bridging feasible entry points and long-term goals: Examples across policy areas
                                                   Short-term FCV constraints and priorities and long-term goals                              Policies to address short-term
     Policy area        Short-term constraints                  Short-term opportunities               Long-term goals                        priorities—with the long-run in mind
     Macro-fiscal and   Limited political capital and           Public employment can support          Sound macro-fiscal management,         Add a jobs and fragility lens to
     fundamentals       capacity for reforms; particular        social cohesion and stability.         strong investment climate to           reforms, and set the right level
                        sensitivity to short-term jobs losses   Reform in priority sectors can yield   facilitate domestic investment and     of ambition—focus on avoiding
                        that may follow from reforms.           a peace dividend (e.g., land rights,   attract foreign investment, reliable   costly mistakes, but seize possible
                                                                power sector, resource revenue         infrastructure.                        opportunities for a peace dividend
                                                                management).                                                                  in priority sectors.
     Emergency and      Insufficient administrative capacity Support to vulnerable groups              Sustainable means-tested safety        Provide targeted support to key
     livelihoods        (and often, funds) to implement      and groups at risk of engaging            nets and programs to build human       groups and build capacity for
                        country-wide systems.                in violence contribute to social          capital.                               private sector activity from the
                                                                                                                                                                                     An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations




                                                             cohesion. Livelihood programs can                                                ground up. Put in place elements
                                                             lay foundations for private sector                                               of delivery systems that can last,
                                                             growth; visible public benefits may                                              and follow up on livelihood
                                                             begin to re-establish a positive                                                 interventions to start connecting to
                                                             social contract.                                                                 value chains.
     Private-sector     Low capacity among firms                Given pervasive market failures        Functioning markets, ongoing           Provide support to sectors, value
     development        to connect to value chains;             around sectors and value chains,       programs focused on innovation,        chains, or regions; to avoid adverse
                        governance and political economy        targeted interventions can support     human capital, matching.               outcomes, focus on jobs-intensive
                        obstacles to reform.                    PSD without distorting prices.                                                investments, addressing clear
                                                                                                                                              market failures, and avoiding
                                                                                                                                              capture.
                                        An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



Notes
 1.	 The framework is part of the WBG’s commitments under IDA 17 to “develop
     a more realistic medium to long-term framework for inclusive growth and
     jobs in FCS” that would move the WBG’s perspective beyond fostering a
     better investment climate, and toward embracing a stronger focus on shared
     growth and economic opportunity.
 2.	 Projections based on UN DESA Population Prospects.
 3.	 For a full review, see Blattman and Ralston, 2015, on which this summary
     is based.
 4.	 Perhaps most notably, a program combining capital, skills training, and coun-
     seling for former combatants in Liberia yielded better jobs and economic
     outcomes, alongside a lower willingness to consider illicit activities or work as
     mercenaries (Blattman and Annan, 2016). Recent evidence also suggests that
     public employment through India’s NRGA program has weakened the link
     between poor economic outcomes and violence in the Naxalite insurgency
     (Fetzer, 2013).
 5.	 See, for instance, Peschka et al., 2011.
 6.	 When including countries with a population of less than a million, average
     spending is higher in FCS ($49 compared to $26). This is due to the higher
     share of very small states among FCS (20% as opposed to 10% among non-
     FCS), and convergence between FCS and non-FCS spending per capita in
     very small states.
 7.	 Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism
     (AML/CFT).
 8.	 Conversely, there is a need to guard against the risk of backsliding on key
     policies that can come with the end of conflict. For instance, traditional law
     can help cohesion in a society emerging from conflict, but may erode hard-
     won gains on women’s rights.
 9.	 More broadly, a rich range of human development interventions can halt the
     erosion of human capital in situations of conflict and displacement. In pro-
     tecting the physical and mental health, education, and skills of participants,
     these programs can make an important long-term contribution to jobs and
     shared growth.
10.	 The range of modalities for support is very broad. It can target capital (access
     to finance; instruments to manage risk; IFC loans or equity investments;
     projects offering capital inputs or matching grants); labor (wage support;
     training; skills matching); complementary public investments in infrastruc-
     ture and services; SEZs that may combine access to infrastructure and ser-
     vices with special regulatory regimes; market information; business advisory
     services; and investments that have signaling effects or demonstration effects
     (for instance, in showing that coordination along a value chain is viable).




                                                                                                        35
An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations



                            References
                            Beath, A., et al. (2016). “Winning hearts and minds through development:
                                 evidence from a field experiment in Afghanistan.” MIT Political Science
                                 Department Research Paper No. 2011–14.
                            Berman, E., et al. (2011). “Do working men rebel? Unemployment and insurgency
                                 in Afghanistan, Iraq, and the Philippines.” Journal of Conflict Resolution,
                                 55.4: 496–528.
                            Berman, N., and M. Couttenier (2015). “External shocks, internal shots: the
                                 geography of civil conflicts.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 97.4: 758–776.
                            Bertrand, M., et al. (2016). “Impacts à Court et Moyen Terme sur les Jeunes
                                 des Travaux à Haute Intensité de Main d’œuvre (THIMO): Résultats de
                                 l’évaluation d’impact de la composante THIMO du Projet Emploi Jeunes
                                 et Développement des compétence (PEJEDEC) en Côte d’Ivoire.” Working
                                 paper.
                            Blattman, C., et al. (2014). “Generating Skilled Self-Employment in Developing
                                 Countries: Experimental Evidence from Uganda”. The Quarterly Journal of
                                 Economics, 129(2), 697–752.
                            Blattman, C., and J. Annan (2015). “Can employment reduce lawlessness and
                                 rebellion? A field experiment with high-risk men in a fragile state.” Working
                                 Paper No. w21289. National Bureau of Economic Research.
                            Blattman, C. and L. Ralston (2015). “Generating employment in poor and fragile
                                 states: evidence from labor market and entrepreneurship programs.” Working
                                 paper.
                            Brück, T., et al. (2016). “Jobs aid peace: a review of the theory and practice of the
                                 impact of employment programmes on peace in fragile and conflict-affected
                                 countries.” ISDC Working Paper.
                            Cali, M. (2015). Trading away from conflict. World Bank Publications.
                            Chekir, H., and I. Diwan (2014). “Crony capitalism in Egypt.” Journal of
                                 Globalization and Development, 5(2), 177–211.
                            Collier, P. (2009). “Post-conflict recovery: how should strategies be distinctive?”
                                 Journal of African Economies.
                            Collier, P., and A. Hoeffler (1998). “On economic causes of civil war.” Oxford
                                 Economic Papers 50.4: 563–573.
                            Collier, P., et al. (2008). “Post-conflict risks.” Journal of Peace Research, 45.4: 461–478.
                            Cramer, C. (2010). “Unemployment and participation in violence.” WDR
                                 Background Paper
                            D’Aoust, O., et al. (2016). “Who benefited from Burundi’s demobilization
                                 program?” World Bank Economic Review, forthcoming.
                            Dudwick, N., and R. Srinivasan (2013). Creating Jobs in Africa’s Fragile States: Are
                                 Value Chains an Answer? World Bank Publications.
                            Earle, J., and S. Gehlbach (2015). “The productivity consequences of political
                                 turnover: firm-level evidence from Ukraine’s Orange Revolution.” American
                                 Journal of Political Science, 59(3), 708–723.
                            Fetzer, T. (2014). “Can workfare programs moderate violence? Evidence from
                                 India.” Working paper.




36
                                       An Integrated Framework for Jobs in Fragile and Conflict Situations


Kluve, J. et al. (2014). “Interventions to improve labour market outcomes of youth:
     a systematic review of training, entrepreneurship promotion, employment
     services, mentoring, and subsidized employment interventions.” Working
     paper, The Campbell Collaboration.
Mansuri, G., and V. Rao (2013). Localizing Development: Does Participation
     Work?” Policy Research Report, World Bank.
Miguel, E. et al. (2004). “Economic shocks and civil conflict: an instrumental
     variables approach.” Journal of Political Economy, 112.4: 725–53.
Mueller, H., et al. (2016). “Recovery from conflict: lessons of success.” Working
     paper.
Peschka, M., et al. (2011). “The role of the private sector in fragile and conflict-
     affected states.” WDR Background Paper.
Ralston, L. (2014). “Job creation in fragile and conflict-affected situations.”
     World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 7078.
Rijkers, B., et al. (2014). “All in the Family: State Capture in Tunisia.” Policy
     Research Working Paper No. 6810. World Bank.
Rossignol, I. and K. Salmon (2016). “Stimulating the private sector and job
     creation in fragile and conflict-affected settings.” Position paper of the World
     Bank Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice.
Speakman, J., and A. Rysova (2015). The small entrepreneur in fragile and conflict-
     affected situations. World Bank Publications.
UNHCR (2015). Mid-Year Trends 2015.
World Bank (2014). A Measured Approach to Ending Poverty and Boosting Shared
     Prosperity: Concepts, Data, and the Twin Goals. World Bank Publications.
World Bank (2013a). World Development Report 2013: Jobs. World Bank
     Publications.
World Bank (2013b). Designing community-driven development operations in fragile
     and conflict-affected situations: lessons from a stocktaking. Social Development
     Department, World Bank.
World Bank (2011). World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security, and
     Development. World Bank Publications.




                                                                                                       37
