                               Agribusiness in South Asia

 Extended Version of the Industry Case Study Done for:

 South Asia’s Turn
   Policies to Boost Competitiveness and Create the Next Export Powerhouse



`Soujanya Chodavarapu, Asa Giertz & Peter Jaeger


                                                         OCTOBER 1, 2016
Acknowledgement
The authors would like to firstly thank all the farmers, traders and other key stakeholders who could make the time to
participate and contribute immensely to the discussions during our village interactions in Pakistan & India. We would
like to place on record our gratitude to Dr.K.M.Singh (Rajendra Agricutural University,Bihar), Madhur Gautam,
Michael Ferrantino, Muhammad Riaz, and Manivannan Pathy from the World Bank Group (WBG) for their substantial
contribution and to Animesh Srivastava, Loraine Ronchi, Shankar Narayanan, Smriti Talwar, R.S Pathak, Bertine
Kamphuis, Ed Keturakis (WBG) for their comments and inputs. For the narrative on key learnings from the lead firms in
India, we would like to thank the representatives from KRBL, LT Foods, Kohinoor, Lalquila, Pioneer Seeds, Godrej
Agrovet Limited, Suguna Poultry, Desai Fruits Limited, ABT Foods, Buhler India, IL&FS Clusters and Anil Starch.
Representatives from Pakistan’s private sector firms such as Nestlé, Engro Foods , Metro Cash & Carry, Fauji Fresh
and Freeze, Mitchell’s Fruit Farms, Green Springs, Roshan Foods , Imtiaz, Noon, National Foods, Rafhan, K&N,
Seasons Foods, Mazco, Matco, Engro Foundation, Long Grain Rice Mills, Guard Agricultural Research & Services,
Fauji Fertilizer Company, Four Brothers Group, Pioneer, Bühler and Srilanka’s Dilmah Tea have contributed
immensely to strengthen the private sector perspective. We are grateful for the contributions from government agencies
such as Department of Agriculture (Government of Punjab, India and Punjab, Pakistan), National Centre for Cold
Chain Development, Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority, Ministry of Food
Processing & Industries-Government of India, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India and for the inputs from
financial institutions such as Habib Bank, Allied Bank and State Bank of Pakistan. Private consortia such as Rice
Exporters Association of Pakistan, All India Rice Exporters Association, National Seed Association of India, Bihar
Industries Association, Bihar Chambers of Commerce, Tamilnadu Chamber of Commerce, Punjab State Farmer’s
Commission, and Invest India have provided valuable inputs. We would like to thank Esperanza Lasagabaster, Paramita
Dasgupta and Martien Van Nieuwkoop for their leadership. The Support & constant guidance from the Task Team
Leaders- Vincent Palmade, Denis Medvedev and India T&C Lead-Sebastian Saez has been vital. We would like to thank
Atisha Kumar, Saachi Pandey and Deeksha Kokas for their support in Research Analysis. Private Sector interactions
and Missions to Pakistan, Bihar, Tamilnadu and Punjab in India would not have been possible without the support of
Ms. Preeti Soreng & Ms. Tanya Cubbins.



World Bank Group Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work
do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement
or acceptance of such boundaries.
                                                                            Agribusiness in South Asia



Executive Summary                                     Content of the report
                                                      After a discussion of the motivation and
Agribusiness (including agriculture) accounts
                                                      approach, we review the agribusiness sector’s
for almost one third of South Asia’s GDP and
                                                      performance in output, trade and productivity.
has the potential to almost double over the next
                                                      The experience of 36 leading firms is used to
fifteen years (reaching US$1.5 trillion by 2030).
                                                      understand the regions’ potential, the drivers of
This increase will be driven by rapid growth in
                                                      competitiveness, and the policy constraints that
population, incomes and urbanization, as well as
                                                      limit these firms’ ability to scale up and replicate
accelerated transformation of the sector towards
                                                      elsewhere. The chapter synthesizes lessons from
higher value products and downstream activities.
                                                      both successful and unsuccessful efforts at the
The highest growth will come from processed
                                                      firm and country level, to understand the
food and related services, such as food retail and
                                                      sector’s most pressing needs.
restaurants which will create millions of
productive jobs outside agriculture and positive      The chapter draws lessons from every country in
backward linkages for farmers. Removing               the region – e.g. the innovative Agriculture
restrictions on trade, markets and prices would       Development Fund in Afghanistan to improve
support this transformation; reforms in these         access to credit; the linkages between
areas are already showing promising effects. In       agribusiness and tourism in the Maldives and
addition, governments should continue to              Nepal; the private sector’s role in linking
support smaller and poorer farmers, who may           farmers to markets in Bangladesh, Bhutan,
not benefit from this transformation. More            Pakistan and India; and the success of leading
targeted and pro-active support should be             firms in India and Sri Lanka in developing
provided to raise productivity, rather than           premium global brands in rice and tea by
blanket subsidies and price controls that             investing in R&D.
encourage the status quo and threaten the
sustainability of the sector in the face of climate   Beyond the need to reduce and improve the
change (for example, large untargeted water           targeting of subsidies, and to pursue market
subsidies).                                           liberalization along the value chains, the chapter
                                                      emphasizes the importance of encouraging
                                                      investment; promoting inclusivity through
How we went about the case study                      backward linkages; building the knowledge
The objectives of this chapter are: (i) to assess
                                                      agenda in the sector by promoting public-private
the region’s agribusiness potential based on
                                                      alliances; and strengthening public and private
international benchmarks of productivity, output
                                                      sector leadership to develop and implement the
(including trade) and consumption along the
                                                      urgently needed new policy paradigm.
main value chains; (ii) to identify the main
constraints through firm-level data analysis,
analysis of the rice value chains, and interviews
with 36 leading firms at the forefront of the
agribusiness transformation; and (iii) to propose
reform strategies based on stakeholder
interviews (including producers and policy
makers) and international experience. This
chapter also relies on recent results from the
World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys covering
thousands of agribusiness firms in South and
East Asia, manufacturing census data from
India, detailed trade data available for most
countries, and several World Bank and FAO
studies.
                                                                                Agribusiness in South Asia




       1.       Motivation and Approach

1.1         Motivation

South Asia’s agribusiness value chain is large and has a strong potential for growth. Including
agriculture, food processing and food related services (e.g. food retail and restaurants), the
agribusiness value chain accounts for almost a third of South Asia’s GDP. Future growth will be
driven by population growth as well as rapid income growth and urbanization shifting the demand
towards higher-value products (e.g. premium branded rice, horticulture and livestock), and to higher
processing and food related services. South Asia’s demand for agro-food products and services is
expected to almost double over the next 15 years, reaching $1.5 trillion by 2030 (see Annex 1A).
Development of the agribusiness sector stimulates economic activity far beyond the farm, as post-
farm activities such as logistics, processing and retail contribute about 55 percent of the total global
value of the sector. Investments in agro-food processing result in higher input and income multipliers
than in any other industry, and the employment effect is about 2.5 times that of other sectors (World
Bank, 2014). Despite increasing trade in food products, the agribusiness sector in all countries
remains primarily domestic for reasons of taste, convenience and preference for fresh food over
frozen. Food processing is often the largest manufacturing industry – for example 90% in Afghanistan
(World Bank, 2014).
Global experience shows that the development of agro-food value chains plays an important role in
rural poverty reduction and in the creation of off-farm jobs, especially for women. The increased
demand for higher value agricultural products and interactions with increasingly sophisticated buyers
often increases the productivity and income of poor farmers (e.g. through backward linkages as
discussed below). Furthermore, some of the agricultural products with the highest growth potential,
for example dairy, can disproportionately benefit women.
Three main challenges stand in the way of capturing these opportunities in South Asia:
      i.    The competitiveness/productivity challenge. Low agricultural yield and high waste
            continues to plague the upstream parts of the value chain, while downstream activities remain
            small, informal leading to low productivity across South Asia. Outdated support regimes
            (support prices for cereals, farm input subsidies, etc.) impede diversification to more
            productive systems. Distorted trade policies also hinder competition, thereby rendering the
            sector insulated and limiting growth.
     ii.    The small-holder challenge. Agricultural production in South Asia is predominantly small
            scale, making it cumbersome for processors to secure a steady supply of quality products at
            reasonable cost. Concerns that large processors will by-pass smallholders by integrating
            vertically with intermediaries/aggregators or by importing the produce, coupled with fears
            that large processors would exploit smallholders, have led some governments to put in place
            counterproductive policies – e.g. restrictions on contract farming in Punjab, India and
            generous fiscal incentives for small-scale food processors in Bihar, India. Section 3 considers
            successful examples of linkages between large processors and smallholders, and section 5
            considers policies governments could use to foster these linkages.
    iii.    The natural resources challenge. Much of the region’s agricultural development has come
            at a high cost in terms of natural resources. In particular, over use of water has been driven
            by substantial direct subsidies (e.g. irrigation charges in Pakistan only covers 10% of the cost)
            and indirect subsidies (e.g. free power enables farmers in Punjab, India to pump beyond


2
                                                                                  Agribusiness in South Asia


            sustainable levels). The stress on land and water resources is exacerbated by rapid income
            growth, urbanization, and climate change. Climate change also leads to interruptions in
            supply and volatile prices for the food industry.


1.2         Approach
Recognizing the interface between agriculture and agro-processing, this chapter focuses on how the
South Asian agribusiness sector can be made more competitive within the context of agricultural
development. The main goals are to:
       (i)     assess the potential of agribusiness in South Asia based on international
               benchmarking of productivity, output (including trade) and consumption along the
               main value chains;
       (ii)    discuss the main constraints standing in the way of this potential (mainly for
               agribusinesses but also in primary agriculture, given the inter linkages); and
       (iii)   propose strategies to remove these constraints while promoting sustainable
               agribusiness practices and fostering productive backward linkages between
               processors and smallholders

The analysis covers agribusiness in all eight member countries1 of the South Asian Association for
Regional Cooperation (SAARC). The term agribusiness encompasses all for-profit activities that
connect the agriculture value chain, from farm inputs to retail, restaurants and hotels. To provide a
broad overview of domestic and international competitiveness, a range of value chains (rice, meat,
dairy, poultry, aquaculture and horticulture) are considered. First-hand interviews and fields visits in
Afghanistan, India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka are combined with material from a wide range of reports
and studies on the other countries, as well as data from enterprise surveys, government sources, and
trade databases.2 Interviews of 36 lead firms (see Annex 1B) covered their background, reasons for
success, the difficulties encountered along the way (particularly with respect to issues affected by
policy), and an overview of future plans for investment in expansion or diversification. The extent of
any backward linkages to suppliers was explored to assess how the relationship can benefit producers,
as well as the impact and reaction to prohibitions against direct purchasing (for example in the Indian
Punjab).



       2.      Performance Analysis

We discuss South Asia’s performance in terms of the size of the food processing industry, trade,
productivity and production cost.
2.1         Output and trade
South Asia is still predominately a producer of primary agricultural products, which are larger in
value than food processing in all countries. Except for Pakistan other South Asian countries do not
come close in terms of value added as a proportion of primary agriculture. Also, South Asia is poorly
connected to the global food value chains both in terms of exports and imports. South Asia’s share of
world agro-food trade is only 3 percent for exports and 2 percent for imports, as compared to 14 and 9
percent, respectively, for East Asia (figure 1). South Asia’s recent increase in export market share is
driven by India (figure 2), mostly due to the removal of the export ban on rice (see below) hinting at

1
    Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka
2
    See bibliography for detailed listing

3
                                                                                                Agribusiness in South Asia


revealed comparative advantage. All countries except Pakistan export more raw material than
processed products. And with few exceptions, imports of processed agro-food products exceed
exports, and are equal, or almost equal, to the value of primary agricultural products. This shows that
the region has distinct regional taste and consumption pattern and also maybe considerable potential
to increase production of agro-food products, both for domestic consumers and export markets.



          Figure 1. Share of world trade, South              3.0




                                                                                                                                                                                Figure 2: Export market share
                                                                                                                                                in Agribusiness (2004 – 2014)
             Asia vs. East Asia and the Pacific              2.5
                   (1972-74 to 2012-14)
                                                             2.0
    15%
                                                             1.5
    10%
                                                             1.0
    5%
                                                             0.5
    0%
              EAP      South Asia      EAP      South Asia   0.0

                                                                   2004
                                                                          2005
                                                                                 2006
                                                                                        2007
                                                                                               2008
                                                                                                      2009
                                                                                                             2010
                                                                                                                    2011
                                                                                                                           2012
                                                                                                                                  2013
                                                                                                                                         2014
                    Export                   Import

                 1972-74     1982-84    1992-94
                                                                      BGD                  IND                  LKA                 PAK
                 2002-04     2012-14




2.2         Productivity and cost along the agribusiness value chain
Productivity remains low in South Asia, especially in higher value agriculture products and
processing activities. We discuss in turn South Asia’s performance in lower value agricultural
products (cereals), higher value agricultural products and food processing.

Cereals


South Asia’s yield performance has improved as the result of longstanding, intensive support for
cereal production. However, yields remain well below levels in other regions practicing intensive
agriculture (such as China and the EU--figure 3), due to lower adoption of productive seeds and new
technologies as well as less efficient use of resources, water in particular.3 Even though investment in
irrigation has maintained growth, irrigated rice and wheat production face diminishing returns to
investment in long run (for example, in India). Bangladesh and Sri Lanka have the highest average
rice productivity in South Asia (figure 4), although yields vary considerably within countries
depending on policies and the allocation of public investment.




3
 Underlying causes behind under-investments in new technology seems to be the low effectiveness of
extension services and market incentives, including prices and proximity to markets, while efficiency in the use
of resources seems to be linked to policies resulting in free water – including free electricity for pumping.
However, it may be noted that countries in EU and China resource abundancy allows deployment of
technology

4
                                                                                                      Agribusiness in South Asia


80000                                         Figure 3: Cereal Yield, Hg/Ha
60000

40000

20000

        0
                      1991-93                      2011-13                     1991-93                       2011-13
                                       Rice                                                        Wheat




                                South Asia        Brazil     China    Thailand           Viet Nam     EU

Source: FAOSTAT,August 2015. *hg/ha is Hectogram per Hectare where hectogram = 100 grammes



                                Figure 4. Paddy rice productivity, t/ha (2014)
    5                           4.39
                                                    3.64                                                     3.89
    4                                                                                       3.62
                                                                      3.17
    3          2.49
    2

    1

    0
            Afghanistan      Bangladesh             India             Nepal               Pakistan         Sri Lanka

Source FAOSTAT; t/ha is tonnes per hectare




Higher-value agriculture products


Horticulture yields are quite low in South Asia (figure 5), and this is compounded by high post-
harvest losses due to poor transportation and inadequate storage.



                                        Figure 5: Horticulture Yield, Hg/Ha
    800000
    600000
    400000
    200000
         0
                   1991-93            2011-13          1991-93            2011-13           1991-93         2011-13
                             Apples                              Onions                              Tomatoes

                                              South Asia     Brazil   China         EU

Source: FAO STAT, Aug 2015 *hg/ha is Hectogram per Hectare where hectogram = 100 grammes



5
                                                                                                   Agribusiness in South Asia


South Asia has seen important increases in milk productivity over the past three decades, but yields
remain very low compared with international giants such as China, the EU, Brazil and Indonesia
(figure 6). South Asia’s cattle meat productivity is the lowest in the world (figure 7).

                                       Figure 6 - Milk Yield, Hg/Animal per Year
    70000
    60000
    50000
    40000
    30000
    20000
    10000
        0
            South Asia        Brazil        China       Indonesia      Malaysia       Thailand      Viet Nam           EU

                                                            Milk     Milk


Source: FAOSTAT, Dec 2015. Hg is Hectogram where 0 Hg = 1 Kg

Figure 7: Changes in livestock productivity, meat and milk (1980-2005)




Source: Growing Africa Report. Hg is Hectogram where 0 Hg = 1 Kg. In the above figs, first figure pertains to meat and second pertains to
milk



Agro-processing


Finally, South Asian countries also lag behind their East Asian neighbors in agro-processing.
According to the World Bank Enterprise survey, labor productivity in Indian, Sri Lankan, and
Bangladeshi food-processing firms ranges between 10 and 25 percent of Chinese firms’ productivity.
And only India is anywhere close to Vietnam’s labor productivity, while agro-processing productivity




6
                                                                                 Agribusiness in South Asia


in Bangladesh and Sri Lanka is only about a third to a half of Vietnam’s level (figure 8).
                  Figure 8. Labor Productivity in Agribusiness Firms (output value /
                                              employee)


                                                                     $26,317




         $6,874              $3,799                                                    $7,482
                                                 $2,499
          India             Sri Lanka          Bangladesh             China            Vietnam


Source: World Bank Enterprise Survey 2014.
Note: China (2012) - 110 firms surveyed; Vietnam (2009) = 97 firms; India (2014) 382 firms; Sri Lanka (2011)
98 firms; Bangladesh (2013) 142 firms



2.3     Productivity drivers in South Asian agribusiness value chains
According to the World Bank Enterprise Surveys, the usual drivers of productivity, including firms’
size, age, export status, foreign ownership, and propensity to innovate and agglomerate, are not
significantly related to productivity in South Asian agribusiness value chains (Annex 11 Tables). This
is likely the result of extensive import protection, regulations and subsidies that mute competition and
reduce rewards to higher productivity or innovation (see section 4).
Half of the 507 firms interviewed had spent resources on innovation, including R&D, training, patents
and acquisition of machinery and/or equipment. Investment in innovation equaled about 5.5% of
turnover, and generated new products equal to about 10% of sales (table 2). This suggests that every
1% spent in innovation generated around 2% of participation of new products in firms’ sales.

Table 2: Innovation Descriptive Statistics (Agribusiness)
                        No. of Agrib.       % of Firms with Innov.    Innovation Expenditure     % New Products in
Size
                            Firms                    Exp.                    per Sales                Sales
SMEs (<100)                  402                    48.51%                    6.04%                  10.05%
Large (>=100)                105                   64.76%                      4.00%                  12.31%
Total                        507                   51.87%                      5.50%                  10.64%
Source: World Bank Enterprise Survey 2014
These results were analyzed using the CDM model of innovation, which is described in Volume I of
this flagship. The model is used to assess the drivers of firms’ innovation inputs (innovation
expenditures over sales), the impact of these inputs on innovation outputs (new products over sales),
and the relationship between these outputs and productivity. No significant relationship was found
between innovation inputs and outputs, or between outputs and productivity (Table 3).
Finally, using a methodology from Martin et al (2011), the impact of agglomeration on firms’
productivity was assessed at the district level in India (at the two and three digit sector classification
using the ASI data--see Annex 11 table). Surprisingly, localization (agribusiness firms co-locating
together) is negatively correlated with productivity. This result might reflect lower input prices
enjoyed by isolated food processors than by a cluster of food processors competing for inputs. The
analysis also shows a positive correlation between productivity and urbanization (agribusiness firms
locating next to firms in other sectors), perhaps because agribusiness firms next to cities may be able

7
                                                                                           Agribusiness in South Asia


to charge more for their outputs. Overall, it appears that value chain effects are more important than
cluster effects in the agribusiness sector.


       3. Drivers of Competitiveness

The development of South Asia’s agribusiness will depend on firms’ capacity to adapt new
technology and inclusive business models, connect with consumers, and respond to changing
demands. Lessons from lead firms can show how to foster the development of agribusiness and the
role the public sector should play. Key issues include how lead firms introduce new technology,
develop new products, leverage existing research, and collaborate with their communities to generate
broader benefits to the sector.
Lead firms play an important role in establishing logistics and opening up markets. Perhaps most
importantly, they set an example for what can be achieved, attract and spread knowledge, and have an
innovative role in the area in which they operate. Lead firms in the agro-food sector:
       provide access to markets, inputs, knowledge and finance to famers and promote integration
        into the value chain
       create jobs directly, as well as indirectly in support services such as packaging, distribution
        and advertising
       pay taxes and social benefits4
       produce safe food
       contribute to most of the high value agriculture exports
       demonstrate what can be achieved in terms of productivity and innovation
       may be significant in tackling environmental issues
       share a mutual interest with their suppliers in the success of the value chain

This section summarizes the experience of 36 lead agribusiness firms in South Asia, representing the
financial, production, process, logistics, and retail sectors.5 These large, productive firms have been
successful in their areas of operation and have a significant presence on the market. They represent
the entire agricultural value chain and a broad set of sub-sectors, and they usually have
forward/backward commercial linkages and engage with enterprises of all sizes. 6


3.1       Learning and innovation

Innovation through the introduction or adaptation of global technology, from their own research, or
from public institutions has been essential to the success.

3.1.1 Founder has technical knowledge
Due to innovative packaging approaches brought from abroad and continued investments in R&D, Sri
Lankan tea company Dilmah has remained competitive despite rising wages among tea growers.
Today, Dilmah Tea is Sri Lanka's largest exporter of tea and the sixth largest tea company in the
world, exporting premium tea to more than 80 countries. It started in 1974 with 18 employees, and

4
  In Pakistan, income from agriculture is exempted from tax, which imposes a substantial loss of revenue for the budget.
5
  More detailed write-ups from the interviews conducted with the 36 firms for this report can be found in Annex 1B.
6
  This section is based on interviews with lead agribusiness firms in India and Pakistan, as well as with government agencies,
development partners and NGOs. Inputs to this section from the rice value chain are based on interviews with farmers,
traders, commission agents and millers and wholesalers. Annex 1B lists the companies interviewed.

8
                                                                           Agribusiness in South Asia


now has 35,000. The founder, from a middle class Sri Lankan family, acquired his skills during
training in London in the fifties, where he spotted the opportunity of developing higher value tea by
having the tea treated and packed in situ as opposed to being shipped as a raw commodity to
London. Dilmah was able to circumvent traditional distribution channels by leveraging new premium
channels such as high-end retail and hotel chains, as well as airlines. This innovation led to superior
tea and in a much higher share of the value being created in Sri Lanka.

3.1.2 Partnerships with leading global firms
The Fauji Foundation is among the largest business conglomerates in Pakistan. Its product lines
include Pakistan’s leading cereal brand and a global fertilizer enterprise, both the result of
collaboration with international companies. The Fauji Foundation was established in 1954, and
entered into a collaboration in 1956 with the UK Quaker Oats company which brought manufacturing
and marketing expertise. Fauji Cereals now has 80 percent of the breakfast cereal market in Pakistan.
The interests of the group gradually diversified, and by the 1970s attention turned to the production of
fertilizers. To acquire leading manufacturing and product development capabilities, a joint venture
was established with the Danish chemical catalysis company Haldor Topsoe A/S to form the Fauji
Fertilizer Company (FFC).

3.1.3 Making use of existing public research
At the turn of the past century, managers at KRBL attended a demonstration by the Indian
Agricultural Research Institute (IARI) where a new “evolved” variety 7 of basmati rice, numbered
1121, was presented. KRBL staff were shown the variety’s extraordinary cooking characteristics,
which resulted in the longest cooked grain of any basmati type. Subsequently, KRBL acquired a
small sample of 3.5kg from IARI, and in 2001 began growing it for reproduction even before the line
had entered national trials. Three seasons later, when the variety was officially released as Pusa-1121,
KRBL had 20,000 tons ready. Over the next three seasons a portion of the crop was saved for
reproduction and a portion milled for test marketing. KRBL had already established a network of
farmers, initially through contract production. The knowledge that KRBL would buy 1121 in the
mandis reduced the marketing risk facing the farmers growing the new variety. The results of testing
were overwhelmingly positive. Growers recognized the higher returns from higher yields on a shorter
growing cycle, with a lower water requirement. And consumers in the Gulf markets found that a cup
of milled rice gave 4.5 cups of boiled rice, compared to the more typical 4 cups. Adoption of the new
variety spread rapidly to cover 84 percent of basmati plantings in Punjab and 68 percent in Haryana
by 2013.
Plant breeding, and indeed much experimental research, is beyond the resources and capabilities of
typical companies in the value chain, except those established to develop and exploit new technology
as input suppliers. Plant breeding and other agronomic research is generally perceived as a public
good that needs the support of public funding. That creates a dislocation between research and
product development, and the dissemination of new varieties and novel technologies is slowed by
high risk perceptions. Farmers are reluctant to grow a new variety, listed and certified or not, unless
assured of a market.
Linkages between research institutes and the private sector can be encouraged through private-sector
funding of research or through a foundation established to exploit research. There are a number of
examples of this latter approach, such as the Fundación Chile8 and the Negev Foundation9.




7
  Only one parent was a basmati type
8
  www.fch.cl
9
  www.negev.org

9
                                                                          Agribusiness in South Asia


3.1.4 Being forced to learn and innovate through competition
K&N, the Karachi-based fully integrated poultry enterprise, operates in Pakistan where 98 percent of
chickens are sold live through the wet market. Despite solid growth, the formal market for processed
chickens is small. Operating in this segment requires competing directly with global leaders such as
McDonalds and KFC. Where these global chains were once customers of K&N, they began importing
chicken parts at a lower cost than K&N could meet. At the same time, restrictions by US on imports
of meat from Pakistan made it impossible to export halal chicken products to North America. The
management of K&N opened a factory in New York State, and the exposure to international markets
and world class suppliers has kept K&N at the leading edge of the processed poultry business.
The Indian seed industry was transformed from domination by public enterprises in the 1960s to a
private sector-driven model by the 2000s. The first generation seed corporations (national and state
seed corporations) played a critical role in delivering the seed to both commercial farmers and the
small, marginal farmers. The next two decades saw structural changes with the entry of private sector
firms that were predominantly family owned. The Indian government embarked on an ambitious
reform agenda with introduction of the new seed policy in late 1980s and economy-wide reforms in
early 1990s, which paved the way for the entry of the multinational seed giants in India.
Few multinational seeds companies began operations in India independently; instead, most entered
into partnerships with domestic private firms. Initially the industry thrived on the genetic plant
material supplied by public agencies such as the Indian Council of Agriculture Research and the State
Agriculture Universities. Subsequently, the private seed sector achieved rapid growth and now
supplies most of the hybrid seeds in the country. Several studies indicate that the market share of the
private seed sector is as high as 70-90 percent in major commercial crops like cotton, maize, and
vegetables. Similarly, the private sector supplies 60-80% of commercial seeds in self-pollinated crops
like paddy (especially in the states of Punjab, Haryana, and Andhra Pradesh). Private sector
participation has been encouraged by the low marginal cost and risk in producing paddy seed, and the
potentially lucrative market for hybrid maize and vegetables. Recent trends also indicate increasing
consolidation in the private sector.
India also strengthened the intellectual property rights (IPR) regime to comply with World Trade
Organization agreements. The Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights (PPVFR) Act, 2001
and the amendments of the Patents Act brought the domestic IPRs regime on par with the
international regime as envisaged under the WTO. These initiatives have promoted increased choice
to farmers, thereby enhancing access to quality seed material in rural India.



3.2     Driving development throughout the supply chain.
Lead firms in South Asia have had to develop linkages with smallholders, who dominate production
of raw materials in the region. Firms have increasingly relied on joint ventures with smallholders,
including in its most developed form contract farming. However, many other, more flexible
arrangements exist to link numbers of small scale producers to a larger agri-business firm. While
such arrangements are not without challenges, they also can be powerful means of disseminating new
technology, introducing diversification, improving returns to farmers, securing timely supplies of the
right quality for a processor or exporter, and eventually driving higher levels of productivity.

3.2.1 Facilitating smallholder access to markets
Lack of market information and logistical difficulties prevent small-scale producers in South Asia
from accessing markets efficiently. Market information is essential to delivering the right product, in
terms of quality or market expectation, at the right time and at the right price. Without a good
understanding of these criteria, and preferably for more than one market, the small scale producer is

10
                                                                              Agribusiness in South Asia


seriously disadvantaged. Distance to market is another key constraint on the small scale farmer, who
may not have access to regular transport. Generally, distances to market in excess of four hours of
travelling time act as a major deterrent to marketing perishable products. If the product is to be
exported, the logistics and financing requirements are usually beyond the capabilities of the small
scale farmer. In any event, further processing may be needed prior to export.
Linkages between producers and down-stream agribusinesses can open up market opportunities and
connections that smallholders would otherwise find difficult, if not impossible, to reach. On the export
side, the rice processors provide the small scale farmer with access to global markets. In the case of
the basmati rice variety Pusa 1121, the rice processor KRBL transferred crucial market information to
farmers by ensuring that they produced the “right” product for the overseas markets. In the banana
trade, Desai F&V and its partners recognized the logistical difficulties of moving perishable and
easily damaged fruits from the farms to the markets. By taking control of the logistics and managing
the process from fruit formation onwards, Desai succeeded in supplying remote urban centers with
quality bananas, and achieved the ultimate success of exporting Grade ‘A’ fruit.
Aftab Bahumuki Farms Limited (ABFL), established in 1991, is one of the leading poultry farms in
Bangladesh. ABFL first introduced contract farming for commercial broilers on an experimental
basis, by working with a select group of 20 farmers. The number of farmers involved had increased
to 650 by 2003, but an epidemic of bird flu reduced the number of participants to 200. Since then
numbers have risen again. While contracting helps the farmer to move from raising scavenging
poultry to commercial poultry production, the principle attraction in the contract is the market access.
An assured market and favorable prices circumvents the high transaction costs involved in finding
markets, collecting market information and negotiation. A study 10 finds that contracted farmers
achieve a significantly higher level of output (11,783 kg/year) than the non-contract farmers (6,763
kg/year), with higher labor productivity. The gross margins of 18.2 taka11 and net returns of 17.2 taka
for contract farmers were substantially higher than those of the non- contract farmer, 12.9 taka and
10.0 taka respectively. These improvements led to higher gross income for the poultry farms.
Linkages also form between producers and middlemen. In Bhutan for example, citrus and in particular
mandarin has become the primary agricultural export. The future crop is sold at flowering time to
contractors, who take responsibility for the crop as it develops. These contractors provide support to
farmers and maintain the post-harvest logistics necessary to deliver a quality crop to the exporter. The
contractors also act as assemblers on behalf of the exporters, who are unable to maintain relationships
with large numbers of farmers. The position of the contractor is insecure, since farmers could form
marketing groups with the ability to deal directly with the exporters. Mostly the relationships are
informal and based on trust rather than contract.12

3.2.2 Access to inputs
Lead firms are increasingly providing extension services, either exclusively or in tandem with the
government and development partners. Pakistan’s Government began including the private sector in
extension in 1988, and most leading firms now participate (Riaz 2010).13 Contracting a future harvest
in return for receiving inputs on credit is another common model, often carried out without a written
contract by traders and farmers. More formal arrangements are also set up where, for example, the
buyer has need of a particular variety. One example is menthol production in Uttar Pradesh in India

10
   Begum, I.A. 2008. Prospects and potentialities of vertically integrated contract farming
in Bangladesh. Department of Agricultural Development Economics, Hokkaido
University, Japan.
11
   Taka is the currency of Bangladesh. 1 Taka ~ USD 0.013
12
   Further examples of linkages providing market access are shown in Annex 2.
13
   Annex 3 provides more examples of some of the extension and advisory services provided by the
interviewed Lead Firms.

11
                                                                            Agribusiness in South Asia


(see Section 5.3). In India, Pepsico provided potato varieties suitable for the processing of potato
chips to thousands of small-holders supplying its processing facilities.
In Bhutan, Mountain Hazelnut Ventures (MHV) was established in 2010 to plant and process
hazelnuts. The company imports hazel tissue, cultured plantlets as well as seed, from a related
operation in China. These are distributed among farmers; in three years of operation 2,000 ha have
been planted and 5,000 farmers trained. Commercial harvesting may begin this year. In a landlocked
country with a population heavily dependent on subsistence agriculture, the opportunities for adopting
change and accessing remote markets are extremely limited. This linkage between processor and
farmers provides a rare opportunity for income generation in a challenging environment.

3.2.3 Access to finance
Linkages with downstream producers can improve farmers’ access to finance. This is achieved
directly through a variety of contract farming arrangements, with inputs provided on the basis of
agreements to sell the output at a later date. There are indirect benefits as well, as banks are more
willing to lend to farmers that have a contractual arrangement with a processor. Godrej Agrovet
(GAVL), for example, is a diversified agribusiness company with interests in animal feed, oil palm
plantations, agricultural inputs, and poultry. The oil palm plantation business works with 54,000 ha of
smallholder production spread across eight states. The land is owned by the farmers, and GAVL
provides assistance to them in switching to oil palm. GAVL buys fruits and crushes them to produce
crude palm oil (with the potential to reduce the crippling dependence on imported vegetable oils).
GAVL’s involvement and in particular the guaranteed price arrangements, has encouraged banks to
lend to farmers. GAVL has developed a standard financing model with the banks for the farmers.
Finally, agricultural insurance is not well developed in South Asia, and ABT, for example, provides
insurance to their dairy farmers.




      4. Constraints on Competitiveness
The World Bank Enterprise Surveys can be used to analyze the impact of cross-cutting domestic
investment climate constraints (political climate, crime, corruption, taxes, electricity, finance, labor
regulations and skills) on agribusiness firms’ productivity in all South Asian countries except the
Maldives. Remarkably, the only constraints found to be significant are electricity (Afghanistan and
Pakistan) and the political climate (Afghanistan and Nepal - see Annex 5 for more details).

Most of these challenges are related to agricultural policies that in the past were successful in
increasing cereal crop production and improving food security, but that today are impede the growth
of higher value food products and related services. The combination of import protection, restrictions
on markets and prices, and extensive passive subsidies has stifled competition and rewarded the status
quo. This is why the traditional drivers of competitiveness are not significantly related to productivity
in most of South Asia’s agribusiness (see section 2). This section provides an overview of the
agribusiness policy constraints, and discusses the positive impact of recent reforms.




4.1     Trade policy and facilitation


12
                                                                                     Agribusiness in South Asia


Almost all South Asian countries liberalized their external agricultural trade during the 1980s and

       Table 3: Tariffs on imported                   1990s. Sri Lanka led the way, with others following in
       agricultural products                          the 1990s. The extent of liberalization varied, but in
                                                      any event many countries reversed or reintroduced
       Agricultural       Average        Average      trade policies in the 2000s, shifting to a more inward
       Products            Bound         Applied      looking stance. Non-tariff trade barriers are now
                           Tariff        MFN rate
                                                      pervasive and increasing.
       Afghanistan           --             7.1
       Bangladesh          192.0           16.8       4.1.1     Tariffs
       India               113.5           33.5        Overall, bound tariffs 14 in South Asian countries
       Nepal                41.5           13.8       remain high (Table 4). While the applied MFN rates
       Pakistan             95.5           15.4       are significantly lower, the difference between actual
       Sri Lanka            50.0           25.7       and bound rates implies a potential unpredictability in
       Thailand             38.9           29.9       national trade policies. Table 3 sets out the average
       Vietnam              19.1           16.2       tariffs on imported agricultural goods in South Asia.
       Indonesia            47.0           7.54
       China                15.8           15.6
       Source:                          website:
                                               The tariffs imposed by India on most agriculture
       http://tariffdata.wto.org/TariffList.aspx
                                               categories are higher than in other South Asian
                                               countries. For example, the Indian duty on dairy
products is 30%, compared to 25% in Pakistan and 10% in Nepal. Also, India maintains high tariffs
on the imports of higher value added dairy products such as cream, butter, yoghurt, cheese and
sweetened milk powders. An analysis of MFN duty rates on basmati rice in countries which are
leading exporters and importers is given in Table 4.

Table 4: Comparison of MFN Duty Rates on Basmati Rice

Import                to MFN Duty Rate Sales Tax              Additional Duties & Taxes
Country

India                    80%                0                 Landing charges (1% CIF)
                                                              CESS (3% (Duty + CEX (Education & Higher Education
                                                              CESS) + Countervailing duty))


Pakistan                 10%                17%

Bangladesh               10%                0%                AIT(Advance Income Tax) (5% CIFD)

UK                       0% + €30.00        0%
                         per tonne (1000
                         kg)
USA                      0% + US$0.0083     Depends    on
                         per kg             State



Iran                     40%                8%

Thailand                 52%        7%

http://tariffdata.wto.org/TariffList.aspx


14
     The bound tariff is the maximum MFN tariff level for a given commodity line.

13
                                                                                      Agribusiness in South Asia


The region’s agriculture sector is also hampered by some instances of inverted tariff structures. For
example, in Afghanistan the average tariff on intermediate goods is significantly higher than the
average tariff on final goods, while imports are negligible (figure 9). Field interviews with
stakeholders also point to highly inverted tariffs in particular subsectors. For example, Pakistan’s
import duty on finished poultry products from Malaysia is zero, and from China is 16 percent, but
local poultry processors must pay 15-30 percent duty plus 17 percent sales tax (GST) on inputs. The
Poultry Association estimates that these tariffs raise local producers’ costs by 5 percent, and that
reverting to the zero rating (pointing out that all foods in the EU and many other countries are zero
rated) could lead to an additional slaughter by the processing industry of 20 million birds per year.
This would increase domestic consumption and exports, raise government revenues by PKR 3.8
billion over five years, create over 14,000 jobs, and generate an extra PKR 7 billion for the allied
industries of packing, marketing and ingredients. Similarly, the fruit juice industry in Pakistan faces
import duties of 25 percent for glass and 20 percent for cans, compared with 10 percent on imports to
India, and 5 percent on glass and 15 percent on cans on imports to Nepal.15 While exporters can often
be reimbursed for import duties on inputs, the process is reported by processors in Pakistan to be
slow.

Figure 9: Recent Average Intermediate & Final Tariffs along with Import Values (2013 in case of
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India; 2014 in case of other countries in the Graph)

     45.0                       40.2                                                            35000000
     40.0                     35.0                                                              30000000
     35.0
                                                                                                25000000
     30.0
     25.0              21.6                   21.4 20.1
                                                     20.9                               21.0    20000000
     20.0            17.8                                                        16.6 17.0
                                        15.0                               15.1
                                                                    14.1 13.6                   15000000
     15.0   10.2                                             11.4 10.0          9.7
                                       9.5   9.3                                                10000000
     10.0     7.0                                           6.3
      5.0                                                                                       5000000
      0.0                                                                                       0




                    intermediate                                 final
                    Import Value, Intermediate USD1000           Import Value, Final USD1000


Source: WTO Data, December 2015

4.1.2 Export bans
Government intervention in the export trade adds a level of political risk that is a strong deterrent to
investment in large scale processing and export operations. As the world food price crisis unfolded,
the Government of India banned the export of non-basmati rice in October 2007 in order to increase
supply for its food distribution program. The ban was lifted temporarily, and was then reapplied in
April 2008 and remained in place until 2011. As a result, none of the large, transnational rice traders
invested in the Indian non-basmati trade. Once the ban on exports was lifted, India rapidly moved to

15
  Import duties on juices in Pakistan vary from an MFN rate of 25 percent, to 20 percent on juices from China
and 5 percent on product from the SAFTA. Some origins, for example Malaysia or Iran, also receive preferences
on specific juices. For India the MFN rate for juice is 30 percent with a preferential rate for SAFTA of 20
percent. The Indian processor is at a significant advantage compared to its Pakistani counterpart.

14
                                                                            Agribusiness in South Asia


become the leading exporter of rice in the world. More recently, new large scale mills with an export
focus are being installed in Andhra Pradesh.
Export restrictions probably added to the rise in commodity prices, primarily by causing panic buying
in importer countries. 16 Alternatives that would be less disruptive to external trade include the
application of safety nets, such as cash transfer programs to the poor, the relaxation of import controls
and release of stocks, and longer term investment to increase agricultural production.

4.1.3 Non-tariff barriers
Declines in tariff rates in South Asia, especially in India, have not been accompanied by strong
growth in intra-regional trade. For example, while India is the largest or the second largest (after
China) trading partner for all other SAARC countries, with 73% of all intra-SAARC exports, it only
registers 13% of intra-SAARC exports. Also, India’s exports to SAARC countries equal only 4.7% of
its total exports, and India’s imports from the region remain an insignificant 0.5% of its total imports
(according to IT Trade Map data for 2011).

Non-tariff barriers have long been cited as one of the major reasons behind the low intra-regional
trade. NTBs are far more pronounced in India and Pakistan than in the other countries. These barriers
can broadly be categorized as the positive list approach, technical barriers to trade and sanitary and
phyto-sanitary measures, trade facilitation and customs procedures, financial measures, para-tariff
measures and visas. For example, Sri Lankan exporters express concerns over quantitative restrictions
imposed by Indian authorities on certain products, e.g., hydrogenated vegetable oil. Afghan goods
entering Pakistani territory either for Pakistan’s market or for transshipment to other countries are
subject to repeated inspections, leading to delays in shipment. Further, India's food safety and
standards regulations (2011) provide a new definition for cheeses that prohibit the use of animal-
derived rennet, and thereby exclude any cheese from the EU (see Annex 7 for the most common non-
tariff measures in South Asia).

The external trade environment for agriculture in South Asia thus remains highly restricted, with
important variations between countries. Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan and Afghanistan generally have
open trade regimes, while trade policy in India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka is unpredictable and ad hoc,
with multiple shifts in policy, often varying by commodity and export/import orientation.

4.1.4 Infrastructure
The efficient flow of product through a port and quality storage infrastructure are especially important
for perishable products, where delay can mean partial or complete loss of a shipment. Up-country
customs clearance and container sealing can simplify the process, but in Pakistan this is not available,
while procedures at Karachi are considered cumbersome, particularly due to the lack of risk-based
inspection. Several attempts are being made in the region to speed procedures and improve storage
and transport infrastructure, for example the establishment of export processing zones in both
Pakistan and Bangladesh.

4.2        Restrictions on domestic agricultural markets
The extent and severity of market regulations and the distortions they impose on marketing varies
markedly across countries. Domestic markets and marketing function freely and efficiently in
Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan and Sri Lanka, while agricultural markets in India and Pakistan still
operate under regulations formulated many decades ago, which tend to significantly impede efficient,
modern transactions. For example, the mandatory sale of produce in licensed markets with a limited
number of licensed traders has over time created an imbalance in market power, impaired
transparency, and limited direct purchase and contracting between agro-processors and farmers. In

16
     IFPRI (2010) Reflections on the global food crisis

15
                                                                                  Agribusiness in South Asia


addition, all countries face problems in physical market and road infrastructure that significantly raise
marketing costs.
Reforms have been introduced, but implementation has been uneven and their impact has been
limited. Much more needs to be done, as the regulatory framework for markets and marketing is
essential to move towards higher value added agricultural activities.

4.2.1 Market regulations
Most countries in the region have recognized the need for reforms in agricultural marketing. India and
Pakistan, which have the most distorted marketing policies, are taking several steps to this end. For
example, India introduced a model Agriculture Produce Marketing Act (APMC) in 2003, which
provides for the creation of alternative marketing channels, thereby restricting monopolistic practices
and encouraging the creation of efficient infrastructure by the private sector. Despite such attempts,
the reforms have not been implemented fully by most states in India, as is also true for Pakistan.

The case of agricultural marketing in Punjab, India is an example. The Government of Punjab through
Punjab Agro Foodgrain Corp (PAFC) engaged in contract farming from 2002-03 to encourage
diversification away from rice. Success was limited, and the scheme was closed in 2012. In 2013 the
Government of Punjab introduced the Punjab Contract Farming Act, which provides for buyer
registration, dispute resolution, direct purchases through farms/markets and oversight by the Punjab
contract farming commission. However, because the APMC Act has not been amended to allow for
direct purchasing, contract farming is still not permitted. The APMC markets therefore remain in
place and all rice, basmati and non-basmati, is traded through them. A number of taxes17 remain in
place, which in total amount to 14.5 percent of the sale value. By contrast, in Tamil Nadu the APMC
was reformed and market fees and taxes have fallen.

Similar differences in policy regimes are observed in Pakistan. For example, the mandi in Pakistan’s
Punjab adopted its Agricultural Produce Markets Ordinance in 1978, which was virtually unchanged
from the original Act of 1939 and provides for strict control over the marketing of agricultural
produce via market committees. Also, produce must be traded through the market, mostly with a fee
levied by the market. As a consequence, there are no private markets to compete with the established
markets. There are about 150 fruit and vegetable markets and 150 grain markets in the Punjab.
Services are poor and the setting of fees is opaque. With a limit on the membership of dealers and
traders, there are allegations of collusion and misbehavior in the market. Mostly the problems affect
the fresh produce supply chain, where excessive commissions reduce the return to the farmer and
raise retail prices to the consumer. By contrast, in Pakistan’s Sindh Province, the 1939 Act was
replaced by the Sindh Wholesale Agricultural Markets Act, 2010. The new Act abolished notified
market areas and market committees, and allowed private markets and direct buying. Private
initiatives have emerged as a result. One such example is being developed by the Pakistan
Agricultural Coalition, which is establishing a chili trading platform in Kunri, Sindh Province with the
goal of introducing a more direct linkage between grower and buyer in order to reward quality. This
new venture relies on bringing a number of actors together to provide a full range of quality services,
including logistics, storage and an auction platform. If successful, the concept will be rolled out to
other areas and for other crops.

4.2.2 Other impediments to private investment in agricultural markets in Bihar, India
The state of Bihar attempted to improve the enabling environment for agricultural marketing, and in
particular reduce rent-seeking, by repealing the APMC Act in 2006. This paved the way for the
establishment of many private market yards, while trade in the formerly-regulated market yards

17
     Sales tax 5 percent; Market fee 2 percent; Agents’ commission 2.5 percent; other 5 percent(of MSP)

16
                                                                            Agribusiness in South Asia


continued. However, infrastructure services are deplorable in the market yards that are owned by the
state and continue to be the major trading platforms. Basic amenities such as power, water, security,
sanitation and general upkeep are inadequate, but no private investment will take place so long as the
yards remain in state ownership. Unfortunately, Bihar lacks alternative channels for marketing
produce. While Bihar ranks among the top vegetable and fruit producing states in India, the
inadequate market network makes transactions onerous and costly for both producers and consumers.

4.2.3 Policy impediments to logistics

The Indian logistics industry has grown by 16 percent per year over the past few years, and was
valued at an estimated US$ 130 billion in 2012-13.18 The industry includes freight and passenger
transportation via road, rail, air and water, as well as warehousing and cold-storage. It is estimated
that the aggregate freight traffic is about 2-2.3 trillion ton kilometers. The costs of freight transport
constitute about 16% of agribusiness industry turnover, and about 14% of outbound food grain
industry turnover. Of the total warehousing space of about 1,800 million sq ft, the industrial and
agricultural segments constitute about 86 per cent and 14 per cent, respectively. Two thirds of food
storage is owned by the public sector. The lack of adequate storage infrastructure in India is one of
the primary reasons for high costs and avoidable food wastage. Some of the constraints to
development of higher value chains are enumerated below:
     Inadequate storage infrastructure: The Warehouse Development Regulatory Authority has
         recently estimated the existing capacity of storage at 118 million MT 19 . The planning
         commission estimates the current gap between agricultural warehousing supply and demand
         at 35 million MT. Currently, public sector agencies like the Food Corporation of India (FCI),
         Central Warehousing Corporations (CWC) and the various State Warehousing Corporations
         (SWC) have a storage capacity of 83 million MT, while the private sector has close to 19
         million MT. To put the scarcity in perspective, food grain stocks held by the government
         totaled 80 million MT at last year’s peak, according to the FCI annual report. India’s current
         cold storage capacity at 25 MT is barely sufficient for 10 percent of fruit and vegetables
         produced in the country.

        Skewed distribution of storage capacity: Skewed distribution of the cold storage capacity is
         another issue, with North India having access to 56 percent of the total public storage
         infrastructure, compared to only 8 percent in Eastern India. Six major grain producing states
         account for almost 67 percent of storage capacity in the country. Bihar, Odisha, MP,
         Chattisgarh and Jharkhand, which have recently become major grain producers, only account
         for 13 percent of storage capacity.

         Lack of collateral management options: Collateral management refers to financing of
         agricultural goods stored at warehouses, and is only in nascent stages in a few states in India.
         This presents a huge opportunity.

        Inadequate freight infrastructure: India’s freight depends heavily on roads, despite the traffic
         being bulk in nature. With a conservative annual growth rate of 7.5%, India’s freight traffic is
         projected to leapfrog by 2020. The poor quality of roads, trucking and port handling


18
  Report by India Brand Equity Foundation: Indian Logistics Industry- gaining Momentum; November 2013
19
  Report by committee for strengthening negotiable warehouse receipts by the warehousing development
and regulatory authority in the country; Department of Food and Public Distribution ; February 2015,
http://wdra.nic.in/FinalBook.pdf


17
                                                                                 Agribusiness in South Asia


         infrastructure will continue to impair service levels and transit times, and will hamper the
         competitiveness of agribusiness (among other sectors).

        Regulatory Barriers: Outdated regulations, such as the Agriculture Produce Marketing Act
         (first promulgated in 1956), and Essential Commodities Act (from 1955), have hindered the
         development of storage and processing infrastructure in India. In particular, stock limits and
         price limits can be imposed, with penalties that include potential jail sentences of up to seven
         years20. Not surprisingly, the private sector has been hesitant in engaging in storage. The tax
         regime in India does not encourage multi-modal logistics systems, which means that firms
         often rely only on road transport, despite the cost.

Recent measures, like the inclusion of agri-warehousing under priority sector lending by the Reserve
Bank of India, several subsidy schemes (such as capital investment subsidy scheme offered by
NABARD which ranges from 15-33 percent of project cost), tax incentives and the Warehousing
Development Regulation Act 2007 (which will promote negotiability of warehousing receipts) are
aimed at compensating for the high regulatory/penal risk discussed above. Similarly, several sub-
national governments have introduced Private Entrepreneur Guarantee Schemes, under which the FCI
guarantees hiring of warehouses for 10 years, in order to encourage private sector construction. But
these are second best and expensive solutions, as a low risk, low cost environment would be superior
to an artificially high risk, high reward/cost one.



4.2.4 Limits on retail competition and FDI in India

India’s merchandise retail market, which accounts for nearly half of private consumption, is forecast
to increase to US$1.4 trillion in nominal terms by 2021. Traditional brick and mortar stores make up
93% of the total retail market. Corporate brick and mortar retail caters to about 7%, and e-commerce
about 0.1%.

FDI in the retail sector is subject to some limits. Fully-owned foreign firms are allowed for single
brand product retail trading, and in some states a maximum of 51 percent foreign ownership is
allowed for multi-brand retail trading. In either case, Government approval is required, the
availability of which varies from state to state. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Delhi, Haryana, Kashmir,
and Maharashtra, among others, permit foreign retailers while W Bengal, Bihar, Karnataka, Kerala,
Madhya Pradesh, among others, do not. Global retailers such as Wal-Mart, Tesco Plc., Metro AG,
Shoprite Holdings GAP, JC Penney, H&M, Karstadt-Quelle and Sears (Kmart) have expanded their
presence in India. The variety of FDI approval policies has led to different degrees of competition
among states. For example, unorganized players have improved their services in states that have
opened doors to foreign firms, showing that competition can increase pressure for performance even
among the unorganized local retailers who dominate the Indian retail landscape.


4.3 Restrictions on prices and products
Price controls are the most common intervention in regional agricultural markets, with a significant
impact on agribusiness. The drive to food security in the 1960s and 1970s led to multiple public
interventions to support the production of cereals, most notably output support prices and subsidized
input prices. Although almost all countries in the region have achieved self-sufficiency in food

20
  The ECA is not applied evenly across all states: in 2014 Maharashtra was apparently not applying stock limits
to onions and potatoes and UP is not enforcing the Act. http://www.business-standard.com/

18
                                                                              Agribusiness in South Asia


    production and have the potential to generate surpluses, these price policies have become politically
    very difficult to remove. Minimum Support Prices (MSP) in India (initially for rice and wheat, but in
    recent years expanded to cover a wide range of other crops) and support prices for wheat in Pakistan
    are backed by large procurement programs. Bangladesh announces minimum support prices, but with
    limited procurement (although procurement takes place mostly in the dry season irrigated boro rice
    crop, which limits the otherwise considerable potential for farmers to diversify in that season). Sri
    Lanka also announces minimum prices; while its procurement operations are limited, the policy
    continues to distort market prices.

    4.3.1 Pricing restrictions and higher-value products
    As discussed in chapter one, higher incomes and urbanization is increasing the demand for higher
    value food products such as fruits and vegetables, tubers, and livestock products such as meat and
    dairy. But even though this means important income opportunities for farmers, India is already unable
    to meet its domestic demand for higher value products. In part, this reflects policies which bias
    production towards non-basmati rice and wheat (World Bank, 2014). Importantly, Minimum Support
    Prices (MSP) for production discourages farmers from moving into higher value crops that would
    increase income and employment, and boost investment, for example in post-harvest infrastructure. In
    addition, the MSP discourages local processing, even when other incentives for processors are
    provided. In Bihar, the state Government provides investment support for the establishment of small-
    scale mills. However, the MSP on the input means that rice processors are not able to compete with
    the prices of imported rice from India’s Western States, so that building mills is not profitable.
   Although only 23 percent of farmers in India actually benefit from MSP, the MSP together with
                                        heavily subsidized inputs (see section 4.4) provide a low-risk
Table 5: MSP trends and cost            operating environment for farmers to continue to produce
comparators in India                    crops that may not be profitable under free market
                                        conditions. Table 5 shows the margins for MSP relative to
                                        production costs. Initially the MSP was directed at
                                        encouraging the production of rice to achieve food security.
                                        Lately, the MSP has become a means of supporting farmers
                                        and had led to surpluses that are now exported.
                                             In order to encourage the production of higher-value
                                             commodities, which are often more perishable than grain
                                             products and thus inherently carry more risk for producers
                                             and other actors in the supply chain, a level playing field
                                             must be created in the sector.
                                              The wheat market in Pakistan is heavily controlled by the
                                              Government, which has several negative effects. For
                                              example, the quality standard used for public sector
    purchases of wheat is Fair Average Quality (FAQ), and specifies only the most basic criteria of
    moisture content and presence of impurities. By contrast, a miller might expect to buy on the basis of
    parameters such as test weight, gluten content, and falling number. These rudimentary standards
    provide no incentive to maintain quality during storage. The mills use a wheat washing or wet
    cleaning process that requires a lot of potable water and generates problems due to effluents and
    handling of the wastewater, and which is generally considered outdated and in some countries banned.
    The millers have little incentive to operate efficiently: since only flour mills are permitted to store
    wheat and subsidized wheat is supplied to the mills on a quota system related to the number of roller
    stands in the mill, millers can earn profits by reselling subsidized wheat when the market rises above
    the support price. In order to counteract such widespread practices the government monitors



    19
                                                                           Agribusiness in South Asia


electricity consumption at the mills, but this encourages running the mills empty, with further wastage
of water.

4.3.2 Unrecognized quality and food safety standards
Although the premium for better quality products can be high, food safety and quality standards can
pose challenges for South Asian traders and exporters. Sanitary, phyto-sanitary (SPS) and food safety
regulations are the main obstacles. The issues vary among countries, but a general concern among
processors and traders consulted for this report is that food safety regulations often are rigid, do not
reflect scientific advancements, and are not in line with WTO’s Agreement on Sanitary and Phyto-
Sanitary measures. In Bangladesh, India, and Pakistan, the regulatory authorities are spread across
ministries or other agencies, with overlapping responsibilities and without coordination (e.g. livestock
and plant health fall under the Ministry of Agriculture and food safety under the Ministry of Health).
Enforcement of regulations is reportedly inefficient or lacking, and food safety laboratories are not
recognized by international bodies and lack the capacity for tests for pesticides, mycotoxin and
antibiotic residues.
The system lacks the capacity to ensure the safety of food products for consumers, and also reduces
access to foreign markets that demand compliance with international standards. For example, in May
2014, the EU imposed a temporary ban on imports of Indian Alphonso mangoes and four
vegetables21, as a result of what the European Commission described as "significant shortcomings in
the phytosanitary certification system of such products exported to the EU". The main concern was
that pests found in Indian exports could pose a risk to agricultural production in the EU. The UK
alone imports some 16 million mangos (US$9 million) per year from India, so the ban affecting all
EU imports could have important effects on producers and actors in the supply chain. The EU lifted
the ban 6 months later, after facilities had been upgraded, new handling practices implemented, and
the capacity if inspecting staff improved.
Quality is also of concern to sector participants. A survey of traders in Bangladesh showed that the
premium for both high quality and sanitary standards ranged from 10 to over 30 percent (although the
study showed higher returns for quality than for meeting sanitary standards). Nevertheless, few of the
traders that participated in the survey reported that they increased costs in order to improve quality.
Similarly, an overview of agro-food processors in Afghanistan revealed that many operated with
equipment dating back to the 1970s and few have invested in the quality assurance necessary to
access foreign markets. Thus, although there is a potentially high international demand for Afghan
fruit products (regionally renowned for their high quality), existing processing lines prevent such
exports. Annex 8 provides an overview of challenges to food safety/SPS and quality cited by the
interviewed companies.




21
     Eggplant, the taro plant, bitter gourd and snake gourd

20
                                                                                Box 1: Food in
                                                                             Agribusiness      South
                                                                                             safety     Asiaand the Maldives
                                                                                                    in Nepal


In the longer term, inability to meet quality and safety standards may           Only 0.1 percent of the Nepalese budget
prevent South Asian products from being available in supermarkets as             is spent on food safety, and the country
retail develops. Across the globe, middle-class consumers demand                 has only 5 food safety testing
appealing packages, informative labels, and consistent quality and               laboratories and 40 food inspectors 1
safety. Retailers impose higher standards (the most well-known                   Adverse consequences for health and
example being the Global GAP standard) to ensure that these demands              hygiene have limited the number of
are met and to prevent any contamination throughout their complex                tourists visiting Nepal. Nepal’s main
supply chains. Increased consumption of animal-sourced food and                  export items, such as tea, honey, and
                                                                                 coffee, are also affected. Nepalese tea
processed products typically increase concerns over quality and safety.
                                                                                 was banned in Germany after pesticide
In South-Eastern Europe, however, horticulture producers also struggle           residues were found in shipments. The
to access these new markets, as not even their fresh produce meets               coffee sector is also vulnerable, as
retailers’ requirements for quality and shelf life. As a result, retailers       Nepal’s poor testing facilities are unable
often import fresh produce from export giants in the EU and Turkey.              to certify the absence of pesticide
                                                                                 residues. These higher-value products,
At the same time, not all markets have the same requirements,                    and in particular Nepal’s premium
especially not in low and middle-income countries, and farmers and               quality tea, are major foreign exchange
firms should adapt their practices according to the requirements of the          earners, so that food safety risks are
intended market. For example, the organized milk industry in Pakistan            problematic for the economy as whole.
and India maintains international quality standards to produce a
                                                                                 WBG’s Toolkit on Food Safety
superior packaged product with minimal health risk to the consumer,
                                                                                 prescribes eight fundamental pillars to
and these standards are used in marketing the product. However, there
                                                                                 reforming food safety: i) food safety
is only a limited segment of the market prepared to pay for this level of        should be secured along the entire food
quality assurance and therefore, raw and unpasteurized milk continues            chain; ii) regulation by itself cannot
to be sold on the informal market to consumers. Although accessing               ensure food safety; iii) in a food safety
high-end markets can potentially generate substantial revenues, it is            system, primary responsibility (and
unlikely that small actors have the capacity and resources needed to             liability) for the safety of food rests on
comply with the required standards. Instead, it is advisable to access           food business operators; iv) the role of
new markets a step or two at a time.                                             consumers        should     be      strongly
                                                                                 emphasized; v) preventative and risk-
Complying with quality standards and food safety requirements can be             based approaches should be the basis for
both challenging and costly, in particular for small-scale actors, and the       regulatory reform, decision making,
Government can therefore play an important role as supporter and                 control, and self-control of food safety;
facilitator. The provision of public goods such as SPS and food safety           vi) the role of international standards
                                                                                 and scientific justification is key; vii) the
infrastructure (harmonized regulations, certified testing facilities, and
                                                                                 impact of food safety reform on trade
information and training) can help small actors comply with food safety
                                                                                 should be carefully considered; and viii)
requirements. An example of successful Government support in this                co-ordination and collaboration are vital.
area can be found in Bangladesh. In July 1997, the EU banned shrimp
imports from Bangladesh due to unsatisfactory product safety.                    Source: Food Safety Toolkit : Guiding
Fortunately for the industry, FAO was already working with the                   Principles of Food Safety Reform,
processors and the Government to implement Hazard Analysis Critical              Published by Investment Climate-WBG
                                                                                 ; March 2014
Control Point (HACCP) principals throughout the chain, and so the
food safety concerns were addressed over the next 5 months. In this
period, Bangladesh’s shrimp sector lost US$15 million. The cost to
upgrade the supply chain was around US$18 million in total, and
included investments in new processing equipment, public laboratories,
and technical skills. The annual maintenance cost for this is estimated at
US$2.2million for the private sector and US$225,000 for the
Government. However the benefits have included both reclaiming the
banned market and further increases in exports following the HACCP
implementation. The industry notes that it can now charge a higher



21
                                                                            Agribusiness in South Asia


premium, as shrimp from Bangladesh is no longer seen as a low-quality product (Cato and Sunasinge,
2003).
Since complying with SPS/food safety requirements and specific quality standards often necessitates
investments in facilities, equipment, processes, and/or packaging, access to finance is often a
prerequisite for successful implementation. The government can play a role as a guarantor of
commercial credit lines targeting agribusinesses, but rule-based, transparent lending is essential.

4.4     Seed regulations and sector development
While it is prudent for Government to monitor the introduction of new plant varieties, the process
often is cumbersome and deters technology infusion in the sector. Also, devolution of powers between
federal and provincial governments and misinterpretations of law add to problems. In Pakistan, the
devolution of responsibility for agriculture to the provincial level resulted in regional variations in
interpretation and implementation of the 1976 Seed Act. In addition, the Act was drafted when there
was little private sector activity, so it did not provide an appropriate regulatory framework. As a
result, private sector companies are largely unregulated/informal. The government of Pakistan’s
proposal for a new Seed Act will address a number of these issues, and it is viewed positively by the
formal private sector.
Bangladesh has streamlined the seed certification process, based on the Dutch model.
The states also have responsibility for regulation of the seed industry in India. Several reform
measures at the state level have encouraged private sector-led R&D, innovative approaches to seed
multiplication (often introduced by multilateral seed companies and absorbed by the local seed
industry) and the growth of a vibrant domestic seed industry that caters to South Asia and to Africa.


4.5     Land regulation and long-term investment in high value crops
Land is a challenge at several levels in South Asia. Access to readily available and affordable
industrial land is increasingly a challenge, due to competition with rapidly growing cities for
agricultural land. Access to land for productive farming is also problematic. Land holdings are small
- on average 1.15 ha in India (down from 1.23 in 2005/2006) and 2.1 ha in Pakistan (2010 census),
and land is often split between multiple parcels. For example, the average land holding in Nepal is
0.96 ha, but split between four parcels (Sharma, 1999). Although the population is growing, the
changes in land sizes vary as more people move to urban areas. Nevertheless, pressure on agricultural
land is high, and marginal land is increasingly taken into use. As a result, land depletion and soil
salinity is increasingly a problem (World Bank, 2014). There is thus an urgent need to invest in more
sustainable land management in South Asia. Also, with the on-going structural transition from a rural-
based labor force to increasingly urbanized societies, it is important to maintain flexibility in land use
to ensure that land resources can be accessed by sector participants.
At the time of independence, land systems in several South Asian countries mainly consisted of large
landowners and poor landless farmers; consequently, reforms were initiated and have been
implemented at various scale and with different results. One example is the sharecropping policy in
Bangladesh, which has been in place since 1984 and was originally intended to facilitate access to
land and improved inputs for landless, cash constrained farmers. The sharecropping system
guaranteed landowners 30 percent of the harvest, or 50 percent if inputs had been provided. Studies
showed that the use of high-yielding varieties increased among small-scale farmers as a result, but
also that the applied “rent” has been extortive and that the system provided little incentive for farmers
or landowners to invest in the land. Similar systems exist elsewhere in South Asia, e.g. in Bihar.


22
                                                                                 Agribusiness in South Asia


In India, land policy was under the purview of states. In some states, for example Tamil Nadu,
Kerala, and West Bengal, reforms have favored smallholders. Overall, tenancy reforms and abolition
of intermediaries tended to reduce poverty, while land consolidation tended to increase productivity.
Interestingly, imposing a ceiling on the size of landholdings does not seem to affect either poverty or
productivity.22 In other states, such as Punjab, reforms have focused more on ensuring tenancy rights,
which have resulted in highly fragmented land with lower productivity. There are several places in
South Asia where only limited progress has been made, because political pressures, a traditional caste
system, or domestic conflict have impeded reforms and resulted in large, underutilized land holdings
and the exclusion of large sections of the rural population from the land market.23
Overall, land users in South Asia have little incentive to invest in the land or to re-parcel land into
bigger holdings for those who seek to expand their farming activities. Land re-parceling can often be a
tedious activity, with exchanges of leases and land user rights taking place between multiple parties. It
is therefore important that the right to use the land is conferred for an extended period. Similarly,
investing in long-term land management and soil improvement requires assurance that the land will be
available for a longer period of time. For example, the application of agro-forestry practices and the
planting of shade trees, which will become increasingly necessary owing to climate change, require
decades’ worth of investments. Similarly, certain water harvesting infrastructure and pumping
mechanisms have limited mobility, and any investor would require secure land rights, or alternatively
long-term leasing agreements if the owner is not willing to invest.

4.6     Large, untargeted subsidies on inputs and unsustainable practices
Free water use, and subsidized electricity and diesel for irrigation, have encouraged inefficient use of
water and depleted water resources, which is threatening the sustainability of agribusiness. Much of
the region’s irrigation depends on groundwater tables (e.g. 60 percent in India, of which 15 percent
are already overexploited--World Bank, 2013). Water productivity in rice production in Bangladesh
is particularly low, both compared with other countries in South Asia and internationally (World
Bank, 2015).24 Studies also show that the efficiency of water use varies between and within countries,
depending on the level of subsidies.
Inefficient use of water is becoming an economy-wide issue. Agriculture’s share of total fresh water
use is very high in some countries (e.g. 98.6 percent in Afghanistan and 90.4 percent in India,
compared with 65 percent in China and 55 percent for Brazil), and competition for water is likely to
increase with growth in manufacturing and in household consumption (FAO Country Profiles, 2014).
Climate change will exacerbate these problems, and appropriate land management will be crucial for
stable and sustained agribusiness growth. In the summer, extreme heat will affect 70 percent of the
land area in the region, and variability in rainfall is projected to increase (although precipitation
forecasts vary depending on scenario and timeframe). The combination of higher temperatures and
variable rainfall, along with a rise in the sea level that will overflow costal zones and thus raise soil
salinity, are expected to significantly reduce crop yields, even assuming improvements in technology.
An increase in average global temperatures of 2 degrees centigrade is anticipated to reduce crop
production by 12% compared to a baseline with stable global temperatures by 2050 (World Bank,
2013).



22
   LSE: http://personal.lse.ac.uk/GHATAK/landref.pdf.
23
   Only in India, landless farmers make up for 25 percent of the agricultural labor force
(http://planningcommission.nic.in/reports/articles/venka/index.php?repts=m-land.htm).
24
   The cost of resources is not included in the calculation of TFP discussed in section 2.


23
                                                                             Agribusiness in South Asia


Several governments subsidize fertilizers, and until recently favored urea or nitrogen-based fertilizers
over other fertilizers, resulting in overuse. India’s large subsidies get the most publicity, but the
subsidy bills of Sri Lanka and Bangladesh are also enormous – nearly as large as all public
expenditures on agriculture. Pakistan does not have explicit fertilizer subsidies, but low prices on
natural gas used in the production of urea provide an indirect subsidy. Nepal also has subsidized
fertilizer prices, but the subsidy level is modest given the open border and heavy subsidies by India.
The subsidy is mostly designed to offset high transport costs in the more remote parts of the hilly
country.
Subsidies for water and fertilizers impose a great burden on public finances. In India, subsidies to the
food sector amount to US$85 billion dollars annually.
A removal of subsidies should be implemented to charge the true cost of water and inputs, taking into
account externalities, including with respect to the depletion of groundwater reserves. A road map
with a clear, time-bound conversion of subsidies would help actors in the sector adapt to the new
rules. A first step is to make direct subsidies on inputs and price controls conditional on complying
with certain agricultural practices. A second step would be to replace supply side, blanket subsidies
with a targeted demand side system leveraging technological progress (e.g. mobile payment and
electronic ID).
Climate smart agriculture (CSA) comprises agricultural practices that (i) increase productivity; (ii)
adapt production to climate change; and (iii) reduce emissions from agriculture. An example is deep
placement of fertilizer, which can increase yields, reduce nitrogen pollution, and save costs on
fertilizer application. Rice farming under this method in Bangladesh increased yields by over 30
percent. Similarly, alternative wetting and drying in irrigated rice cultivation in Asia has reduced
water use by up to 30 percent and reduced greenhouse gas emissions by over 40 percent.25 Other
common CSA practices include introducing short-duration, drought-resistant and salt tolerant
varieties, shared cultivation, zero tillage, rainwater harvesting and micro-irrigation, constructing
ditches and contour planting, mulching, harvesting manure, and using cover crops.
These approaches must be consistent with local conditions, and generally require incentives or
regulatory measures. A starting point for many countries, for example Sri Lanka, has been to develop
so-called Climate Smart Agriculture Profiles, which map out current practices, emissions, and
projected climate change implications for the sector, as well as existing financing and institutional
requirements for adopting new practices.

4.7 Exposed, vulnerable groups
While an analysis of issues concerning exposed, vulnerable groups is far beyond the scope of this
chapter, it should be recognized that policies are needed to ensure efficient and fair labor markets and
protect human rights. In general, labor regulations and minimum wages do not apply to small farms
with under 10 employees, which maintain flexibility in labor use. This situation keeps the rural labor
market relatively free and allows flexibility to fit agricultural needs, such as seasonality. However,
financial crises affecting poor families, non-availability of credit, and limited vocational training often
force unskilled workers in rural areas to enter quasi-bonded work contracts with landlords who pay
them lower than the market wage rate. Many workers are also bonded through debt obligations.
Widespread child labor in rural areas is also a result of desperate family financial situations and the
absence of schools.




25
     The Bank’s Lima position paper Towards a Climate Smart Food System By 2030.

24
                                                                            Agribusiness in South Asia



      5. Recommendations

The agribusiness sector provides the essential transition between production systems and
consumption. This complex sector involves volatile production systems, global and domestic supply
chains with different regulatory systems, varied quality regimes, trade access and subsidies, with
unpredictable implications for income and employment. Nevertheless, agro-industry can have
profound implications for shared prosperity. The primary conclusion, therefore, is to make policies for
agro-industry central to the country and regional development strategy.


5.1 The urgent need for a new paradigm
Removing the constraints on the development of a competitive agribusiness industry in South Asia
could have a dramatic impact on development, while failing to address these constraints could be
disastrous, given the mounting challenges of depleting water resources and climate change. New
approaches to supporting the poor and ensuring food security are essential to facilitate the removal of
the blanket regulations and subsidies which prevent strong, sustainable agribusiness growth in South
Asia. The development of large leading agribusiness firms does not need to come at the expense of
farmers; many successful firms created backwards linkages to farmers and thereby generated benefits
to the broader agriculture sector. At the same time, unleashing large scale agribusiness will not benefit
all small farmers and could leave many of them even more vulnerable. There is thus a need to
combine supply side reforms, public support to increasing agricultural productivity, and additional
targeted support to the poorest farmers.
As countries move from agricultural-based to urbanized societies, agricultural policies generally move
from production-oriented policies that emphasize social protection towards policies that support a
more specialized, knowledge intensive sector, made up of larger entities that are responsive to market
demands. At the same time, independent social safety net mechanisms should be developed to
safeguard the poorest and most vulnerable in the sector. Several countries in South Asia are entering a
transitional phase, where productivity increases in agriculture have allowed labor to be released into
other sectors while generating consumer demand beyond that of food. However, in order for the
domestic agribusiness sector to reach its potential in raising incomes and employment, agricultural
policies must support sustainable agribusiness development that is responsive to consumer demands.


5.2     Strong leadership and data for the new paradigm

Successful agribusiness sectors have required strong, high-level leadership to develop and implement
the agenda, which often affects the interests of powerful groups. Implementing subsidy programs is
easier than reforming them, and creating a conducive agribusiness environment inevitably requires
coordination among several different ministries (i.e. agriculture, trade/commerce, industry, and
sometimes health, infrastructure, and environment). Achieving a comprehensive and internationally
acceptable food safety regulatory framework, which requires a farm-to-fork approach, has proven
challenging in many countries: food safety often falls under the Ministry of Health while SPS
regulations are typically the purview of the Ministry of Agriculture. In several countries of South
Asia, any such reform program will also involve close coordination with the Ministry responsible for
social protection to safeguard vulnerable groups that might be at risk in this transformation.
Malaysia established a dedicated transformation team at the highest level, staffed with highly-skilled
public sector and foreign experts, which had a mandate to drive a cross-sectoral agribusiness agenda


25
                                                                               Agribusiness in South Asia


and coordinate between ministries. The success of such efforts requires an on-going dialogue with the
private sector (see Annex 6 on high level task forces). A good approach is to establish steering groups
(preferably private sector led) with representatives from the different components of the value chains
(including different sizes of farms, firms providing logistic services, and processors) and relevant
public institutions to meet regularly with the Government-led agribusiness team to advise on how to
overcome constraints in the subsector. Industry groups in South Asia, some of them well-organized
like the Poultry Associations in India and Pakistan, do not represent the broader value chain and they
do not have the formal role in policy formulation that these value chain steering groups hold.
Important lessons can be drawn from countries that have successfully developed their agribusiness
sectors. A review of the Governments’ roles in agribusiness development in Uruguay (See Annex 10),
Indonesia and Malaysia provides examples of what governments should and should not do:
1. Stable macro-economic policies, a tolerable business environment, and a major emerging market
   opportunity (often led by China) were common to all three countries.
2. State support was largest in countries with high upfront investments in processing and tree crop
   establishment, combined with close coordination of production and processing.
3. Incentives that distorted relative prices, especially for production inputs, have had significant
   welfare costs. Cheap land in Indonesia favored deforestation rather than intensive agricultural
   production.
4. The more that state support is directed to individual firms, without well-defined rules determining
   eligibility for that support, the greater the risk of rent seeking. The best results were obtained
   when strong, rule-based governance prevailed, as in the case of plantation forestry in Uruguay.
5. Public-private partnerships directed involving smallholders achieved a more equitable distribution
   of benefits. For example, smallholders now produce nearly 40 percent of the palm oil in
   Indonesia.
6. Neighbor effects—when investment and technology spill into a country from nearby countries—
   were important in nearly all cases in reducing the costs of establishing the industry.

Strategy should look beyond the farm-gate into inputs, logistics, processing, and retail. It should also
define clear roles for the public and private sectors, recognizing that these roles may change as the
sector transforms. For example, in areas with limited agribusiness development, it may be justifiable
for the public sector to provide time-bound support to so-called first movers, whether local or foreign.
Successful first movers can generate positive externalities in knowledge, skills, and market linkages.
This initial support can be justified by the high startup costs and risks associated with developing new
agribusiness value chains. State support can also be important in underwriting the high transaction
costs of linking investors to smallholders in the startup phase.
Understanding the sector is key to successful and adaptive policy making, not the least to ensure
efficient and transparent use of taxpayers’ money. Policy making is a continuous process that must be
constantly evaluated and revised as objectives are achieved and the agro-food sector evolves. Impact
evaluations are critical, in part because policies may have inconsistent effects across sectors. For
example, trade policies may impair production, or impede nutrition and economic development
objectives. 26 Institutions such as extension services and market information systems play an
important role in providing information to both private actors and policy makers. Farm, animal, and
land registers can also be used to manage agricultural support policies. Integrated institutions also are
required to monitor the impact of sector policies on water and soils. Importantly, the entities involved
in developing agricultural policies should be separate from those responsible for payments and
controls.
26
  For example, prohibiting exports of a grain commodity would discourage production, while reducing prices
for that grain may divert consumption from other crops with better nutritional value.

26
                                                                                Agribusiness in South Asia



5.3        Investment and linkages

The private sector may be more effective than the public sector in tackling constraints on profitability.
For example, Desai Fruit and Vegetables and its investors, have helped to "professionalize" the
banana value chain in India and thus improved their competitive position. This kind of externality
may justify providing incentives to strategic first movers.
Facilitating contract farming also can promote positive externalities. The term contract farming covers
a range of different pre-harvest agreements, joint ventures, and pledges that link producers either
upstream to the input suppliers or downstream to the processors. Upstream linkages can help input
suppliers increase sales and improve farmers’ access to credit and technical support. And downstream
linkages can reduce buyers’ costs and improve supply reliability, while providing farmers with an
assured buyer for new and more profitable products, reduced transaction costs or higher prices. Alone
and without links, the small scale farmer must cope with unmanageable production risk and market an
irregular surplus in a spot market. Linkages can provide more robust support than any public service
extension scheme.
Linkages are not without their disadvantages, and failure to meet contract terms can lead to a
breakdown of trust. However, in general mechanisms for strengthening linkages generate far reaching
benefits and ultimately lead to greater flows through the supply chain.
Promoting linkages can supplement other initiatives to augment rural finance. In Afghanistan, the
Agriculture Development Fund began in 2010 as a US$100 million USAID project to provide much
needed long term financing along agribusiness value chains, at decent interest rates on a commercial
basis (meaning the loans have to be repaid). The fund was rated as the most successful USAID project
in Afghanistan, with a more than 95 percent reimbursement rate and 60,000 farmers benefiting. The
fund is facing excess demand and discussions are underway to scale it up.
The key innovation of the ADF is to provide long-term loans to sophisticated business intermediaries
along the value chains (e.g. agro-food processors), on the condition that they on-lend a portion to their
suppliers-farmers. These intermediaries have the knowledge and incentive to lend to the
most deserving of their suppliers, to ensure repayment. By contrast, commercial banks mostly cater
to urban areas and lack such access and knowledge. The ADF has been operated by professionals
with extensive experience in commercial banking and agribusiness from other countries, and
incorporates financial products that are fully compliant with Sharia. This approach helps improve
access to long term finance along the value chains (including for farmers) and encourages the
development of linkages between farmers and processors.
Farming systems, products, markets, business environments and above all participants in agricultural
value chains are extremely diverse, so there is no single model for success. However, an important
principle is that contract farming must be built on a viable business model. Shepherd27 , for example,
notes that donors tend to view contract farming as a “development tool where commercial principles
do not apply”. Other elements (see World Bank Toolkit28) that determine success include the nature
of the product (staples are more difficult than high-value cash crops), the nature of the participants or
groups of participants, the presence of third party support, the shared risk and responsibilities defined
in the contract, the pricing mechanism, and above all the management of the relationship between
buyer and seller – see Annex 11 for an example of a successful contract farming initiative in Vietnam.




27
     Shepherd, A. (2013) An Introduction to Contract Farming. http://makingtheconnection.cta.int/node/206
28
     World Bank (2014) An analytical toolkit for support to contract farming. Internal Paper.

27
                                                                                    Agribusiness in South Asia


The development of trust is important because contract farming requires a long term commitment
between two parties. In this respect the term “contract farming” is misleading29 since it implies a
dependence on a contract that can be enforced. In practice, enforcement is difficult on either side of
the contract, and recently more emphasis has been given to alternative dispute resolution techniques
of arbitration and mediation. Here the long term goals of the participants are given more importance
than the immediate rights of a transactional exchange.
Overall, the role of government in support of contract farming lies in facilitation rather than
regulation. Much has been written about the regulatory needs and the legislation required, but for the
most part such measures (competition, employment and labor, environmental issues, safety and
health, land) are already on the statute books. These policies might benefit from some refinement.
However, in view of the diversity of contract farming schemes and the widespread use of informal
contracts, it is unlikely that regulatory policies would be able to cover the breadth of contract farming
relationships without being unduly prescriptive. Government support to the emergence of contract
farming can develop on a number of levels30:

          Market promotion – trade and investment policy should be supportive of investment and
           development of exports, and encourage investment and competition downstream;
          Logistics – improvement of roads, especially at the farm level, and storage facilities in
           conjunction with private operators increase the ability of small-scale farmers to participate in
           contract farming;
          Seed import legislation – the inability to import improved planting material efficiently can
           impede upgrading production, particularly where the sponsor intends to introduce new
           varieties or new crops;
          Producer groups and cooperatives – policies and legislation to formalize producer groups can
           help lower procurement costs and facilitate the distribution of inputs and technical knowhow;
          Innovation and extension - innovation is key to competitiveness, and the ability to
           disseminate knowledge and technology through extension can be encouraged through cost
           sharing.
          Finance – access to finance is a persistent problem in the rural economy, and contract farming
           can increase farmers’ access to finance.



5.4        Public and private knowledge collaboration
Innovation will always be difficult in an environment dominated by small scale farmers. The priority
for the smallholder is survival, and without support the small scale farmer cannot afford to experiment
with new crops or varieties. However, a downstream commercial partner ready to support production
and buy the output can significantly reduce farmers’ risk. There are well-known examples of contract
farming being used to modify farming practices, for example the introduction of dairy farming in
Rajasthan or cultivation of potatoes for processing in Bangladesh and in India.
The production and export of Indian menthol products stands as one of the most spectacular
achievements in creating a new industry through contract farming. Smallholder mint cultivation,
which is popular in northern Uttar Pradesh, was made possible by private sector investment in a
speculative venture. Once the industry became established, the further development of varieties and
agronomy were carried out by public institutions. After years of stagnation, CIMAP initiated its
‘Improved Technology for Menthol Mint (Mentha arvensis) Essential Oil in India’ project in 1993 .

29
     “relational farming” might be preferable
30
     World Bank (2014) An analytical toolkit for support to contract farming. Internal Paper.

28
                                                                                Agribusiness in South Asia


Within a few years, the introduction of new varieties together with agronomic research increased
yields and oil recovery. The development of short cycle varieties allowed farmers to fit mint
cultivation between the rabi and kharif crops in the rice-wheat or rice-potato/pulse crop cycles. The
Fragrance and Flavor Development Centre (FFDC) at Kannauj took over the distribution of planting
material and organization of extension and training. This public-private collaboration has resulted in
an industry that today supports at least half a million families. At current prices (INR930/kg), raw
mint oil adds over US$700 million a year to the rural economy in Uttar Pradesh. India has an
estimated 80-90 percent share of global exports of menthol products.31

5.5     Nurture inclusivity
The anticipated rise in demand for agribusiness has the potential to generate enormous income
opportunities in rural areas and along the value chains. However, without support, some groups risk
being left behind. This is problematic in any country, as the core of the food supply is produced
domestically and by family farmers. Not including small-scale producers would be especially
problematic in South Asia, where the majority of producers hold less than one hectare of land, and
women now constitute over half of the agricultural workforce in Bangladesh and a third in
Afghanistan, India, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka. Most linkages between farmers and processors will be
established directly by the private sector. However, the public sector can help reduce the transaction
costs facing processors, logistics providers and retail firms in working with a myriad of small scale
producers, for example by providing production information and facilitating access to seeds for
emerging value chains. Similarly, publically-financed services can be provided to small-scale farmers
and agribusinesses to reduce prohibitively high market access costs, for example implementation and
certification of market standards.
Few companies work directly with small-scale producers, and successful small-holder inclusion in
value chains has often been through aggregators or producers groups. At the global level, the cocoa
sector may provide the most successful example of small holder inclusion in global value chains, as
much of the industry relies on producers with less than a hectare of land. Increasing global demand
and supply constraints due to climate change have led companies like Mars and Cadbury to work with
hundreds of thousands of smallholders to improve practices and to certify their production. This has
required that producers are organized in cooperatives or producer organizations. This private sector-
led approach has been successful in the high-value cocoa industry because the costs can be recovered
rapidly. Public support may be more important in other sub-sectors, for example in the form of
technical support through the extension services in organizational skills, and access to finance to help
establish cooperatives.
An important target group for this support is women. Together with West Africa, South Asia still has
the world’s largest gender gaps. Increasing access to education can boost agricultural productivity, so
the region’s low school enrolment ratios for girls will impair agricultural growth. Other measures,
such as ensuring that women have equal access to assets and inputs (including land and credit) have
proven to close productivity gaps in the agricultural sector as well as among entrepreneurs.32
The poorest smallholders are at greatest risk of being left behind, but other groups such as landless
agricultural workers and women also are at risk. Modern agribusiness requires skills and
technological know-how, which may prevent certain groups from participating further down the value

31
  The success story of menthol production in India can be found in full in Annex 4.
32
  Globally, FAO estimates that ensuring equal access to productive resources for women would raise
agricultural output in developing countries by between 2.5 and 4 percent (World Bank, 2014; WDR, 2012).
Barriers to full female participation also have implications for the competitiveness of larger industries.
Internationally, companies that exclude women in management positions have proven to have lower skilled
management on average, which over time leads to lower innovation and competitiveness (WDR, 2012).

29
                                                                           Agribusiness in South Asia


chain. Collaboration with the private sector is essential to understand deficits in skills and to ensure
that smaller participants can access different points along the value chain. Finally, public investment
in training and infrastructure to support the poorest segments of the sector can also be achieved
through social protection schemes, such as well-targeted cash for work or cash for training programs.




30
                                                                          Agribusiness in South Asia



Annexes

Annex 1A

Estimating the Size of South Asia’s Food Market by 2030

With growing incomes and population, and with rapid urbanization, South Asia’s food market is
projected to more than double over the next 15 years, reaching US$ 1.5 trillion by 2030. Household
expenditure data on food shows that South Asia’s food market is currently worth about
US$ 500 billion (2011 year household food and beverage expenditure data). Because the majority of
South Asians still reside in rural areas, rural food consumption account for 65 percent of South Asia’s
food market. This holds even though the majority of poor live in rural areas and their food spending
is significantly below the average, (although they spend proportionally more of their income).

By 2030, the UN estimates that South Asia’s population will increase from 1.7 to 2 billion people. To
estimate the value of the total food market, it is assumed that household incomes will double from
$1,500 to $3,000 over the next 15 years in line with the past 20 years’ increase in per capita GDP (5%
annual growth on average) and that the share of household incomes that goes to food consumption
will drop slightly from around 30 to 25% based on the observation that the share of food
consumption decreases as income grows as per the figure below.




Source: Source: Analysis of World Bank 2011 ICP report




31
                                                                   Agribusiness in South Asia



Annex 1B List of Companies interviewed

                     Pakistan                      India                 Sri Lanka
Financial      Habib Bank,
               Allied Bank,
               State     Bank      of
                Pakistan
Inputs         Fauji       Fertilizer      Pioneer Seeds ,
                Company,                    Bühler India
               Four         Brothers
                Group,
               Pioneer,
               Bühler
Rice           Engro Foundation,           KRBL, LT Foods,
               Long Grain Rice             Kohinoor,
                Mills,                      LalQilla Basmati
               Guard Agricultural
                Research            &
                Services,
               Mazco,
               Matco
Dairy          Nestlé,                     ABT Foods
               Engro Foods
Meat/          K&N,                        Suguna Poultry
Poultry         Menu/SeasonsFoods
Maize          Rafhan                      Anil Starch Private
                                             Ltd
F&V            Fauji Fresh and             Desai F&V Pvt Ltd
                Freeze,
               Mitchell’s      Fruit
                Farms,
               Green Springs,
               Roshan, Imtiaz,
               Noon,
               National Foods
Retail         Metro
Multi-                                      Godrej Agrovet
sector
Tea                                                                         Dilmah




32
                                                                      Agribusiness in South Asia



Annex 2         Examples of market linkages

Sub-sector       Company     Engagement                       Comments
Cereals          Engro       2,000 farmers under contract;    Established brand in UAE
                             prices set daily, selling to     marketing basmati; provide
                             Engro is voluntary but           input and advisory support to
                             payment       is     swifter,    farmers including machinery
                             transparent and often higher
                             than mandi.

                 Rafhan      30% of their maize supplies      Rafhan produce a range of
                             bought     from contracted       starches and other derived
                             maize farmers.        Provide    maize products such as
                             written contract, hybrid seed,   dextrins, sugars and syrups.
                             technical advice, bags and
                             freight to mill.

                 Matco       10-15% of needs for paddy Export to 60 countries using
                             for milling come directly brand Falak. Own agency in
                             from about 250 farmers.   Dubai for trading.

                 KRBL        Tried contract farming but       Operate one of the largest
                             reverted to using commission     rice milling operations in the
                             agents to buy through the        World. Exports to all major
                             mandis but retain a contact      markets. Leading position of
                             farming      model     where     the India Gate brand
                             services     (quality   seed,
                             technical      advice)    are
                             provided to 94,000 families.
                 LT Foods
Horticulture     Desai       Contract farming. Managed        Premium domestic market
                             logistics    for       highly    and export 50-60% to Middle
                             perishable   product      and    East
                             marketing
                 National    No contracting now but           Engaging in PAC in creating
                             provides technical assistance    a marketing platform for
                             and some equipment eg            chillies for quality product
                             geotex sheets for drying
                             chillies

                 Fauji F&F                                    All the farmers have existing
                                                              markets for their produce.
                 Pepsico     Guarantee purchases for
                             potatoes
Miscellaneous    Godrej      Buy from 54,000 ha of small- Reducing Indian dependency
                 Agrovet     scale owned production of oil on the major food import
                             palm across 8 states giving
                             access to consumer markets
                             through quality crushing

33
                                                             Agribusiness in South Asia


                      operations. Potential to buy
                      from 200,000 ha. Also
                      engaged with small-scale
                      producers in dairy, poultry
                      and aquaculture.

          Hindustan   Contract farming operations
          Lever       in chicory, tomato and tea
Poultry   K&N         Limited contract farming;      Processing and value added
                      most chicks sold to farmers    products; own stores and
                      and bought back at market.     direct deliveries to retailers
          Suguna      Supply to and buy from         Provide consumer with a
                      25,000 farmers. Buy back.      guarantee of quality that
                                                     secures demand from small-
                                                     scale producer. Large range
                                                     of value added products.
                                                     Own stores. Export to the
                                                     Middle East and Japan
Dairy     ABT         Buying from16,000 farmers,     Selling quality milk and
                      through 1,3000 collection      dairy products to urban
                      points procuring 250,000       markets including door step
                      litres/day                     delivery. Export ghee.
          Nestle      Work with 190,000 farmers      Access formal market for
                                                     dairy products
          Engro       Operate through 1635 milk      Have 56% of formal milk
                      collection centres plus 330    sector – provide milk, tea
                      mobile milk collecting vans    whiteners, ice cream etc
                      plus 1300 medium to large
                      farms with own chillers plus
                      own production.




34
                                                                      Agribusiness in South Asia



Annex 3        Examples of linkages giving access to inputs

Sub-sector    Company            Engagement                       Comments
Seeds & Agro- Pioneer            Operate through a network
chemicals                        of dealers who in turn
                                 finance and support the
                                 farmers
                  Fauji          Support to dealers through       Crop demonstrations, field
                                 their farm advisory services     days, meetings and crop
                                 which have reached 1.5 mn        seminars, farm visits. Soil
                                 farmers since inception.         and water testing
Rice/Grain        Engro          Reach 1.5mn farmers with         Gross margin /ha improved
                                 PKR77bn of chemical              by at least 25%.
                                 inputs. Has developed new
                                 variety of rice Basmati 515
                                 based on foundation seed
                                 from the research station;
                                 kits to upgrade combines;
                                 training;
                  Rafhan         Access to seed, pesticide,
                                 and fertilizer for contracted
                                 farmers.
                  Matco          Supply seed to contracted
                                 farmers
                  Guard          Advisory services through a
                                 toll free number, field days,
                                 yield competitions etc to
                                 support their seed and input
                                 sales. Contract farmers are
                                 supplied with seed and
                                 chemical inputs.
                  KRBL           Provide technical assistance
                                 and        inputs;      close
                                 relationship with Pusa
                                 research institute
                  Kohinoor       Only technical advice
Horticulture      Desai          Supply plantlets from own        Yields doubled
                                 labs and fertilizer; manage
                                 farms from fruit set
                  PAC/National
                  Fauji F&F      Use contract farming to
                                 achieve          international
                                 standards     in     broccoli,
                                 potatoes, okra, taro, bitter
                                 gourds and apple gourds
                                 inter alia. Seed is imported
                                 from Holland. Korea.etc
                  Pepsico        Seed         on        credit;
                                 demonstrations

35
                                                     Agribusiness in South Asia


Poultry   Suguna   Provide inputs, advice,
                   manage associations.
          K&N      Breeding        units;     4
                   hatcheries; feed production;
                   laboratories and diagnostic
                   research.
Dairy     ABT      provides extension, training Average      daily     yields
                   and insurance                increased by 22% so far
          Engro    Provide literacy, computer
                   training,     inputs     and
                   improved stock. Partnering
                   with Telenor to develop
                   mobile payment system.




36
                                                                              Agribusiness in South Asia



Annex 4. The Success Story of Mentha Arvensis in India

Menthol is an important component for the flavouring and fragrance industry. It conveys a mint taste or
scent to a variety of products from pharmaceuticals and toiletries to foods and confectionery and tobacco.
Mint oil is extracted by distillation from a species of mint, namely Mentha arvensis, and the oil is chilled
to yield crystals of menthol leaving dementholised mint oil behind.
The first introduction M. arvensis in India was in 1954 at the Regional Research Laboratory at Jammu
where it was introduced from its native Japan. There was limited commercial interest in the crop until the
company Richardson Hindustan Ltd (RHL) began to explore the possibilities of cultivation on a larger
scale. RHL was established in 1964 as the Indian division of USA based pharmaceutical company
Richardson Merrell, to manufacture its Vicks brand of medications33. The Indian market presented an
opportunity for the company, and an alternative to imported menthol was sought for RHL’s production.
An assessment by RHL staff indicated that the northern part of Uttar Pradesh offered appropriate soil and
climatic conditions for the cultivation of M.arvensis. The company established its own research base,
processing unit and laboratory at Bilaspur, on the edge of the Terai region, and company personnel began
working with local farmers to introduce the crop by providing planting material and technical advice to
contracted growers.
The introduction proved successful and cultivation expanded. In the mid 1980’s the Central Institute of
Medicinal and Aromatic Plants (CIMAP) in collaboration with RHL developed a new variety of
M.arvensis that outperformed the existing clone that had been the only planting material since its
introduction decades earlier. Indian menthol output grew from a few tonnes from around 20ha in in 1965
to over 5,000 tonnes on 40,000 ha in 1992/93.
Production then stalled. RHL had been assimilated into Procter & Gamble in 1985 and a corporate
decision to withdraw from agricultural research and production followed shortly afterwards. The
upstream Indian menthol operation was restricted to buying on the open market. The farmers were left
without support and without contracts. In the face of low prices and without alternative institutional
support nor selected disease-free planting material, crop yields and oil output in India fell.
On the market side, production had far outpaced domestic demand and the mentha farmers were now
directly impacted by global demand. The Indian menthol was considered a lower quality than the product
from China and the dementholised oil, a by–product of menthol production, was not acceptable on global
markets. China was the leading exporter and export sales controlled by government agencies where profit
was not the driving motive. Furthermore the collapse of the USSR, which had been the main market for
Indian menthol, saw international demand fall away.
The situation appeared to be dire: it was not only the crop that was well established in the farming cycle,
but the know-how had spread across a wide region engaging a large number of farmers together with an
industry of metal-workers able to produce the boilers and distillation equipment and an infrastructure of
buyers and traders together with processors of value added products and exporters.
In 1993 CIMAP initiated its ‘Improved Technology for Menthol Mint (Mentha arvensis) Essential Oil
in India’ project. Within a few years the introduction of new varieties together with agronomic research
brought higher yields and oil recovery than previously attained. The development of short cycle varieties

33
     Cough medicines, lozenges, rubs and other inhaled breathing treatments

37
                                                                                   Agribusiness in South Asia


was key in allowing the farmers to fit mint cultivation between the rabi and kharif crops in the rice-wheat
or rice-potato/pulse crop cycles. The Fragrance and Flavour Development Centre (FFDC) at Kannauj took
over the distribution of planting material and organisation of extension and training.
By 2000 the output of mint oil in India had grown to about 10,000 tonnes but with remunerative prices
and declining output in other origins (notably China), production of mint oil increased rapidly. Indian
mint oil production peaked in 2013/14 with about 55,000 tonnes but has since fallen back below 50,000
tonnes per year. India currently produces about 20,000 tonnes of menthol with about 9,000 tonnes of
dementholated oil and some 3,000 tonnes of derivatives. Some 30,000 tonnes of menthol crystals and
powder and mint oils exported annually. Uttar Pradesh accounts for 90 percent of the production of mint
in India. The balance is found across the semi-temperate regions of Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh
and Bihar.
Today, the industry supports at least half a million families and, at current prices (INR930/kg) raw mint
oil adds over USD700 million every year to the rural economy in Uttar Pradesh. In mint cultivation,
popular in northern Uttar Pradesh, India now leads global exports of menthol with an estimated 80-90
percent global market share. The establishment of mint cultivation as a smallholder crop was only made
possible by the initial investment of a private company in a speculative venture. Once the industry
became established, the further development of varieties and agronomy were carried out by public
institutions. After years of stagnation, CIMAP initiated its ‘Improved Technology for Menthol Mint
(Mentha arvensis) Essential Oil in India’ project in 1993 and within a few years the introduction of
new varieties together with agronomic research brought higher yields and oil recovery than previously
attained. The development of short cycle varieties was key in allowing the farmers to fit mint cultivation
between the rabi and kharif crops in the rice-wheat or rice-potato/pulse crop cycles. The Fragrance and
Flavour Development Centre (FFDC) at Kannauj took over the distribution of planting material and
organization of extension and training.
Despite the success story, the future of the sector is somewhat uncertain. Prices of mint oil on the MCX
Futures Commodity Exchange peaked in 2012 on a wave of speculative activity that compounded short
supply, but prices softened quite rapidly and the harvest that year turned out to be good. The volatility of
the oil prices has encouraged the development of synthetic alternatives to menthol that offer stable prices
comparable to the natural product. Overhanging stocks of mint oil and synthetic alternatives are adding
downward pressure on prices in the near term and a ban in many Indian states on the consumption of
gutka34 has also impacted negatively on mint oil prices.




34
     Masticant of areca nut and tobacco often flavoured with mint oil. It is a stimulant and known carcinogen.

38
                                                                             Agribusiness in South Asia



  Annex 5. Cross-cutting constraints to productivity (WB Enterprise Surveys)

  In the World Bank Enterprise Surveys, firms are asked to rate the importance of domestic cross-cutting
  investment climate issues. Firms classify them into no obstacle (value zero), minor (one), moderate
  (two), major (3) and very severe (4). Table 1 shows the averages for each obstacle for all countries in
  South Asia except for the Maldives as well as for Vietnam and China. Although, firms in South Asia
  report higher averages compared to China and Vietnam, they only rank electricity (Afghanistan and
  Pakistan) and the political climate (Afghanistan and Nepal) as having a significant impact. This result is
  confirmed by the lack of correlations between these factors and productivity performance (see Table 2).
  The real issues are related to agribusiness specific policies as discussed in Section 5.
  Table 1: Firms’ Obstacles by Country (Averages)

                                                                                   Labor     Labor
Country        Finance Political     Crime    Taxes    Corruption Informality       Reg.     Educ.    Electricity
Afghanistan      2.39   3.16          2.49     2.02       2.56        1.92          0.95      2.10       3.15
Bangladesh       1.46   2.77          0.69     1.07       1.95        1.24          0.87      1.16       2.48
Bhutan           0.88   0.38          0.38     1.17       0.63        0.75          1.13      0.63       1.00
India            1.14   1.09          0.54     1.43       2.18        0.91          1.16      1.13       1.92
Nepal            2.22   3.66          0.98     1.17       2.29        1.58          1.56      0.93       2.88
Pakistan         1.23   1.79          1.70     1.60       2.15        1.22          1.17      1.11       3.18
Sri Lanka        1.52   1.04          0.67     1.39       0.84        1.48          1.21      1.25       1.60
Average          1.55   1.98          1.06     1.41       1.80        1.30          1.15      1.19       2.32
China            0.83   0.24          0.37     0.66       0.26        1.00          0.53      0.99       0.69
Vietnam          0.96   0.09          0.25     0.43       0.39        1.19          0.46      0.75       1.15
  Source: World Bank Enterprise Survey
  Note: Afghanistan (2014); Bangladesh (2013); Bhutan (2015); India (2014); Nepal (2013); Pakistan (2013); Sri
  Lanka (2011); China (2012); Vietnam (2009).



  One possible investigation is assessing whether there is any correlation between these obstacles and
  firm’s productivity. Following Ayyagari et al (2008) and Lage de Sousa (2016) methodology, we
  investigate which obstacle is hampering firms to achieve higher levels of productivity in the agribusiness
  sector.
  Table 2 shows the results for South Asian firms in these 7 countries in terms of labor productivity, total
  factor productivity (TFP) and labor productivity growth in the last three years.
  Although firms have ranked these obstacles higher than in comparable countries, they do not seem to be
  correlated with firm’s productivity. According to the outcomes, political aspects are negatively correlated
  with labor productivity, suggesting that firms facing higher political instability tend to have lower levels
  of productivity.
  Yet this result is not backed up with TFP or productivity growth, which weakens its initial outcome.
  Corruption shows a positive correlation with TFP, but as for political aspects, results are not corroborated
  with other measures of productivity.



  39
                                                                   Agribusiness in South Asia



 Table 2: Obstacles to Productivity – Agribusiness
                             (1)           (2)            (3)
 VARIABLES                Labor Prod       TFP       Prod Growth

 Log(Size)                   0.0112       -0.0445       0.0049
                            (0.097)        (0.070)     (0.014)
 Log(Age)                   -0.0265       -0.1224       0.0119
                            (0.053)        (0.067)     (0.010)
 Foreign                     0.6205       -0.7141       0.0069
                            (0.340)        (0.409)     (0.128)
 Exporter                    0.3604        0.2940      -0.0081
                            (0.387)        (0.277)     (0.029)
 Finance                    -0.0172       -0.0465      -0.0123
                            (0.046)        (0.068)     (0.014)
 Political                 -0.1470*       -0.0737       0.0008
                            (0.065)        (0.039)     (0.018)
 Crime                       0.0174        0.0003       0.0042
                            (0.086)        (0.062)     (0.028)
 Taxes                       0.0351       -0.0481      -0.0081
                            (0.063)        (0.042)     (0.046)
 Corruption                  0.0843      0.0720**       0.0015
                            (0.046)        (0.020)     (0.010)
 Informal Sector             0.0057        0.0006       0.0174
                            (0.065)        (0.039)     (0.014)
 Labor Regulations          -0.0078      0.0588**       0.0020
                            (0.040)        (0.022)     (0.026)
 Workforce Education        -0.0676       -0.0946       0.0002
                            (0.065)        (0.065)     (0.012)
 Electricity                -0.0352       -0.0388       0.0019
                            (0.036)        (0.021)     (0.009)
 Constant                 9.6758***      1.5080***   -0.4796***
                            (0.276)        (0.162)     (0.128)

 Observations                 993          692          828
 R-squared                   0.1013       0.0692       0.0370
 Robust standard errors in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




40
                                                                          Agribusiness in South Asia



Annex 6: Tasks of High Level Agribusiness Transformation Team

The agribusiness transformation team has a key role to play in generating and leveraging
knowledge. One cannot underestimate the value of knowledge in motivating and informing the right kind
of actions on behalf of the government and the private sector. The knowledge that the agribusiness
transformation team should generate and leverage falls under four categories:
1. Identification of the main agribusiness opportunities. This effort should entail: (a) identification of
   potential production areas by product, based on agro-climatic suitability; (b) a demand analysis to
   identify the most promising markets (both domestic and international); and (c) for specific agro-
   climatic zones and markets, a detailed productivity/cost benchmarking (starting with the leading
   players) to evaluate the competitiveness distance with the main competitors.
2. Identification of the main constraints standing in the way of realizing the main opportunities.
3. The detailed cost benchmarking done in the previous step will help identify the steps in the value
   chains where productivity/cost need to improve the most, differentiating by type of player. The root
   causes (namely market and government failures along the lines discussed in this report) for the lower
   quality and/or higher costs should then be established in these areas through in-depth interviews of
   leading players with international exposure and comparative analysis.
4. Identification of practical solutions to remove the main constraints. Active dialogue with policy
   makers to remove key constraints is a core responsibility of the agribusiness team. The team can also
   collect information on how other countries have dealt with these constraints from a technical,
   financial, and political point of view.
5. Monitoring and evaluation of progress so as to take corrective actions. Last but not least, the
   agribusiness transformation team will need to put in place monitoring and evaluation systems to
   carefully assess implementation progress. These assessments will enable countries to terminate or
   correct failing initiatives while scaling up and replicating successful ones. The team can then identify
   successes for scaling up and also publicize opportunities.

Source: Byerlee et. al., 2013




41
                                                                               Agribusiness in South Asia



Annex 7: Most Cited NTMs specific to Countries in South Asia

Afghanistan
Port Access: Afghan        Licensing      and    150 categories     Range         of   Additional payments
shipments accessing        registration          of SPS and         para-tariffs in    such      as      bank
Karachi port and           requirements for      TBT measures       the form of        guarantees, collateral
goods from other           both imports and      related       to   export levy,       money               for
countries             to   export.               packaging,         licensing fees,    shipments/      trucks
Afghanistan passing        Provision for a       labelling,         royalty, etc       passing       through
through this port are      post-transaction      certifications,    Afghanistan is     Pakistan
subject to long and        levy or royalty at    and                the      second    Other Issues:
thorough inspection        pro-rata basis on     conformity         country other      Large volume of
by Pakistan officials      the invoice price.    assessments,       than         Sri   informal trade
                           The range is wide,    or         other   Lanka,        to   creating
                           from 0.01% to up      restrictions       impose         a   disincentives       for
                           to 15% of the         pertaining         variety       of   Afghan
                           invoice price.        mostly        to   tariffs      on    manufacturing and
                                                 food,              exports            revenue loss to the
                                                 petroleum                             Afghan government
Bangladesh
Para-Tariffs in the        Port Restrictions:    Sanitary and       TBT                Fluctuating
form                of     Export                Phyto-             Restrictions:      Standards         and
Supplementary Duty         restrictions from     Sanitary           Packaging,         Procedural Steps:
and Regulatory Duty        India and import      measures           labelling,         poor      coordination
imposed on imports in      restrictions. For     pertaining to      certifications,    and     dissemination
270        categories.     eg: imports under     Human,             &conformity        between government
government’s revenue       Bonded                Animal      and    assessments,       officials         and
collection       from      Warehouse             Plant     health   or         other   business community
supplementary     and      system to enter       and      related   restrictions are   leads as well as
regulatory      duties     Bangladesh            food      safety   found for 218      fluctuation standards
exceeded      revenue      through               issues       are   product            & procedures often
collection       from      Chittagong Sea        applied to over    categories.        hamper prospects for
customs duty in the        Port only             300 product                           Bangladesh       Food
2012-2013 fiscal year                            categories for                        Processors
                                                 Bangladesh
India
Port     Restrictions:     SPS               TBT Restrictions:      Fluctuating        Import prohibition:
Currently 137 Indian       Restrictions:     found for about        Standards &        Import of beef in any
imports are allowed to     Sanitary and      228         product    Procedural         form and import of
enter Pakistan only        Phyto-            categories       for   Steps:             products containing
through         Attari-    Sanitary          India.     products    arbitrary          beef in any form is
Wagah           border     measures          belong            to   interpretation     prohibited         for
between India and          applied      to   machinery,             of regulations.    religious    reasons.
Pakistan. India itself     250 product       equipment,      and    Frequent           Import              of
imposes specific port      categories.       chemicals        for   changes to the     Genetically Modified
entry       restriction    There       are   industrial     use,    standards and      Food,            feed,
measure (C3) for           complex           processed food         conformity         Genetically Modified
many categories of         procedural                               assessment         Organism (GMOs)
products applicable        steps.     For                           procedures.        and Living Modified

42
                                                                                Agribusiness in South Asia


for all or different       example,                                                     Organisms (LMOs)
countries, depending       each                                                         or     any     product
on the nature of the       consignment                                                  containing any of
product.       Indian      is subject to                                                these is subject to
traders, particularly      testing                                                      several kinds of
exporters, also face       instead of the                                               certification,     and
such      port  entry      standard                                                     other TBT measures
restriction measures       practice    of
in Bangladesh.             risk     based
                           inspection.
Bhutan
Quantitative               License               Para-Tariffs:       A total of 14 categories of items
Restrictions:        For   Requirements:         Bhutan faces a      are restricted for import from all
imports            from    Each        import    variety      of     countries and are subject to licensing
countries other than       consignment           discriminatory      requirement with special permission
India, an importer can     requires separate     para-tariffs
import      only       4   import license for    from India and      Import of raw materials for industrial
containers a year.         the        already    Bangladesh.         use must have a value addition of
                           registered                                minimum 40%.
                           importer.
Maldives
The quota regime has       Time consuming                            Quality Standards: Maldives’ exports
been ’operationally‘       import and export                         often face restrictions on quality and
eliminated, and now        licensing                                 SPS issues in importing countries due
both      public    and    requirements                              to the absence of proper testing and
private parties are                                                  inspection facilities.
allowed to import
staple foods,
Nepal
Quantitative               Special     permission     is      Six categories of products, including beef,
restrictions are in        required for exports of some       plastic materials with less than 20 micron
place for exports of       timber products and forest         thickness, and some other products
rice, wheat, sugar &       resources      related     to      prohibited under other laws are banned for
grains      for    food    biodiversity and environment       import on religious, public health, and
security reasons.          conservation.                      environmental grounds.
Pakistan
Political Restrictions:    SPS Restrictions:     Technical           Port               162 categories of
The NTM inventory          Sanitary        and   Barriers       to   Restrictions:      products/items, are
for Pakistan found         Phyto-Sanitary        Trade (TBT)         Currently 137      subjected to bans/
E329 (Prohibition for      measures              in Category B       Indian imports     restricted bans for
non-economic reason        (Category         A   of            the   are allowed to     imports and exports
n.e.s.      or      ‘not   under UNCTAD          UNCTAD              enter Pakistan     broadly.
elsewhere specified’)      classification)       classification      only through       Imports of a number
applicable to 585          pertaining       to   have        been    Wagah border.      of     products    are
categories of products     Human, Animal         found         for   Imports from       subject to quality
under different levels     and Plant health      about        186    Afghanistan        standards.
of HS chapters and         and related food      product             are         also   Import of a number
codes for imports          safety issues are     categories.         subject to port    of products is subject
from India.                applied to about                          specific           to regulatory duty.
                           79          product                       restrictions


43
                                                                         Agribusiness in South Asia


                          categories.                          due to security
                                                               considerations.
Srilanka
Para-Tariffs in the       Licensing             SPS Restrictions: TBT Restrictions: applicable to
form of export levy       Requirements:         Sanitary        and about 90 product categories.
(referred to as ‘cess’    335 categories of     Phyto-Sanitary
from a 10% to 35%         products       with   measures
range), and a 5%          different levels of   (Category A under
infrastructure            HS chapters and       UNCTAD
development levy on       codes for imports     classification)
imports, both specific    are       regulated   pertaining       to
and ad valorem exist      under         E129    Human,       Animal
in Sri Lanka. A           (Licensing      for   and Plant health
differential treatment    non-economic          and food safety
in VAT calculation        reason n.e.s.) in     issues are applied
for imported products     Sri Lanka.            to     over     101
is also a form of para-                         product categories
tariff     faced    by                          for Sri Lanka.
importers.




44
                                                                               Agribusiness in South Asia



Annex 8: Weaknesses in the food safety/SPS regulation according to Lead Firms
Interviews with lead firms around South Asia reviled various weaknesses in the food safety/SPS
regulation:

        National standards do not comply with international norms (e.g. WTO Agreement on Technical
         Barriers to Trade and WTO Agreement on Sanitary and Phyto-sanitary Measures) and therefore
         prevent market access for. The international recognition of the apex authorities and of monitoring
         laboratories is patchy.
        Weak ability of farmers to achieve the standards required by the industry or exporters.
        Weak implementation of regulations and technical capacity among institutions and their
         inspection agencies need to be upgraded.
        The large number of regulatory authorities leads to confusion over areas of responsibility. There
         may be regional discrepancies within countries where responsibility has been devolved to state or
         provincial level leaving uncertainty over responsibilities and unique technical regulation regimes
        Voluntary standards and mandatory technical regulations are not always clearly separated.
         Insufficient representation of the private sector in the governance structures
        There is no high level oversight of the national quality infrastructure or the technical regulation
         framework and so no co-ordination and collaboration across ministries to ensure WTO
         compatibility. In Pakistan a National Quality Policy35 was formulated in June 2014. Its current
         status is not known.




35
  See also Policy paper on sanitary and phytosanitary management and controls in Pakistan. Ministry of National
Food Security and Research, Government of Pakistan (2014)

45
                                                                         Agribusiness in South Asia



Annex 9: The Kyrgyz Agribusiness and Marketing Project
As consumer preferences change, accessing even the domestic market can be a challenge for processor as
Kyrgyz food companies are well-aware of. In the years that followed independence after the collapse of
the Soviet Union, a new market started emerging especially in urban areas in the Kyrgyz Republic.
Companies that had existed for decades and supplied Kyrgyz consumers with processed products such as
juices, milk products, and cheeses, all of a sudden had trouble keeping up with new demands and saw
their products being pushed aside on the super market shelves by products from Kazakhstan with better
quality and more appealing packaging. At the same time, much of the processing equipment dated back to
the time of the Soviet Union, and many managers were uncertain how to approach the challenges in this
changing environment.
The World Bank-financed Kyrgyz Agribusiness and Marketing Project provided a three-pillar approach to
upgrading agro-food processors. 42 companies, selected on the basis on interest and viability, were
supported with subsidized consultancy services by food-technicians, marketing, and financial
management specialists – all helping the processors to upgrade processing equipment, marketing
strategies (including market identification, packaging, and labelling), and IT-based financial management
systems for up-to-date business-oriented approaches. In addition to the subsidized consultancy services,
the project also financed a revolving credit line through five commercial banks to ensure financing (at
market rates) for some of these investments and to the agro-processing industry in general.
Overall, the 42 participating companies showed an average increase in sales and profit with 114 and 107
percent respectively at the end of the project, reaching the shelves in Bishkek and beyond with their
upgraded products.
Source: ABMP ICR/Authors




46
                                                                             Agribusiness in South Asia



Annex 10: The Uruguay Case Study
Uruguay—soybean, rice and plantation forestry: This small country (3.5 million people) has increased
its world market share in 8 of its 10 top agricultural exports over the past 20 years. During this period, it
has maintained a stable macro-economic environment and an open policy toward foreign direct
investment. It had the highest score for governance indicators among the countries reviewed—although it
scored relatively poorly in the Doing Business Indicators. It has also developed two significant new
export industries. The new soybean industry garnered US$ 327 million in foreign exchange earnings in
2008; the new pulp and paper industry, based on plantation forests, provided US$ 902 million. Uruguay
also increased rice exports nearly four times to 1 million tons, worth US$ 461 million in 2009, with
significant exports to Africa in recent years.

The state has played different roles in the development of these industries. The soybean industry received
no specific government incentives and was not jump-started through a special program. Large
Argentinean agribusiness companies, which are highly taxed on soy exports in their own country, were
able to import seed to Uruguay (thanks to flexible regulations) and openly acquire land through rental or
purchase (thanks to Uruguay’s well-defined property rights and well-functioning land markets). For rice,
Uruguay forged a unique public-private partnership to finance rice research and technology transfer, with
co-financing shared equally by producers and the government. This highly effective rice innovation
system has achieved one of the highest national average rice yields in the world (around 8 tons per
hectare) and a benefit-cost ratio of 7.9 on the investment in research and development.

In contrast, the government played a very activist role in developing a new forest policy and passing a
forestry law that provided special incentives to the sector and to some firms. Incentives included a 50
percent subsidy and land tax exemption for plantations on land designated as low-quality pastures and
tax-free status for five export pulp mills. The rationale for special forestry incentives appears to relate to
(1) the long gestation period of about 10 years from forest establishment to harvest, which ties up capital;
(2) the very large scale of processing investments (more than US$ 1 billion per mill); (3) the need to
coordinate the investment in the feed supply to pulp mills with the investment in the mills; and (4) the fact
that neighboring countries were offering equivalent or higher subsidies for plantation forestry.

A study by Morales (2007) estimated an internal rate of return on investments in the forestry industry of
32 percent, including subsidy investment provided by the government. The program attracted about US$
4 billion in private investments, including the largest single foreign investment in Uruguay’s history.
Risks appear to be minimal. Plantation forestry and downstream processing were estimated to have
provided four times the jobs per hectare relative to the low-productivity cattle ranching that it replaced.
Environmental impacts have likely been neutral or positive. The plantation subsidy was removed in 2005.

The downside was that soy, rice, and forestry industries greatly increased wear and tear on rural roads as
they moved millions of tons of new product to mills and ports. In 2011, Uruguay was debating a special
tax on large land owners to finance road maintenance.

Source: Byerlee, et. al., 2013




47
                                                                           Agribusiness in South Asia



Annex 11: Contract Farming in the Coffee Sector (Nedcoffee in Vietnam)
The coffee roasters in the consuming markets of the World are increasingly demanding that their
suppliers can provide assurance that the coffee is produced under sustainable conditions. Nedcoffee
Vietnam is Vietnam’s third largest coffee exporter with annual exports around 90,000 tonnes per year. It
was established in 2008 with a factory in Buon Ma Thuot with a fully integrated, state-of-the art
processing line and designed capacity of 60,000 tonnes per year. Nedcoffee buys through four buying
stations and coffee beans are brought by truck to Buon Ma Thuot. The buying stations are staffed by
employees but Government regulations do not allow the exporter to buy direct from the farmer so the
procurement is achieved through independent collectors in the surrounding areas, including the 22 partner
collectors of Nedcoffee.


Nedcoffee Vietnam is ahead of the national average in supplying sustainable coffee, with 15 percent of its
coffee produced (2013) under certified sustainable conditions, and a target of 25 percent in the next years.
Coffee verified or certified as produced under sustainable conditions attracts a premium of USD40-
60/tonne for the exporter. Of this premium half will stay with the exporter to cover the costs of handling
the coffee separately and for maintaining the traceability of the supply. The remainder is split equally
between the collector and the farmer. There is therefore an incentive for each player in the supply chain to
maintain the integrity of the certified or verified coffee.


A typical partner collector for Nedcoffee will buy 500t/year of coffee and all is sent to Nedcoffee. The
collector may also trade pepper and rice and supply agrochemicals and a small operation can easily
turnover USD1mn per year. From May each year the collector starts to pre-finance the crop with
advances of fertiliser providing the linkage between Nedcoffee and the farmers that permits the
development of traceable certified sustainable coffee. In the Nedcoffee factory the coffee is prepared,
cleaned, graded with colour sorters and sieves, maybe polished, and bagged. A range of grades is
produced according to customer specifications. Certified coffee is handled and stored separately.
Source: Authors




48
                                                                                          Agribusiness in South Asia



 Annex 12: Productivity drivers regression results


  Table 2: Firm characteristics and productivity – Agribusiness
                                     (1)              (2)               (3)
  VARIABLES                      Labor Prod           TFP           Prod Growth


  Log(Size)                        0.0112           -0.0445           0.0049
                                   (0.097)          (0.070)           (0.014)
  Log(Age)                         -0.0265          -0.1224           0.0119
                                   (0.053)          (0.067)           (0.010)
  Foreign                          0.6205           -0.7141           0.0069
                                   (0.340)          (0.409)           (0.128)
  Exporter                         0.3604           0.2940            -0.0081
                                   (0.387)          (0.277)           (0.029)


Table 4: CDM Model for Agribusiness
                                                    (1)                         (2)                            (3)
Stage                                            1st Stage                 2nd Stage                      3rd Stage
Dependent Variable                         Log(Innov. Exp./Sales)     Log(New Products/Sales)        Log(Labor Productivity)

Predicted Log(Expenditure/Sales)                                                -2.6759
                                                                                (6.310)
Predicted Log(New Products/Sales)                                                                           1.9169
                                                                                                            (2.251)
Log(Size)                                          0.0051                        0.0427                     0.2693*
                                                  (0.005)                       (0.040)                     (0.150)
Log(Age)                                          -0.0007                       -0.0513
                                                  (0.009)                       (0.047)
Export                                            -0.0213                       -0.0056
                                                  (0.017)                       (0.155)
Foreign Status                                     0.0094                        0.2218
                                                  (0.055)                       (0.335)
Internal Funds                                   -0.0278*                       -0.0113
                                                  (0.015)                       (0.193)
Duopoly / Monopoly                                -0.0182
                                                  (0.022)
Capital Labor Ratio                                                                                        0.0000***
                                                                                                             (0.000)
Process Innovation                                                                                           0.3216
                                                                                                             (0.260)
Organization Innovation                                                                                      0.0195
                                                                                                             (0.270)
Observations                                        477                           489                          181
R-squared                                                                                                    0.1629
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

 49
                                                                           Agribusiness in South Asia




     Table 5: Agglomeration Economies - District Level (Agribusiness)
                                               1                  2          3                 4
     Dependent Variable: TFP                         Two-Digit                   Three-Digit


     Localization                       -0.0820***         -0.1164***    -0.0575***      -0.0329**
                                          (0.020)            (0.024)      (0.012)          (0.015)
     Urbanization                       0.0591***           0.0512**     0.0428***       0.0367**
                                          (0.020)            (0.020)      (0.015)          (0.018)
     Observations                            6,135               6,135     6,135           6,135
     R-squared                               0.0036          0.0052       0.0041           0.0057
     Robust standard errors in parentheses
     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




50
                                                                        Agribusiness in South Asia



Annex 12         Bibliography
ActionAid        2015       Contract farming and out-grower schemes Appropriate development
                            models to tackle poverty and hunger? Policy Discussion Paper
Akmal            Accessed   Pakistan: Land Reforms Reconsidered ;
Hussain          in 2015    http://akmalhussain.net/Publish%20Work/SouthAsia/PakistanLandRef
                            ormsReconsidered.pdf
Ahmed, Md. 2007             Market Research Study for Bhutanese Orange and Apples. Report
Saleh                       prepared for the World Bank
Ahuja, U. et 2008           Scented Rices of India Asian Agri-History Vol 12 No 4 (267-283)
al.
Byerlee et.  2013           Growing Africa: Unleashing the Potential of Agribusiness
Al.

Cato       and   2003
Sunasinge,
Confederatio     2013       India as an agriculture and high value food powerhouse: A new vision
n of Indian                 for 2030
Industry &                  Food and Agriculture Integrated Development Action 3
McKinsey
CRISIL Risk      2009       Enhancing Competitiveness of Indian Manufacturing Industry:
and                         Assistance in Policy Making
Infrastructure              http://nmcc.nic.in/pdf/CRISIL_March2009.pdf
Solutions
Limited
Corporate        2015       A Brief Report on Food Processing Sector in India www.cci.in
Catalyst
(India) Pvt
Ltd
DAI              2012       Islamic Finance at the Agricultural Development Fund Technical
                            Report for USAID
Euromonitor      2015       Market Dynamics in India: consumer Trends and Momentum
International
FAO              May        Bangladesh and FAO Achievements and success stories; FAO
                 2011       Representation in Bangladesh;
FAO              2012       Food Outlook
FAO              2012       Trends and Impacts of Foreign Investments in Developing Country
                            Agriculture:        Evidence         from        Case   Studies,
                            http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/est/INTERNATIONAL-
                            TRADE/FDIs/Trends_publication_12_November_2012.pdf
FAO              2013       Contract farming for inclusive market access. Rome
FAO              2014       Country Profiles, Accessed October, 2014
FAO              2015       Food Price Index

FAOSTAT          Extracted http://faostat.fao.org/
Database         from Dec
                 2014 to
                 Feb 2015
Giraud, G.       2013      The World Market of Fragrant Rice, Main Issues and Perspectives
                           International Food and Agribusiness Management Review Volume

51
                                                                          Agribusiness in South Asia


                             16, Issue 2
Government        2013       The Potential of Intra-Industry Trade between Pakistan and India
of Pakistan,
Ministry of
Commerce
Government        2014       Maldives climate change policy framework
of          the
Maldives
Indian Retail     2014       https://www.kpmg.com/IN/en/IssuesAndInsights/ArticlesPublications/
–The      next               Documents/BBG-Retail.pdf
growth Story
International     accessed
Comparison        October
Project (ICP)     2015
database
IRRI              2013       Rice Almanac Ed 4
IRRI              2000       Aromatic Rices. Philippines.
Jain, A. K.       2013       A View of Natural Menthol Used in the Global Fragrance and Flavour
                             Industries and India's Role. In: IFEAT International Conference 2013.
                             San Francisco, USA 29 September - 3 October 2013. London: IFEAT
Kozicka, M. 2015             Modelling Indian Wheat and Rice Sector Policies ZEF-Discussion
et al.                       Papers on Development Policy No. 197
LSE          Accessed        Land Reform in India
             Dec 2015        http://personal.lse.ac.uk/GHATAK/landref.pdf
Lipinski, B. 2013            “Reducing Food Loss and Waste.” Working Paper, Instalment 2 of
et al.                       Creating a Sustainable Food Future. Washington, DC:
                             World Resources Institute. Available online at
                             http://www.worldresourcesreport.org
Lusby, F.         2008       Working with Lead Firms within the Value Chain Approach
                             microREPORT #144 USAID Best Practices in Implementation Paper
                             Series
Maldives          2008       Maldives National Adaptation to Climate Change / the Human
Ministry of                  Dimension of Global Climate Change. Presentation to European
Environment,                 Parliament – Temporary Committee
Energy and                   on Climate Change
Water
Ministry of       Accessed   Database and statistics accessed from http://www.mofpi.nic.in/
Food              in 2015
Processing
Industries,
Government
of India
Minten, B. et     2011       The Quiet Revolution in Agrifood Value Chains in Asia
al.                          The Case of Increasing Quality in Rice Markets in Bangladesh, IFPRI
                             Discussion Paper 01141
NIC               Nov        FDI Fact Sheet (Nov 2014):
                  2014       http://dipp.nic.in/English/Publications/FDI_Statistics/2014/india_FDI_
                             November2014.pdf
Pandey, R.        2014       Groundwater Irrigation in Punjab: Some Issues and Way Forward
                             Working Paper No. 2014-140 National Institute of Public Finance and

52
                                                                     Agribusiness in South Asia


                        Policy New Delhi http://www.nipfp.org.in
Planning         2011   Report of the working group on agricultural marketing infrastructure,
Commission              secondary agriculture and policy required for internal and external
of India                trade for the XII Five Year Plan 2012-17
Raihan, S.,      2014    NTMs in South Asia: Assessment and Analysis,
M. A. Khan              SAARC-TPN.
and       S.
Quoreshi
Rang, A. et      2015   Status Paper on Rice in Punjab Rice Knowledge Management Portal
al.                     http://www.rkmp.co.in
Reardon, T.      2011   The Quiet Revolution in India’s Food Supply Chains IFPRI
& B. Minten             Discussion Paper 01115
Reardon, T.      2012   The Quiet Revolution in Staple Food Value Chains
et al.                  Enter the Dragon, the Elephant, and the Tiger
                        Mandaluyong City, Philippines: Asian Development Bank, 2012.
Reardon,      T. 2013   The Transformation of Rice Value Chains in Bangladesh
et al.                  and India: Implications for Food Security ADB Economics Working
                        Paper Series No. 375
Reardon,      T. 2014   Urbanization, Diet Change, and Transformation of Food
et al.                  Supply Chains in Asia MSU Global Centre for Food Systems
                        Innovation
Riaz, M.         2010   The role of the private sector in agricultural extension in Pakistan in
                        Rural Development News 1/2010
Rosengrant,   2012      Looking Ahead: Scenarios for the Future of Food, IFPR
M.W.,
Tokgoz, S.,
Bahndary, P.,
and Msangi,
Siwa
Salunkhe,     2012      The overview of Government subsidies to agriculture sector in
H.A.      and           India IOSR Journal of Agriculture and Veterinary Science
B.B.                    Volume 1, Issue 5 (Nov. - Dec. 2012), PP 43-47
Deshmush                www.iosrjournals.org
Sharma, V.P. 2007       India’s Agrarian Crisis and Smallholder Producers’ Participation in
                        New Farm Supply Chain Initiatives: A Case Study of Contract
                        Farming IIMA W.P. No.2007-08-01
Shih, C. L.      2012   A View of Menthol Development - from the Perspective of Singapore.
                        In: IFEAT International Conference 2012. Singapore, 4-8 November
                        2012. London: IFEAT.
Sinha, K.        2013   Paddy Processing Mills in India: An Analysis J Rice Res
                        1: 115. doi: 10.4172/jrr.1000115
Surendra Raj 2009       Citrus in Bhutan: Value Chain Analysis Department of Agricultural
Joshi, S.R. &           Marketing and Cooperatives
B.R. Gurung             Ministry of Agriculture and Forests
South Asian 2014        NTMs in South Asia: Assessment and Analysis
Network on
Economic                http://sanemnet.org/ntms-in-south-asia-assessment-and-analysis/
Modelling
Switzerland   2014      Chilies, dairy and mangoes: the food processing sector in Pakistan.
Global

53
                                                                     Agribusiness in South Asia


Enterprise
Thiyagarajan 2015        Status Paper on Rice in Tamil Nadu Rice Knowledge Management
. K and R.               Portal http://www.rkmp.co.in
Kalaiyarasi
UNCTAD       2013        World Investment Report
USAID        2014        Regional Trade in Seed, Fertilizer, and Strategic Grains A Review of
                         the Legal, Regulatory, and Institutional Constraints to Growth Across
                         South Asia USAID Enabling Agricultural Trade
WDI          extracted
Database     Dec
             2014-
             Nov
             2015
World Bank / 2006        Pakistan’s Agrobased Exports and Sanitary and Phyo-sanitary (SPS)
UNIDO                    Compliance
World Bank   2008        World Development Report: Agriculture for Development
World Bank   2009        Awakening Africa's Sleeping Giant: Prospects for Commercial
                         Agriculture in the Guinea Savannah Zone and Beyond. Washington
                         DC, USA.
World Bank    2012       World Development Report: Gender in Development
World Bank    2013       Kyrgyz Republic Agrobusiness and Marketing Project (ABMP)
                         Implementation Completion Result Report
World Bank    2013       Agriculture for Nutrition in Latin America: From Quantity to Quality
World Bank    2013       Turn Down the Heat
World Bank    2014       Agricultural Productivity in India
World Bank    2014       Accelerating Agricultural Productivity Growth, Republic of India.
                         World Bank Report No: 88093-IN
World Bank    2015       Economic Cluster Analysis: Study of Food Processing and Informal
                         Manufacturing Activities in Kabul City (to be published)
World Bank    2015       South Asia Enterprise Survey
World Bank    Accessed   Agribusiness Team Database
              in 2015
World Bank    Accessed Lima position paper Towards a Climate Smart Food System By 2030
              in 2015
WTO           Accessed http://tariffdata.wto.org/default.aspx
              in    Dec
              2015
                        http://sanemnet.org/ntms-in-south-asia-assessment-and-analysis/




54
