B   Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land
Advisory Paper

© 2015 Compliance Advisor Ombudsman (CAO)

All rights reserved.

The Office of the Compliance Advisor Ombudsman (CAO)
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
Telephone: + 1 202 458 1973
Website: www.cao-ombudsman.org
e-mail: cao@worldbankgroup.org

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of
the World Bank Group or the governments they represent.

CAO does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in
this work do not imply any judgment on the part of CAO concerning the legal
status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting
portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation of applicable
law. CAO encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant
permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a
request with complete information to:
The Office of the Compliance Advisor Ombudsman
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
Fax: +1 202 522 7400
e-mail: cao@worldbankgroup.org

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should also
be addressed to the Office of the CAO at the above address.
Contents

Abstract.............................................................................................................................. 1
A Complex Set of Pressures on Land............................................................................... 2
An Overview of CAO Land Cases...................................................................................... 6
Challenges.......................................................................................................................... 8
	     Challenge 1: Competing national and local land tenure systems and
	     development priorities.................................................................................................... 9	
	     Challenge 2: A history of land conflict........................................................................... 10
	     Challenge 3: Information imbalances and competing development perspectives
	     between the private sector and community.................................................................. 11
	     Challenge 4: Competing community perspectives about private sector projects........... 13
Tools.................................................................................................................................. 14
Building capacity for effective engagement......................................................................... 15
	   Tool 1. Conflict assessment.......................................................................................... 16
	   Tool 2. Third-party neutrals........................................................................................... 18
	   Tool 3. Participatory impact assessments and monitoring ........................................... 22
	   Tool 4. Company/community collaboration and land management............................... 26
	   Tool 5. Strengthening grievance mechanisms and redress systems.............................. 27
Conclusion........................................................................................................................ 32
References........................................................................................................................ 34

Box 1. The Role of Government in CAO Land Cases......................................................... 17
Box 2. What Does a Typical CAO Assessment Look Like?................................................. 19



Case Study 1.	            Transforming Relationships between Communities and Companies
			                       in the Philippines: Ambuklao-Binga Hydroelectric Power......................... 20
Case Study 2.	            Addressing Land Disputes in the Indonesian Oil Palm Sector:
			                       Wilmar Group......................................................................................... 24
Case Study 3.	            Working with Communities and Companies around Timber
			                       Plantations in Uganda: Agri-Vie Fund...................................................... 28
Case Study 4.	            Addressing Multiple Land Claims alongside a Major
			                       Oil Pipeline in Cameroon: Chad-Cameroon Oil Pipeline........................... 30


Figure 1. Land-related Claims in CAO Cases....................................................................... 7
Map 1.	 Conflict Mapping: Overlapping Land Use Boundaries Reflecting Local,
		      Regional, and National Priorities............................................................................. 10
Table B2.1. Examples of Meetings with Stakeholders........................................................ 19
Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land                                      1




Abstract
Against a backdrop of private sector investment in developing countries,
companies and local communities typically face difficult land rights and
land use contexts. It is therefore critical that communities, companies, and
development practitioners develop and use constructive tools to help manage
challenging relationships and circumstances. This Advisory Paper summarizes
some insights that the Compliance Advisor Ombudsman (CAO) has gained
from its experiences with communities and companies in the arena of land,
private sector development, and conflict. Specifically, this Advisory Paper
highlights recurring challenges faced by the communities and companies
CAO has worked with—including competing community perspectives on
private sector projects; competing national and local land tenure systems and
development priorities; histories of land conflict; and information imbalances
between companies and local communities—as well as competing development
perspectives. It then focuses on some of the tools CAO has used to help address
these challenges, including the use of third-party neutrals; participatory
monitoring and project evaluation; company/community collaboration and
land management; and strengthening grievance and redress systems.


This paper was originally prepared as a submission for the 2014 World Bank
Group Land and Poverty Conference. It has been revised as an Advisory Paper
to articulate the issues and challenges raised by complainants related to land,
and to highlight some of the practical tools CAO has used to assist communities
and companies in managing these challenges.
2                                              Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land




A Complex Set of
Pressures on Land
Both human and environmental pressures on land and
natural resources in developing countries are increasing
in the face of global population growth and the
mounting effects of climate change. Within the private
sector, investments in resource-intensive sectors such as
agribusiness and extractive industries continue to grow.
Meanwhile, the range of local, national, and international
interests related to large-scale, resource-based investments
has also expanded rapidly as international and domestic
development priorities reflect concerns over global
resources and food security (World Bank 2011). Resource-
intensive private sector investments often require large
areas of land, creating competition with local communities
and other land users. Such competition can lead to conflict.


Participatory land mapping, Indonesia (CAO).
Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land                                                                              3




With this global context, land-related issues continue to be a major focus of the
international development community, particularly how to ensure that private sector
investments create local benefits and promote sustainable resource management.
The Office of the Compliance Advisor Ombudsman (CAO), as the independent
accountability mechanism for the private sector arms of the World Bank Group—
the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency (MIGA)—helps address community grievances and disputes about
environmental and social project impacts. Through its work, CAO engages frequently
with land-related issues between communities and companies and from a third-party
perspective. This creates a unique space where challenges can be addressed.

Concerns raised by locally-affected communities often focus on the extent to which
people are benefiting from private sector development projects, and how these projects
impact their livelihoods, local environment, and social fabric. Communities typically
have little bargaining power in the negotiation, planning, and implementation of
projects, even in circumstances where development finance institutions are involved.
CAO’s work with communities and companies has demonstrated a need to understand
the impacts of private sector investments in land from the community perspective: in
particular, to recognize the challenges that communities face in managing relationships
with private sector entities where development projects affect access to and control
of land, and what approaches can be used to help mitigate these challenges. Engaging
with these issues is particularly critical in the context of development finance
institutions like IFC/MIGA, which strive for positive development impacts through
private sector investment.

The World Bank Group1 has set out two ambitious goals for the next 15 years: ending
extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity (World Bank 2013b). The important
role that the private sector plays in achieving these goals has been highlighted in
a number of ways. The World Bank Group has articulated the need to work with
governments, the private sector, and civil society to take on transformative projects
that can help the poor lift themselves out of poverty (World Bank 2013a). Specifically,
in relation to IFC/MIGA, whose roles are growing in significance, the World Bank
Group is focused on attracting more private sector investment to developing countries
(World Bank 2013b). Moreover, IFC’s role has been emphasized because its “strong
track record in environmental and social risk management has made it a partner of
choice” (World Bank 2013b).



1	
     The World Bank Group is made up of five institutions managed by their member countries: the International Bank for
     Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), the International Development Association (IDA), the International Finance
     Corporation (IFC), the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), and International Centre for Settlement of
     Investment Disputes (ICSID).
4                                                                             Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land




IFC’s growing role as part of the World Bank Group’s long-term strategy, and as
a partner for private sector companies in developing countries, means that it has
an influential role to play in catalyzing the types of investments that can generate
local benefits and promote sustainable resource management. IFC’s Sustainability
Framework should be an important part of achieving these positive development
outcomes.2 The Sustainability Framework offers both IFC/MIGA and its private sector
clients the opportunity to engage with local communities, develop environmental and
social management systems, and promote the kind of participation that can enable
project benefits to reach the most vulnerable portions of the population. Importantly,
it offers the tools for companies to manage environmental and social risks and protect
communities from harm. However, the potential for conflict at the project level
increases in instances where gaps exist between policies and implementation, when
consultation with local communities is seen to be inadequate, or when company and
community strategies to mitigate adverse impacts diverge.

As an independent accountability mechanism, CAO seeks to engage with communities
and companies to help them manage conflict and find ways of improving project
outcomes on the ground. In its compliance work, CAO assesses the application of
how well IFC/MIGA has/have applied policies, procedures, and standards in relation
to environmental and social issues raised in complaints. In its dispute resolution role,
CAO works directly with companies and affected communities to address issues of
concern at the project level. Since 2000, CAO has handled over 150 cases. While these
represent only a fraction of the IFC and MIGA portfolios, CAO’s annual caseload has
grown and the complexity of cases has increased in recent years.3 Of the over 150
cases CAO has handled, just over half have raised issues related to land, including land
acquisition, land compensation, resettlement, land management, land contamination,
and land productivity.

CAO’s understanding of land and private sector investment reflects the perspectives
of communities and the challenges they face. When thinking about how communities
can benefit from private sector land investments, CAO’s caseload suggests that even
within the context of institutions like IFC/MIGA, which are recognized for their best
practice environmental and social standards, communities are rarely brought to the
negotiating table; much less are they in a position in which they can leverage positive
outcomes. Even where communities are consulted about project impacts, they still
face challenges engaging with private sector companies from a position of relatively

2	
     These standards apply to investments financed directly by IFC; investments implemented through financial
     intermediaries or managed by IFC’s Asset Management Company or any other IFC subsidiary, as well as investments
     funded in part or in whole by donors; and IFC’s Advisory Services.
3	
     CAO measures complexity of cases with the following proxies: number of stakeholders involved, number and complexity
     of issues raised, government participation, and capacity-building requirements. The annual caseload has grown from 3
     cases in 2002 to 54 cases in 2014.
Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land                                           5




little power. Furthermore, many communities face challenges related to land that
predate the private sector investment such as historical land conflict, or competing
local and national frameworks on land tenure, land use, and development. In short,
communities typically face difficult land rights and land use contexts with minimal
capacity and resources.

This Advisory Paper summarizes some insights CAO has gained from its experiences
with communities and companies in the arena of land, resource management, and
conflict. It touches upon recurring challenges faced by the companies and communities
CAO has worked with, and focuses on some of the tools CAO has used to help them
address these challenges. Given that CAO casework is driven by complaints received
from communities, lessons on challenges and tools should be understood from that
standpoint. CAO recognizes that there is a great deal of work that has been done on
the subject of land and investment from other perspectives, particularly in relation to
local and national land tenure systems. However, the challenges and tools outlined in
this Advisory Paper are meant to serve as a guide for those seeking to improve resource
management and enhance project benefits at the local level.
6                                     Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land




An Overview of
CAO Land Cases
CAO caseload data illustrates that impacts on land have the
potential to touch multiple aspects of life for communities.
For example, in cases that raise issues around health,
communities are often concerned about the impact of
land degredation on increasing the opportunity for disease
vectors (such as mosquito breeding grounds). Issues around
land productivity and access are often linked to concerns
about the capacity to use land to generate income either
through subsistence farming or other forms of income-
generating activities. Complaints that raise issues around
land pollution and biodiversity speak about not only
related to localized pollution, but also to the long-term
impacts to ecosystems.




Rwanda (A’Melody Lee, World Bank)
Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land                                                       7




From health to livelihoods to the environment, land has both practical and cultural
significance in the lives of many individuals and communities. As such, when private
sector projects have negative impacts on land, they have the potential to impact every
aspect of community life. In order to avoid and mitigate many of the issues that have
been raised in CAO land cases, it is critical that the challenges surrounding land-
intensive projects are not overlooked. The following sections illustrate some of the
main challenges related to land emerging from CAO cases, and help to highlight issues
that should be at the forefront of the planning and implementation of projects with a
sensitive or substantial land component.

Figure 1. Land-related Claims in CAO Complaints

40


30


20
                                                                                       35
                                                                        33
                                                           29
                                               24
10
                              14
            4
 0
          Land             Land              Land         Land      Resettlement       Land
         quality          pollution       biodiversity compensation                productivity/
                                                                                      access




A total of 76 complaints have raised land-related claims, which amounts
to 52 percent of all eligible complaints from 2000 to 2014.
8                                                                                        Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land




Challenges
Recurring themes emerge in CAO land cases that
characterize the types of challenges faced by project-
affected communities. These themes—including information
imbalances, a history of conflict, and competing local and
national priorities—cut across the many unique regional
and country-specific contexts.

New house being constructed by community member on land acquired as a result of CAO mediation process, Uganda (Felix Davey/CAO).
Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land                                                                              9




Challenge 1. Competing national and local land tenure systems and
development priorities

There is a considerable body of work and literature on the challenges of competing
national and local land tenure systems. Whether working at cross purposes or simply
faced with inadequate implementation regimes, government and community land
tenure systems can be a source of friction in private sector investment projects.4
National agendas tend to focus on macro-level benefits that may accrue as a result of
private sector investment, while local communities seek practical benefits that enhance
their livelihood needs.

In CAO cases, these competing land tenure systems and development priorities have
had a range of negative or unanticipated outcomes, with implications for communities,
companies, and government entities. For example, in the Philippines the courts ruled
in favor of expropriating land for a hydroelectric power plant despite claims by
indigenous communities of communal rights to the land (see Case Study 1). This type
of scenario can result in large-scale resettlement of populations, further complicated by
inadequate consultation about the resettlement process or compensation claims that
may go unaddressed. This was the case in the Philippines, where competing land claims
remained unresolved for nearly 60 years before CAO received a request for assistance
from affected community members. In other cases, CAO has seen how the overlay
of national and customary laws can cause confusion, with land access and use rights
being granted under one system or government agency, and denied under another.
The situation is further compounded by inconsistencies in how customary rights are
recognized by governments. This creates uncertainty not only for companies that are
unable to navigate these complexities, but also for community members whose land
title can be overruled by more powerful national systems.

In many of the most challenging land cases CAO has dealt with, issues related to
communal land rights and resettlement have been a source of disputes between
communities and companies (see Map 1). Resettlement has been raised as a
concern in 23 percent of CAO’s total caseload; of these cases, 69 percent claim that
resettlement was involuntary, and 48 percent raise concerns about the inadequacy of
the resettlement process. When communities are resettled, their livelihoods disrupted,
and their ties severed from the important cultural and economic resource of land,
they are left in vulnerable situations, which can create conditions for conflict. When
communities also operate in contexts where there is no trusted or accessible system to
address their concerns, there is little power they can leverage and few avenues they can
pursue to address the challenges related to competing land tenure systems.

4	
     A Google Scholar search using the key words “competing land tenure” received 158,000 hits in 0.09 seconds. A Google
     Scholar search using the key words “land tenure conflict” received 230,000 hits in 0.07 seconds. Some useful resources
     include Feder and Feeny 1991; Banerjee and Iyer 2002; and FAO 2012.
10                                                                           Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land




Map 1. Overlapping Land Use Boundaries Reflecting Local,
Regional, and National Priorities




          Mining corridor

          Geospatial mapping of assets

          Permits for land parcels issued
          by the national government

          Ancestral domain claimed by
          Indigenous communities

          Ancestral boundaries determined
          by the National Council for
          Indigenous Peoples/Free Prior
          Informed Consent (FPIC)

          De ned forestry reserves de ned
          by the National Department of
          Environment

          Overlapping village boundaries/
          Divided community interests


Note: The boundaries in this diagram depict a fictional scenario based on a CAO case.




Challenge 2. A history of land conflict

In about 20 percent of CAO cases involving land disputes, even before private sector
investment occurred, there was a history of land conflict associated with the area of
project development. Longstanding issues include historically unresolved land claims,
displacement, involuntary resettlement, and lack of adequate compensation for land.
Prior disputes may have occurred within communities, between communities and
companies, and between communities and the national government.

CAO’s work with regard to IFC’s investment in Honduras in Corporación Dinant
demonstrates how long-running grievances over land can impact a private sector project
and the communities around it. IFC made an investment in agribusiness in a region of
Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land                                                                              11




Honduras where there was a history of conflict over land involving large landholders,
affiliates of former peasant cooperatives, and Indigenous groups. The sources of this
conflict date back decades, but the conflict escalated and became violent in late 2009,
after affiliates of former peasant cooperatives initiated a series of large-scale occupations
of oil palm plantations operated by the IFC client.5

The land legacy issues highlighted by the Dinant case are not atypical in CAO’s
experience. In a CAO case in the Philippines regarding the Ambuklao-Binga
hydroelectric project (Case Study 1), unresolved land claims related to Indigenous
communities had been the source of tension in the region for over 60 years following
expropriation of land by the government. These issues reemerged after IFC partnered
with a local developer to privatize and rehabilitate the hydroelectric facility. These
issues were raised by communities in a complaint filed with CAO in 2008.

These cases show how a history of land conflict can be reignited or intensified by the new
pressure that private sector development brings. A failure to recognize how community
livelihoods are impacted in the context of long-standing land disputes may result in any
positive impacts generated by the project being dwarfed by the conflict it sparks.


Challenge 3. Information imbalances and competing development perspectives
between the private sector and community

Close to 50 percent of CAO land cases cite lack of adequate information disclosure,6
and over 60 percent raise issues around consultation with affected communities.7 IFC’s
Sustainability Framework underscores the importance not only of disclosing information
to communities but also of carrying out the appropriate consultation and risk
assessments (IFC 2012b, 16, 18, 22). The Framework states that effective consultation
“helps Affected Communities and other stakeholders understand the risks, impacts and
opportunities of the project” (IFC 2012b, 18). While complaints to CAO often do not
distinguish between the roles and responsibilities of IFC/MIGA and its clients, CAO’s
experience suggests that, at best, communities may feel these processes are lacking due
to poor communication on the part of the project operator, or IFC/MIGA, or both. At
worst, lack of readily accessible project information and partial or limited company
disclosure and consultation create distrust among affected communities about the
company’s credibility and commitment to identify, mitigate, and manage impacts.

5	
     CAO Audit of IFC Investment in Corporacion Dinant, December 20, 2013. <http://www.cao-ombudsman.org/cases/
     document-links/links-188.aspx>
6	
     These figures are based on CAO’s caseload for FY 2014. Requirements for information disclosure are outlined in IFC’s
     Access to Information Policy (IFC 2012c). These figures are based on CAO’s caseload for FY 2014.
7	
     These figures are based on CAO’s caseload for FY 2014. Requirements for due diligence are outlined in IFC’s Policy and
     Performance Standards on Environmental and Social Sustainability (IFC 2012a, 2012b).
12                                                     Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land




During the development of the Chad-Cameroon oil pipeline, for example,
complainants pointed to imbalances in information and differing understanding of
project impacts between the Cameroonian project sponsor and affected communities.
Despite the establishment of a local mechanism designed to address community
concerns, communities noted that they were unclear about company measures to
mitigate and address project impacts. From the complainants’ viewpoint, there was
also a lack of clarity by the company about the extent of environmental and social
impacts on local communities.

Such information imbalances and consultation shortcomings generate tensions between
private sector operators and communities. Particularly with regard to risk management
and environmental and social impact assessments, community perspectives about
project impacts may not always be adequately reflected, which may lead to unresolved
concerns and unmet expectations. These sorts of concerns may be more pronounced
with Indigenous communities, where impact assessments are “generally undertaken
by proponents or their consultants and fail to focus on Indigenous peoples and issues
of importance to them; adopt methodologies that are inappropriate and ineffective
in the Indigenous context; and are embedded in value systems and world views that
devalue Indigenous knowledge and understandings of project effects” (O’Faircheallaigh
2013, 3). As a result, communities and companies may speak at cross purposes, with
companies believing they have adequately captured the scope of project impacts on
land, and communities feeling that their issues have not been adequately addressed—
which further contributes to a cycle of conflict and distrust.

These differing perspectives on project impacts, migitation measures, and development
outcomes are exacerbated by information and power imbalances between the company
and community. Largely left out of a project’s technical evaluations, communities are
often poorly informed about the operational impacts of a project on their land, or how
the company plans to mitigate any negative outcomes. Given the fact that information
sharing, consultation, and impact assessment are often the first experiences that a
company and community have with each other during the project’s development,
failure to handle these interactions well can create significant barriers to developing
the trust that is required for companies and communities to address other challenges
associated with complex land issues arising from private sector investment.
Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land                                              13




Challenge 4. Competing community perspectives about private sector projects

In CAO’s experience, communities are not always homogeneous, and neither are their
views about private sector investment and local development. Differences may stem
from uncertainties about whether projects will have a positive or negative impact
overall; whether the expected project benefits will be shared equitably throughout
the communities; and whether certain community members will benefit more, or
be impacted more, than others. In relation to land, divergent views may arise with
regard to the allocation and use of land for these projects, or around perceived project
impacts to land, natural resources, or ecosystems at large. For example, land pollution,
biodiversity, and land access or productivity have been raised frequently as issues in
land-related complaints. Differences may also stem from divergences between legal
and customary land rights. If community representatives are required to engage with
government and private sector agents regarding the project, some community members
may question the legitimacy of these representatives to act in the best interests of the
whole community.

Such competing perspectives are illustrated in another case from the Philippines, where
CAO received a complaint in 2011 from two Indigenous communities belonging to the
ethno-linguistic group of Mamanwas in northern Mindanao. The complaint related to
the social and environmental impacts of mining exploration on communities living in
the vicinity of the project, and the impacts on an ancestral domain. Some community
members who were not part of the complainant group did not share concerns about
negative impacts to land and the environment, and were focused on the anticipated
economic and social benefits of the project. The company, meanwhile, believed that
the majority of people in both communities supported their presence and viewed the
complainant group as the minority voice.

As this example illustrates, it is important to recognize that community perspectives
on land and development are not always cohesive, and to understand how differing
understandings of impacts and benefits, and differences in representation and voice, can
influence the way that communities respond to land-related investments. Depending on
a company’s capacity to manage these cleavages, the outcomes can vary greatly. In some
instances, the company or community may be unwilling to engage at all, while in other
instances, the company might work with those factions in the community that favor
the proposed investment. Companies that engage with communities in spite of such
divisions, however, may not be able to gain support and consensus in the long term,
as conflict builds between factions that see the benefit and rewards of investment, and
others that remain wary of the negative impacts. These scenarios may deepen rifts that
exist in communities and exacerbate challenging land dynamics.
14                                                                           Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land




Tools
Faced with a variety of challenges, communities often have
few tools at their disposal to help them engage with the
company in a constructive and meaningful way. This is the
arena in which CAO does its work—when many of the
other channels for remedy and redress have not met with
success, or are not sufficiently developed and trusted. In the
space CAO occupies, conflict is often already entrenched
before communities seek intervention.
Through its work, CAO has developed and employed a number of tools to engage
with communities and companies about land complaints. These tools have the
potential to help put these parties on a more level footing in order to address issues
related to project impacts and benefits, and thereby transform difficult relationships
on the ground.



CAO team assessing complaint related to an oil pipeline in Cameroon (CAO).
Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land                                             15




Not all dispute resolution tools can be used in all circumstances. Deciding which tools
might be effective depends on the context of the case and the willingness of the parties
to engage with one another in good faith.

As the accountability mechanism for IFC and MIGA, CAO has the ability to engage
with communities and companies from a third-party perspective. This creates a unique
space where challenges can be addressed. The importance of neutral third parties in the
community-company relationship is discussed below.

If voluntarily requested to do so by the parties, CAO engages with the issues raised
by communities in an effort to offer remedy and redress. The focus is primarily on
creating a space for dialogue in order to develop creative tools and strategies with local
communities and private sector clients to address these challenges, even amidst difficult
local, national, and international landscapes. These tools are discussed below. The tools
and approaches that CAO has found helpful in addressing land disputes are grounded
in practical solutions developed at the grassroots level. They are flexible, and should
be adapted to the context and capacity of different parties, including communities, the
company/companies, government, and other relevant stakeholders (see Box 1). Together,
these tools offer insight into success factors that can help address challenging and often
deeply entrenched issues related to land.


Building capacity for effective engagement

Capacity building has been employed, in some form, in all of CAO’s land-related
dispute resolution processes. Capacity building is a broad term, but from CAO’s
perspective, it involves providing training in practical skills aimed at ensuring that key
parties—both communities and companies—understand the dispute resolution process
and are able to participate effectively and confidently in it.

Both the community and the company should benefit from capacity building. The
assumption is often made that only communities lack the capacity to engage around
and address challenging issues associated with land. While it is true that communities
can benefit from specific skills training to articulate and represent their interests
confidently in relation to project impacts and benefits, in CAO’s experience, company
staff can also benefit from capacity building to improve their understanding of how to
engage in a mediated process.
16                                                        Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land




CAO has engaged in many different forms of capacity building with parties to a
conflict. Specific capacity building needs are very much a function of the relative
strengths of each party and the context in which they are operating. The discussion
that follows highlights different examples of capacity building that can be conducted
in the case of land disputes. It is important to understand that capacity building is a
necessary component for each of the tools that will be discussed. Without capacity
building at multiple levels, it is unlikely that parties will be able to overcome the
significant hurdles to the resolution of disputed issues in the context of a land dispute.


Tool 1. Conflict assessment
Assessing, understanding, and mapping conflict is an important tool in dispute
resolution and a fundamental part of CAO processes. Conflict assessments help
facilitate a deeper understanding of the issues and dynamics that lie at the heart
of a dispute, and allow for insights into the opportunities for resolution. Though
there are many different approaches to conflict assessments, CAO follows a specific
methodology in its assessment process with the goal of clarifying the issues and
concerns raised by the individuals and/or communities that filed a complaint; gathering
information about how different stakeholders see these issues; and helping the parties
understand the different options available to them through CAO’s Dispute Resolution
and Compliance functions (see Box 2). This process is carried out in all CAO cases,
not just those that involve land, and is a critical step in the process that forms the
foundation of CAO’s work.

An initial information-gathering stage allows CAO to map the main stakeholders,
issues, and interests related to the complaint and to review any relevant documentation
related to the project, including IFC/MIGA documentation and information submitted
by the parties. Information gathered by CAO during the course of an assessment is in
no way used to make judgments about the merits of the case or the issues that it raises,
but helps to ensure that CAO is well informed about the issues, the project, and the
context in which the dispute is taking place.

Preliminary interviews and discussions with IFC/MIGA project staff, the company,
and the individuals and/or communities that filed a complaint provide CAO with a
further opportunity to understand major issues from the viewpoint of the primary
parties involved. These interviews also allow CAO to identify other relevant parties or
stakeholders that may need to be considered during the assessment process. These may
include, for example, government representatives, civil society actors, NGOs, private
sector partners, or other affected communities.
Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land                                                   17




           Box 1. The Role of Government in
           CAO Land Cases
           Although CAO’s primary interaction is with communities and IFC clients,
           government is often an important stakeholder, directly or indirectly, as well.
           This is particularly true in cases related to land, where there may be a conflict
           between different land rights frameworks and approaches to land ownership
           and management.

           The extent to which government entities—whether at the local, subnational,
           or national levels—are involved in CAO dispute resolution processes varies
           greatly, and may include their role as participants, observers, or endorsers of
           agreements. In some instances, government has played an active role as a
           direct stakeholder in a dispute resolution process. In Indonesia, for example,
           affected communities and the company­    —a subsidiary of Wilmar Group, an IFC
           client—agreed at the outset that CAO would work closely with government
           toward a mediated solution to concerns over the destruction and clearance
           of community lands. The dispute resolution process was guided by a Joint
           Mediation Team composed of CAO mediators and local government officials,
           and was supported by an Official Decree of the Governor of Jambi Province in
           Sumatra (see Case Study 2).

           In Uganda, CAO has facilitated two dispute resolution processes related to
           land evictions around timber plantations managed by New Forests Company,
           the investee of an IFC-supported private equity fund. The issues in the dispute
           highlight some of the challenges resulting from allocation of land by government
           to private sector investors. The government has shown support for the CAO
           mediation at different points throughout the process. For example, district-
           level government officials observed and endorsed the first Annual General
           Meetings of community cooperatives, which were established to help affected
           communities manage financial and other development support they received as
           a result of agreements with the company (see Case Study 3).

           In other instances, government has been involved in supporting the
           implementation of agreements and monitoring of outcomes from CAO
           dispute resolution processes. In the Philippines, as part of a dispute resolution
           process to address land legacy issues in the hydropower sector, the
           provincial government worked with the company and Indigenous Peoples’
           organizations in the joint planning and participatory monitoring of corporate
           social responsibility and livelihood programs resulting from agreements reached
           through the CAO (see Case Study 1).
18                                                           Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land




In most cases, CAO will travel to the field to conduct interviews and meetings with
the parties, affected communities, and the company, as well as other key stakeholders
identified during earlier stages of the assessment process. The form that these meetings
take depends on the circumstances, but may include private meetings, small group
discussions, and/or public consultations. In order to ensure that affected parties are
offered the chance to speak openly and freely about their concerns, CAO engages
translators or local facilitators to help facilitate meetings in the local language and in a
manner that is sensitive to, and respectful of, local customs.

Discussions held with stakeholders during the assessment not only help CAO understand
the basis for issues raised in the complaint, but also help parties identify acceptable options
for addressing their concerns—whether CAO Dispute Resoultion or CAO Compliance.
Importantly, the assessment provides parties with an opportunity to reflect on what they
really want to get out of the CAO process, as well as consider issues from the perspective
of other stakeholders—often for the first time. In cases that do proceed on to CAO dispute
resolution, the assessment will inform the scope and design of a mediation process. Issues
documented during assessment will also inform CAO’s compliance work.


Tool 2. Third-party neutrals
Through dispute resolution, CAO helps provide a neutral space for companies and
communities to engage where grievances have escalated to the point of conflict. The
process is often able to take parties from adversarial positions focused on blame and
liability to one where the parties are able to address the difficult realities that have led
them to conflict. Particularly when tensions have caused relationships to break down,
a neutral facilitator can engage the estranged parties and encourage dialogue. For
example, in instances where disputes are a result of differing community perspectives, a
neutral space gives the opportunity for all voices to be heard. This is not only important
for the community but may also help the company and other influential parties better
understand the nature of community concerns and how they might be addressed. In
instances where communities and companies are constrained by inconsistencies in land
tenure systems, a third-party neutral may be able to help the parties look for other
avenues of managing these inconsistencies and thus mitigate conflict.

Constraints exist, however, since communities do not often have the means, capacity,
or leverage to access third-party neutrals, and third parties employed by the company
might not be perceived as neutral or independent. By explaining and exploring the
potential benefits of working with a third-party neutral, and by providing a safe space
for parties to engage with one another when they are ready to do so, CAO can help
build trust, transform relationships, and create a more level field for engagement—
ultimately to the benefit of all parties (see Case Studies 1–4 for examples).
Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land                                                                       19




           Box 2. What Does a Typical CAO
           Assessment Look Like?
           Once a complaint has been determined eligible,a CAO conducts a desk review
           of project documentation from IFC/MIGA and the project sponsor, and meets
           with IFC/MIGA’s project team to understand the financial structure of the
           project, as well as the environmental and social due diligence undertaken by
           IFC/MIGA. Based on preliminary discussion with project staff, the private sector
           sponsor, and the complainant, the CAO team identifies key stakeholders to
           meet during its assessment trip. During this trip, CAO typically visits the project
           site and meets with local and national stakeholders in different locales. CAO
           also informs stakeholders about the options available to them to address their
           concerns through CAO processes. Examples of meetings are summarized in
           table B2.1.

           Table B2.1. Examples of Meetings with Stakeholders
             Stakeholder                 Assessment process
             Complainants                A town hall meeting with the affected communities and the
                                         head of the village, to facilitate open participation and allow
                                         community members to speak freely about their concerns
             NGO representatives         A small-group discussion with the representatives who
                                         supported filing of the complaint
             Company                     Small-group meetings with senior management of the
                                         company
             Provincial government       Meetings with the governor, deputy governor, and chairman
             representatives             for the Committee on Land Acquisition, who have a key role
                                         in the land acquisition process.

           a. CAO has three criteria for determining whether a complaint is eligible: (1) The complaint pertains
           to a project that IFC/MIGA is participating in, or is actively considering; (2) The issues raised in
           the complaint pertain to CAO’s mandate to address environmental and social impacts of IFC/
           MIGA projects; and (3) The complainant is, or may be, affected by the environmental and/or social
           impacts raised in the complaint.
20                                                             Advisory Series Lessons From CAO Cases: Land




     Case Study 1.
     Transforming Relationships between
     Communities and Companies in the Philippines
     Ambuklao-Binga Hydroelectric Power
     In 2008, CAO received a complaint from the members of the Bokod, Ibaloi,
     Iowak, and Tinongdan Indigenous communities living near the Ambukloa-
     Binga Hydroelectric Power Plant in the Philippines. These communities were
     displaced from their land during the initial development of the project site in
     the late 1950s, and had been in difficult negotiations with the National Power
     Corporation (NPC) and provincial and national government over land claims for
     nearly 60 years when the plants were privatized with IFC’s support in 2008.


          Contextual challenges
     Competing land tenure systems. The Ibaloi and Iowak Indigenous groups were
     displaced from the original project site of the Ambuklao and Binga hydropower
     facilities in the 1950s. Despite their claims to land in the Ambuklao-Binga watershed,
     the national courts ruled in favor of expropriation of land in the 1970s. The process
     resulted in partial payments and resettlement of some of the displaced communities,
     but a large majority of Indigenous claims remained unaddressed at the time the plant
     was privatized.

     A legacy of land-related issues. For many years, affected communities saw
     their only option as reclaiming land ownership through legal means. Not only
     was this process difficult to navigate for local communities, but it was also largely
     unsuccessful. Sustained debates about land ownership between communities
     and the NPC inevitably resulted in challenging relationships, which constrained
     discussions about land-related issues as well as the exploration of nonadversarial
     solutions. The private sector operator (SN Aboitiz Power Benguet) then inherited
     these problems when it purchased the assets from the government with support
     from IFC.



           Tools
     Capacity building. CAO helped strengthen community institutions by helping
     the community decide how to create effective representation. This was critical to
     ensuring that communities were able to enter into discussions concerning individual
     and historical land claims, as well as broader community interests in relation to the
     privatized project. CAO also facilitated joint training for representatives nominated by
     each principal stakeholder (community members, company management, elected
Advisory Series Lessons From CAO Cases: Land                                                                                       21




  local officials, NPC, SN Aboitz, and PSALM, the government entity in charge of asset
  privatization) to increase skills and capacity for multiparty dialogue. The joint training was
  critical in breaking down barriers and misconceptions between the parties, and was the
  beginning of a process of building trust.

  Land management. One of the most significant achievements of the dialogue process
  was the creation of an Indigenous Peoples Cultural Heritage site, which granted
  Indigenous communities the right to use and manage “residual areas” of NPC land (areas
  not included in privatization of the power plants). This allowed communities not only to
  determine the use of the land, but also to ensure its maintenance for future generations.

  Joint planning/Participatory monitoring of corporate social responsibility
  and livelihood programs. In addition to the use and management of residual land,
  Indigenous People’s Organizations were tasked with providing technical assistance
  to the company and provincial government for the development and monitoring of
  Indigenous Peoples programs.

  The Ministry of Energy recognized the solutions identified in the dialogue process as
  “a new model in development” for promoting the resolution of complex project-related
  issues. The process created a forum in which communities could talk directly to key
  stakeholders, as well as a sustainable structure for future engagement around community
  needs. Most significantly, the dialogue process resulted in a shift away from an emphasis
  on land tenure and land ownership to a greater focus on the use and meaning of land as
  it related to the cultural and economic needs of Indigenous Peoples.




   Stakeholders sign agreement following resolution of historic issues related to a hydropower project in the Philippines (CAO).
22                                                                                Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land




Tool 3. Participatory impact assessments and monitoring

One of the critical issues facing communities is that they typically do not have input
into the development and subsequent monitoring of project environmental and
social impact assessments (ESIA). The absence of an inclusive process may lead to
misunderstanding on both sides: the company may be unaware of what impacts
the community sees as most pertinent, while the community may not have a full
understanding of the company’s perspective on expected project outcomes and
measures to mitigate adverse impacts. This may lead to an environment of mistrust,
particularly when managing contentious land issues.

Participatory approaches that involve both the company and community, and
encourage them to work together to identify joint solutions and outcomes, can help
alleviate some of the challenges associated with ESIAs. Participatory approaches
have been used in CAO cases with some success. CAO has addressed a number
of small land claim cases related to the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) oil pipeline,
which traverses Georgia, Turkey, and Azerbaijan. In one case, community members
cited concerns that the company’s ESIA had not assessed the effects of the pipeline
construction in the area, a severe landslide zone, and maintained that the company
was therefore unable to determine adequate mitigation measures.8 Through the
CAO process, the company made its studies available publicly and CAO suggested
that farmers participate in the monitoring strategy to assess the risk of landslides. In
another BTC case, where farmers raised concerns that the company had not fulfilled
previously agreed commitments to restore land, the company and farmers agreed
that assessments of crop yields would be carried out jointly to determine whether
or not the company should compensate farmers for crop losses. In cases where land
rights have been in contention, CAO has helped facilitate participatory processes
such as “walking the land,” where companies and communities walk the boundaries
of the contested areas to gain a better understanding of the other’s perspective and
concept of territory. This technique was used in the Wilmar case in Indonesia, where
company and community representatives jointly identified disputed land around oil
palm plantations (see Case Study 2). This type of participatory approach generated
data that were considered credible by both parties, created consensus, and reduced
contention in a way that allowed them to move forward in the dispute resolution
process with a higher level of trust.




 8	
      Since 2004, CAO has dealt with 33 cases related to the BTC pipleline in Georgia. The full details of each of these cases
      can be found on CAO’s website: http://www.cao-ombudsman.org/.
Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land                                                         23




In conjunction with capacity building, participatory processes can also help
communities use local knowledge and translate it into the terms and metrics that
companies need to demonstrate their compliance with standards and requirements.
By the same token, companies can gain local knowledge that will improve their
understanding of impacts and how the community perceives those impacts. When
effective, participatory assessment and monitoring ultimately contribute to better
engagement between the community and the company. Moreover, having the necessary
skills to monitor impacts such as land degradation and pollution enhances community
members’ capacity to engage with the company on issues that have the potential to
negatively impact their livelihoods before those issues become egregious. Participatory
processes have the added benefit of helping the company and community establish
regular lines of communication, which further helps build trust.




  Young girls from the Ibaloi community impacted by a hydropower project in the Philippines (CAO).
24                                                          Advisory Series Lessons From CAO Cases: Land




     Case Study 2.
     Addressing Land Disputes
     in the Indonesian Oil Palm Sector
     Wilmar Group
     Between 2007 and 2011, CAO received three complaints related to IFC’s
     investment with supply chain links to the oil palm sector in Indonesia. The
     complaints were filed by communities in Jambi, Kalimantan, and Sumatra,
     and covered a range of issues from the clearance of customary lands without
     community support or permission to the destruction of forests and natural
     resources of high value to local communities.


          Contextual challenges
     Competing land tenure systems. Development concessions granted to Wilmar
     Group (the company) and its subsidiaries by the government failed to fully consider
     complex communal land rights. As a result, local communities believed that the oil
     palm plantations were encroaching on their land without their approval.

     Information imbalances and competing development perspectives. CAO’s
     assessment of the complaint documented a lack of community support for the
     project, and questions about the legality of the company’s actions. Communities
     involved in submitting the complaint believed that Wilmar had not carried out
     adequate environmental and social impact assessments (ESIAs) and was clearing
     land without the required permitting.

     A history of land conflict. When CAO began working on the case, there was very
     little trust between the communities and the company. Communities held that oil
     palm development was threatening their livelihoods by encroaching on their land
     and valuable natural resources, while the company held that it had all necessary
     approvals from government to do business in the area.

     Power imbalances and questions of representation. The community and
     the company were wary of engaging with one another. The community sought
     reassurances that the company would enter the dialogue in good faith, while the
     company requested that community representatives have the power to make
     decisions on behalf of their groups, or provide assurances that agreements would
     have the backing of wider community groups.
Advisory Series Lessons From CAO Cases: Land                                                           25




  Walking the land on a CAO assessment of issues related to palm oil plantations in Indonesia (CAO).




            Tools
  Capacity building. To help communities and the company engage comfortably in
  dialogue, CAO worked with both parties before mediations began. Capacity building
  sessions took the form of more formalized training, as well as regular meetings ahead
  of mediation sessions to help the parties explore their interests and address questions
  of representation, while encouraging participants to share information more effectively
  within the wider community groups. This process also helped build consensus around
  important decisions during the negotiations.

  Participatory mapping. One of the ways that CAO encouraged the parties to come
  together to overcome a history of mistrust was through a participatory mapping exercise
  in which parties traveled to the field to jointly identify areas of land that were in dispute.
  The exercise demonstrated that collaboration between the communities and company
  could lead to tangible results, and opened up space for the parties to engage more
  productively around disputed land claims.

  Joint monitoring. Dispute resolution led to a number of land agreements. With
  consensus from the parties, a Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Team was established to
  monitor the implementation of agreed actions. This helped improve the flow of information
  between the community and company and build trust, as both the community and
  company were involved in confirming data and ensuring the accuracy of results.

  While this case was not without challenges, it is an example of how relationships can
  be transformed from conflict to collaboration in a way that enables communities to have
  a voice in the development and management of land on which they depend, and the
  company to develop more trust in its relationship with the host/neighboring communities.
26                                                       Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land




Tool 4. Company/community collaboration and land management

In the face of complicated systems and regulations around land, which are often
coupled with historical disputes and conflicting narratives about land rights and
uses, communities and companies must be willing to come up with creative solutions
to address these challenges together. Often these solutions require unique land
management strategies (see the case in the Philippines, featured in Case Study 1).

In Uganda, changes in land use associated with growth in investment in the forestry
sector have in some instances caused frictions to flare between stakeholders. In 2011, the
government of Uganda claimed responsibility for the eviction of community members
from forest reserves, stating that the land had been demarcated for commercial forestry
plantations and had been illegally occupied. Two affected communities submitted
complaints to CAO, as the company operating the plantations is an investee of private
equity fund supported by IFC. Through a CAO dialogue process that involved a great deal
of critical and innovative thinking on the part of both the communities and the company,
agreements were reached through which the company is extending development assistance
through two community cooperatives that were constituted and registered under Ugandan
law. Forming the cooperatives was a critical step in ensuring a rational and comprehensive
approach for developing the communities’ capacity to benefit collectively from the CAO
process and, in turn, for them to manage financial and other development support for
collective projects. Community members have purchased land for resettlement and
agriculture, and the process of restoring and enhancing livelihoods has commenced.

The cases in Uganda and the Philippines highlight positive outcomes from company
and community collaboration over land management, but arriving at these outcomes
did not come without challenges. It is important that in company and community
collaboration, both sides are willing to engage in dialogue in an open and transparent
way. It also requires both parties to find unique solutions within what may often be
prescriptive legal and regulatory contexts. Both these cases required intense trust
building, capacity building, and engagement by a neutral third party or convener to
allow the parties to arrive at a point where they were able to define solutions to fit
their context. They also required the participation of government through different
national entities, which is often a necessary component in the search for solutions
for successful outcomes. Most importantly, in spite of the substantial obstacles to
success, these cases highlight the opportunities available to overcome entrenched and
contentious land rights issues if companies and communities are able and willing to
collaborate in good faith.
Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land                                              27




Tool 5. Strengthening grievance mechanisms and redress systems

CAO views project-level grievance mechanisms as a critical tool in managing the
challenges associated with land and private sector investment. Sometimes CAO conducts
its work in contexts where companies or national grievance mechanisms are either not
present or are ineffective. Whether they failed to gain the trust of the people they serve,
or whether companies do not have the capacity to handle the complaints they receive,
the lack of adequate grievance mechanisms is often an issue raised in complaints to CAO.
CAO’s dispute resolution work seeks out opportunities to strengthen existing grievance
mechanisms, where possible, rather than attempting to create parallel systems. For
example, a CAO dispute resolution process in Cameroon addressing issues regarding the
Chad-Cameroon oil pipeline has worked to strengthen an existing local mechanism jointly
managed by civil society, government, and the private sector for addressing community
concerns (Case Study 4). In cases where this is not possible, helping companies and
communities create mechanisms that work within their context is imperative.

Guidance on designing and implementing project-level grievance mechanisms to mitigate
negative project impacts for communities and enhance positive development outcomes can
be found in another CAO Advisory Note (CAO 2008). As with many of the tools already
outlined, project-level grievance mechanisms help improve the lines of communication
between companies and communities. Creating a predictable and responsive mechanism
reassures communities that their concerns will not only be heard but that they will also be
addressed. It also allows communities to hold the company to a measure of accountability
that is based on local issues and concerns. For companies, grievance mechanisms can serve
as an early warning system that identifies problems and enables them to manage challenges
proactively, rather than reacting to a crisis. Grievance mechanisms also help companies
clarify internal roles and responsibilities for responding to community concerns, integrate
those responses with the company’s existing systems and protocols, and track responses to
make sure that issues are resolved in a timely manner.

When addressing land issues, a functioning grievance mechanism is integral to
minimizing local impacts, ensuring that local benefits from projects are delivered as
promised, and clearing up miscommunications and misperceptions between companies
and communities. A key component to promoting the lasting success of agreements
is to ensure that grievance mechanisms are used to address issues that arise during
implementation of company-community agreements, before they become entrenched.

This section began with remarks on the importance of neutral third parties, and the role
they can play. It also acknowledged the reality that this is not always a resource that
companies or communities are able to employ. In the absence of a neutral third party,
grievance mechanisms, when implemented effectively, can help offer a safe space for
companies, communities, and even government to engage with one another and address
challenges related to land investment.
28                                                                                   Advisory Series Lessons From CAO Cases: Land




     Case Study 3.
     Working with Communities and Companies
     around Timber Plantations, Uganda
     Agri-Vie Fund
     In 2011, CAO received two complaints from communities living around
     timber plantations in central Uganda. Representatives of communities in the
     Kiboga and Mubende districts claimed that communities had been evicted
     from land that was licensed for commercial forestry plantations by the
     Ugandan government.


             Contextual challenges
     Competing land tenure systems. The New Forests Company (NFC) began
     operating in Uganda in 2005 and has more than 20,000 hectares of forestry land in
     the country. By 2011, about half (10,400 hectares) of this land had been developed
     for pine and eucalyptus plantations. According to NFC, its operations are being
     carried out in accordance with licenses granted to them by the National Forestry
     Authority (NFA). Communities living around some of NFC’s plantations believe
     they were involuntarily evicted from land to which they had a legitimate claim. The
     Ugandan government claimed responsibility for the evictions, stating that the land
     had been illegally occupied.

     Community members walking newly acquired land as a result of a CAO mediation process in Uganda (CAO).
Advisory Series Lessons From CAO Cases: Land                                                        29




  Asymmetries of power and information. Representatives of affected communities
  had concerns about the adequacy of due diligence and consultation carried out on the
  part of IFC and the company. They also raised concerns about the process through
  which evictions were carried out.



           Tools
  Capacity building. In order to help communities overcome some of these fears and
  uncertainties, and to allow parties to participate in dialogue on a more equal footing,
  CAO conducted extensive capacity building sessions with community representatives
  over a number of months prior to the commencement of dialogue. Capacity building
  was also an ongoing process throughout the course of the dispute resolution process.
  CAO designed a capacity building program so that community representatives
  could be directly trained in mediation and dispute resolution skills. The community
  representatives also designed different feedback loops to ensure information sharing
  between representatives and the wider community, in order to keep the broader
  community informed of the process. In addition, the communities took part in
  cooperative management training with the Uganda Cooperative Alliance as coops were
  being constituted and registered. At the request of community representatives, local
  and international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) played an advisory role to
  communities in the dialogue process.

  Community-company partnerships. The dialogue process ultimately led to
  agreements between the parties about the need to strengthen relationships and to build
  stronger and more mutually beneficial ties between the company and communities.
  Through an expansion of its social responsibility investment program, NFC committed
  support to two cooperative societies, which were established to address major
  community needs. Through the cooperatives, parties have worked together on a range
  of sustainable community development projects. Both community cooperatives have
  acquired land for resettlement, ultimately resulting in land tenure security, which is critical
  for restoring and building livelihoods.

  Land management. Joint planning and development of community projects has
  also encouraged the company and community to explore more effective and mutually
  beneficial ways to manage land and local resources.

  This example shows how the allocation of land for private sector investment can create
  complex challenges for both communities and companies. However, transforming the
  nature of community-company relationships away from conflict and toward productive
  partnerships can create avenues for exploring new opportunities that create mutual
  project benefits.
30                                                            Advisory Series Lessons From CAO Cases: Land




     Case Study 4.
     Addressing Multiple Land Claims alongside a
     Major Oil Pipeline in Cameroon
     The Chad-Cameroon Oil Pipeline
     The Chad-Cameroon oil pipeline is a major development project undertaken by the
     governments of Chad and Cameroon, a consortium of oil companies, and the World
     Bank Group to develop the capacity of oil fields in southwestern Chad and to deliver
     oil via pipeline to floating facilities off the Cameroonian coast. In 2011, CAO received
     complaints from communities in both countries related to impacts experienced
     during and after construction of the pipeline.
          In Cameroon, where the pipeline traverses some 240 villages on its way from the
     Chadian border to the coast, local communities raised a number of concerns related
     to impacts on land and livelihoods. Among the major concerns raised were that the
     laying of the oil pipeline led to the displacement of the Bagyéli communities living in
     the area, as well as those living in an area designated as a national park, and thus to
     the loss of their user rights in areas.


          Contextual challenges
     Competing land tenure systems and history of land issues. Seeking resolution
     for unresolved grievances after the pipeline was built, project-affected communities and
     several individuals requested assistance from CAO in addressing a number of social
     and environmental concerns, including those related to the displacement of Indigenous
     communities. After construction of the pipeline was complete, the Cameroonian project
     sponsor, the Cameroon Oil Transportation Company (COTCO), established a tripartite
     platform for addressing and managing community concerns related to the pipeline’s
     development and management. However, according to those submitting the complaint,
     the process did not generate settlements for a number of cases brought before the
     platform, nor did it result in a better understanding of additional cases documented by
     NGOs, leading project-affected people to seek alternative avenues for the resolution of
     open claims.

     Lack of or asymmetrical information between the company and communities.
     Based on discussions with local communities and NGOs during its assessment of the
     complaint, CAO came to understand that the communities lacked clarity about how
     the project was meeting national and international standards, and that there was a
     need for improved awareness about the company, COTCO’s compensation plan, and
     the response to pipeline-related accidents. Similarly, in relation to grievances pertaining
     to project impacts, signatories to the complaint claimed that many additional cases
     documented by NGOs were inadequately understood or addressed by COTCO and the
     tripartite platform.
Advisory Series Lessons From CAO Cases: Land                                                       31




  CAO team listens to a community member’s concerns while assessing a complaint, Cameroon (CAO).




           Tools
  Resolving specific cases through mediated dialogue. CAO convened a mediated
  dialogue around a number of disputes raised by the complainants. These dialogue
  processes are in different phases, ranging from active dialogue in the early stages to
  advanced mediations that are resulting in full implementation of agreements.

  Strengthening grievance and redress systems. CAO has worked with stakeholders
  to enhance collective processes for addressing community interests. Given that the
  tripartite platform represented an existing local mechanism for addressing community
  concerns, CAO’s process has focused on working with members of the tripartite
  platform to sustain and strengthen the mechanism.

  Capacity building. Capacity building has helped the complainants on a number of
  fronts. It has been used to assist a fishermen group to fully engage with the company
  in the CAO dialogue process, and ensure that wider community inputs are sought and
  incorporated into the process. Additional goals are to strengthen the communities’
  organization and ultimately the sustainability of mediated outcomes. Capacity building
  activities to date have included workshops with fishermen representatives alone as well
  as with the various villages, during which participants evaluated the structure, roles, and
  responsibilities of the fishermen’s existing organizations, as well as their engagement
  and communication with their respective villages. In the course of 2015, more capacity
  building workshops are planned.
32                                                        Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land




Conclusion
CAO’s casework has highlighted a number of challenges
that communities face regarding private sector development
related to land. Communities are often outsiders to a
process that is driven predominately by companies and
governments. This leaves them managing challenging
company and government relationships with minimal
leverage or capacity. In addition, as more land and
resources are required to sustain growing infrastructure
and agribusiness sectors, local communities are often
the ones left bearing the burden of growth without fully
reaping the benefits. Development can exacerbate already
fractious relationships and further isolate vulnerable
populations. Livelihoods of rural farmers may be destroyed
as traditional land rights systems conflict with national
government land acquisition policies to encourage private
sector development. Information and power imbalances
between communities and companies may mean that those
affected by projects are ill-equipped to understand and
monitor how their resources are being managed.

As the World Bank Group focuses on catalyzing private sector investment in fragile
and emerging markets, engagement is needed with all actors to avoid or mitigate land-
related conflict, especially in localities with a history of unrest (IFC 2013). The private
sector’s involvement in development has great potential to generate substantial benefits
at the macro and micro level, but the potential also exists for negative impacts to be
experienced by communities that host these projects. Collaborative approaches, such as
those outlined in this paper, are needed to help communities and companies engage in
a way that maximizes the community voice and opportunities for shared value, while
minimizing negative impacts arising from land-intensive investments.
Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land                                            33




Given this challenging context, CAO has worked with communities and companies
to develop strategies and tools to help manage conflicts associated with land. These
approaches have not always resulted in success. In cases where companies and
communities are unwilling to engage in dialogue, or where government policies
present structural barriers to the search for solutions, or where the gap between
community and company expectations is so great, these strategies can fail. However,
this Advisory Paper has illustrated cases where CAO has applied tools successfully
in some of the most difficult of contexts and demonstrated that even the most
protracted company-community conflict can be transformed into something positive.
It is imperative that as the World Bank Group looks to encourage private sector
investment that directly benefits the poor, it does so with a mind to developing robust
tools to help its private sector clients achieve these outcomes. In a sector prone to
conflict and already under pressure, land investment on the part of development
institutions requires a concerted effort to ensure that projects positively transform the
lives of the people who depend upon it.




CAO team meet with community members in Chad (CAO).
34                                                           Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land




References and Resources
Banerjee, Abhijt V., and Lakshmi Iyer. 2002. “History, Institutions and Economic
Performance: The Legacy of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India.” The
American Economic Review 95 (4): 1190–1213.


CAO (Office of the Compliance Ombudsman Advisor). 2008. A Guide to
Designing and Implementing Grievance Mechanisms for Development Projects.
Washington, DC: CAO.


FAO (Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations ). 2012.
Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land,
Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security. Rome: FAO.


Feder, Gerhson, and David Feeny. 1991. “Land Tenure and Property Rights:
Theory and Implications for Development Policy.” The World Bank Economic
Review 5 (1): 135–53.


IFC (International Finance Corporation). 2012a. International Finance
Corporation’s Policy on Environmental and Social Sustainability. Washington,
DC: IFC.


---------. 2012b.International Finance Corporation’s Performance Standards on
Environmental and Social Sustainability. Washington, DC: IFC.


---------. 2012c. Access to Information Policy. Washington, DC: IFC.


---------. 2013. IFC Road Map FY13–15: Creating Innovative Solutions in
Challenging Times. Washington, DC: IFC.


O’Faircheallaigh, Ciaran. 2013. “Controlled Impact Assessment, Impact and
Benefit Agreements and World Bank Policies on Indigenous Peoples.” Briefing
Paper for the Bank Information Centre Community. http://www.bicusa.org/
wp-content/uploads/2013/11/BIC-CommunityCIA-IBAs-WorldBankSafeguards-
Brief-11-12-13.pdf.
Advisory Series Lessons from CAO Cases: Land                                        35




 OXFAM. 2011. “Land and Power: The Growing Scandal Surrounding the New
 Wave of Investments in Land.” Briefing Paper 151. http://www.oxfam.org/sites/
 www.oxfam.org/files/bp151-land-power-rights-acquisitions-220911-summ-en.pdf.


 Ward, Bernie, and John Strongman. 2011. Gender-Sensitive Approaches for the
 Extractive Industry in Peru. Washington, DC: Energy and Mining Department,
 World Bank Group.


 Wily, Alden L. 2012. Rights to Resources in Crisis: Reviewing the Fate of
 Customary Tenure in Africa. Rights and Resources Initiative.


 World Bank. 2011. World Bank Group Report: Rising Global Interest in
 Farmland. Washington, DC: World Bank.


 ---------. 2013a. “President Kim Responds to Civil Society’s Concerns on Private
 Sector Investments.” Press Release, Dec. 9, World Bank, Washington, DC.


 ---------. 2013b. The World Bank Group Goals: End Extreme Poverty and Promote
 Shared Prosperity. World Bank, Washington, DC.
36   Advisory Series Lessons From CAO Cases: Land
Authors: Elizabeth Mensah and Carissa Western (CAO)

Contributors: CAO staff

Peer Reviewers: David Fairman (Managing Director, Consensus Building Institute) and
Dennis Sandole (Professor of Conflict Resolution and International Relations, George Mason University)

Copy editor: Nancy Morrison

Design: Studio Grafik
  Independent Accountability Mechanism for the International Finance Corporation (IFC)
and Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), Members of the World Bank Group

                           2121 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
                             Washington, DC 20433 USA
                            Telephone: +1 (202) 458-1973
                               Fax: +1 (202) 522-7400
                          e-mail: cao@worldbankgroup.org
                         Website: www.cao-ombudsman.org




                                     JUNE 2015
