Electronics in South Asia


Extended Version of the Industry Case Study Done for:

South Asia’s Turn
Policies to Boost Competitiveness and Create the Next Export Powerhouse




Ashish Narain


DRAFT

October 2016




World Bank Group Standard Disclaimer:

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work
do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement
or acceptance of such boundaries.




                                                                                                                           1
                                                              Table of Contents1


Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................................... 3
1.     Motivation and Approach ..................................................................................................................... 4
2.     Performance Analysis ........................................................................................................................... 6
3.     Drivers of Competitiveness ................................................................................................................. 14
4.     Constraints to Competitiveness ........................................................................................................... 17
5.     Policy Recommendations.................................................................................................................... 23


List of Figures

Figure 1: Low Competitiveness of Electronics in South Asia despite productive labor ................ 6
Figure 2: Higher value added and wages in electronics than the industrial average in India ......... 7
Figure 3: Electronics Exports from South Asian Countries is Low and Stagnating ....................... 9
Figure 4: Labor Productivity in India’s Electronics relative to comparators................................ 12
Figure 5: India has a cost advantage in labor intensive processes ................................................ 13
Figure 6: Process times for IT Hardware and Electronics ............................................................ 14
Figure 7: High cost of importing in South Asia vs. Comparators ................................................ 19
Figure 8: Customs Clearance in India ........................................................................................... 21
Figure 9: Weak Worker Skilling Systems in India ....................................................................... 22

List of Boxes

Box 1: Foxconn enters India ......................................................................................................... 10
Box 2: Tos Lanka Company (Pvt. Ltd.) ........................................................................................ 15
Box 3: Dixon Technologies (India) .............................................................................................. 17
Box 4: EMS Management explains their decision making process .............................................. 17
Box 5: The Medical Devices Sector in India ................................................................................ 23
Box 6: The Benefits of Clustering for Firms ................................................................................ 24
Box 7: Options for streamlining the implementation of Notification 25/99 ................................. 25
Box 8: China's approach to providing skills to its workforce ....................................................... 27
Box 9: Leveraging the Diaspora to build bridges ......................................................................... 28


1
  We are grateful to Dr. Timothy J. Sturgeon, MIT Industrial Performance Sector, Mr. Deepak Bharadwaj (Samsung),
Drs. Anwarul Hoda, Dr. Durgesh Rai (ICRIER), Manab Majumdar and Chetan Bijesure (FICCI), Mr. Rajoo Goel
(ELCINA) and Ms. Ratika Jain and Dr. R. C. Chopra (CII) for their valuable industry inputs. We also thank all
companies in India and Sri Lanka that met with us and provide information that went into the report, but chose not
to be named. Finally we are grateful to Vincent Palmade (WBG), Denis Medvedev (WBG), and Esperanza
Lasagabaster (WBG) for their leadership at each stage of the report; and Sebastian Saez (WBG), Mike Ferrantino
(WBG), Daria Taglioni (WBG),Guillermo Arenas and Gonzalo Varela who provided comments and inputs into the
study.

                                                                                                                                                        2
Executive Summary

The electronics sector has played an important role in the development trajectories of several
newly industrialized economies. Surprisingly, South Asia is not currently a significant player in
the sector, though electronics presents a substantial opportunity for the region. Addressing the
constraints that have prevented the growth of this sector could help South Asia raise growth and
create good manufacturing jobs.

South Asia’s lack of competitiveness reflects inadequate provision of public goods rather than
high labor costs. In fact, low labor costs remain the region’s primary source of competitiveness,
as the best firms combine lower wages than in East Asia with comparable labor productivity
performance due to investments in good management systems and worker skills. Instead, many
of the problems relate to policy, regulatory and infrastructural weaknesses that raise trading costs
and increase lead times. Such constraints are extremely serious in an industry that is based on
global networks. A particular issue in India concerns lower tariffs on finished goods than on
necessary inputs, which discourages local production in selected products. In Bangladesh, a key
constraint is the limited supply of large tracts of well-located and readily-available industrial
land for large investors. In general, greater investment in R&D and in training workers could
significantly increase productivity and returns in the South Asian electronics sector. The renewed
interest of global electronics investors in the region – in India and Bangladesh in particular –
shows that a few critical measures to address these constraints could help put the region on the
global electronics map.

The analysis focuses primarily on India and Sri Lanka – the two countries which already have
a critical mass of companies in the electronics sector – and touches on Bangladesh and
Pakistan. In an effort to keep the analysis focused, the study looks only at two of the largest
sub-sectors: telecommunications and consumer electronics. The study combines data from
secondary sources on the drivers of competitiveness with in-depth stakeholder interviews. It has
been suggested by some experts that while the “high-volume, low-cost” manufacturing that
characterizes these sub-sectors remains important, for South Asia as a latecomer, new
opportunities may be opening up for “low volume, high value strategies.” 2


This case study identifies both reasons for success and limits on the growth of electronics in
South Asia, and recommends policies to enhance its growth. The next section discusses
potential benefits of the electronics sector in South Asia, followed by an analysis of sector
performance. We then turn to a discussion of the drivers of competitiveness in the electronic
sector and the major constraints on performance. The concluding section summarizes policy
recommendations to unblock the barriers to investment in this industry and fast-track its growth.




2
    Ernst (2014)

                                                                                                  3
    1. Motivation

The electronics sector is one of the world’s largest industrial sectors and has made a
substantial contribution to global growth. Global trade in electronic products, including
communications and information communication technology (ICT) equipment and electronics-
based consumer products, was estimated at $1.4 trillion in 2012, having grown 5.9 percent a year
between 2008 and 2012.3 From 1980 to 2000, the sector contributed from 0.2 to 0.5 percentage
points to annual economic growth in nine OECD countries (between 0.3 to 0.9 percentage points
if one considers just the 90s).4 The sector’s contribution to economic growth might have been
even higher in developing countries, which benefited from access to more advanced technology
in the developed world. The sector is an important driver of innovation and productivity, a
source for the accumulation of technological capabilities and a catalyst for trade and investment.
For example, the electronics industry – as the biggest sector in terms of output and exports –
drove rapid industrialization in Singapore and Taiwan from the mid-1970s to 1990s.5 Electronics
are a major driver of innovation: 29% of all R&D investments in one thousand firms surveyed
by Bozz & Company were devoted to electronics.6 The share of electronics in R&D investment
is even higher in some specific sectors, especially automotive (see the separate case study).7
Moreover, electronics production is an important source of employment. The ILO estimates that
the sector employed 18 million people worldwide in 2010.8

The sector presents growth opportunities for developing countries. An important feature of the
sector is that production is highly fragmented, with value often added in a variety of countries
before goods and services make their way to end consumers.9 The ability to shift parts of the
value chains to low-cost locations has created opportunities for developing countries to
participate. Electronics companies from the developed world first started relocating to Malaysia,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand during the 1970s and early 1980s, followed by China, Indonesia
and the Philippines, primarily to take advantage of lower labor costs. In recent years, Vietnam
has become an important producer for similar reasons. In 2013, information technology and
electronics accounted for 7% of Vietnam’s exports. This shift has allowed developing countries
to increase their contribution to global value added in the electronics sector from 11% in 2000 to
30% in 2010.10 Asia has been a major beneficiary and has become an important manufacturing
hub, mainly due to its low labor costs, established supply base and proximity to key final
markets.11

Networks of international electronics firms are already in place in South Asia . Several
multinational electronics firms (Samsung, HP, IBM, Motorola, Lenovo, Flextronics and
Foxconn) are present, or have announced plans to invest in the region, and many large firms have

3
  Staff calculations based on UN COMTRADE data. The classification of electronic products is from Sturgeon and
Memedovic ([not in references]).
4
  Collechia and Schreyer (2001).
5
  Poh-Kam (1995).
6
  Bozz & Company (2008) apud Bampi (2009)
7
  Oliver Wyman (2007) apud Lima (2012)
8
  ILO, 2014 (A)
9
  See for example Fernandez-Stark et al, 2011;Sturgeon and Kawakami et al, 2011
10
   J Manyika et al, 2012.
11
   ILO, 2014 (B).

                                                                                                             4
set up R&D centers with world class capabilities in South Asian countries to support global
operations. This activity has been encouraged by South Asia’s large, fast-growing markets (for
example, the electronics market in India is expected to grow at 24% p.a. to reach a market size of
$400 billion by 2020)2 and the potential of the South Asian diaspora with deep knowledge and
extensive networks in the global electronics industry.

However, South Asia could have benefited more from the global shift of electronics
manufacturing. Other countries that started from a much weaker position have forged ahead and
established themselves as new global players in electronics manufacturing exports. For example,
electronics exports in South Asia are small compared to that in East Asian countries (figure 1).
India is only the 14th largest electronics producer globally, behind countries such as Mexico (8th),
Brazil (10th) and Thailand (12th).


    Figure 1: Electronics production is low in South Asia
                                                          300
                                                                                      252.6
                              Per capita exports to the




                                                          250
                                                          200
                                    world (USD)




                                                                                              147.1
                                                          150
                                                          100
                                                           50
                                                                0   3.3   0.3   0.2
                                                            0




    Source: UN COMTRADE; Staff estimates based on WBG Enterprise Surveys

Electronic manufacturing could help South Asia create more and higher value added
manufacturing jobs. The sector is included in the list of Governments’ priority manufacturing
sectors in virtually all countries of South Asia, for its potential to generate growth, exports and
good jobs for workers (especially women) with basic academic and technical knowledge. In
India, productivity and wages in the electronics industry are higher than the average for all
industry (see Figure 2 below). Not surprisingly, electronics are an important part of the
Government’s “Make in India” and “Digital India” campaigns. In Sri Lanka and Pakistan too, the
sector is being promoted on a priority basis.




                                                                                                      5
                                    Figure 2: Higher value added and wages in electronics in India
                                   800,000

                                   700,000                                                    26 Computer,
                                                                                              Electronic and Optical
                                   600,000                                                    Products
                                                                 All Industries               27 Electrical
                   Indian Rupees

                                   500,000                         Average                    Equipment
                                   400,000
                                                                                              28 Machinery and
                                   300,000                                                    Equipment N.E.C.

                                   200,000

                                   100,000                                               All Industries
                                                                                           Average
                                        0
                                                   AddedAdded
                                               Net Value
                                             Value       per per      Wages per worker
                                               Employee
                                             employee    (Rupees)
                                                      (Rupees)           (Rupees)
                                                Source: Annual Survey of Industries, 2009-10, India




     2. Performance Analysis

This section considers South Asia’s performance in terms of output and trade, productivity and
cost, as well as other key dimensions of competitiveness in this industry such as processing times
and innovation.

Output and trade

South Asia has achieved only limited progress in increasing exports of electronics products.
The region’s share of global exports of electronics products remains very low (table []). And the
share of electronics in South Asia’s exports has increased little since the start of the new
millennium (figure 3). The limited performance of South Asia’s electronics sector is best viewed
by an analysis of the experience in India and Sri Lanka.

Table 1: South Asia’s share of global electronics markets is low

 World Market
                                                          2004            2014
 Share (%)
 Bangladesh                           Electronics        0.002           0.003*
 India                                Electronics        0.153           0.347
 Sri Lanka                            Electronics        0.011           0.009
 Pakistan                             Electronics        0.012           0.012
*2011, last year for which the data is available




                                                                                                                       6
        Figure 3: Electronics Exports from South Asian Countries is Low and Stagnating
                 Final Electronics Exports              Intermediate Electronics Exports
                 (Percent of total exports)                 (Percent of total exports)
                                      35                                                               35

                                      30                                                               30
           Percent of total exports




                                                                            Percent of total exports
                                      25                                                               25

                                      20                                                               20

                                      15                                                               15

                                      10                                                               10

                                      5                                                                5

                                      0                                                                0
                                             2001
                                             2000

                                             2002
                                             2003
                                             2004
                                             2005
                                             2006
                                             2007
                                             2008
                                             2009
                                             2010
                                             2011
                                             2012
                                             2013




                                                                                                             2000




                                                                                                             2013
                                                                                                             2001
                                                                                                             2002
                                                                                                             2003
                                                                                                             2004
                                                                                                             2005
                                                                                                             2006
                                                                                                             2007
                                                                                                             2008
                                                                                                             2009
                                                                                                             2010
                                                                                                             2011
                                                                                                             2012
                                           Bangladesh   India   Sri Lanka                                   Bangladesh   India   Sri Lanka
        Source: Staff calculations based on UN COMTRADE statistics

Electronics manufacturing in India was initially controlled by Government. The Indian
electronics industry dates back to the 1960s. While the focus initially was on space and defense
technologies, over time this gradually shifted towards consumer electronics – radios, black and
white TVs, and other audio products. Color TVs started being produced in the 1980s. Till the
1980s, state-owned enterprises like Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) and the Electronic
Corporation of India Ltd (ECIL) dominated the sector, while the entry and operations of private
players in the sector was controlled by the Department of Electronics.12 The mid 1980s and early
1990s saw sustained and rapid growth in the sector. Many large international brands began
partnering with Indian firms to enter the market.

Barriers to private sector electronics production were lowered as part of India’s market
liberalization program. Licensing requirements for consumer electronics were abolished in
1996. In addition, tariff and non-tariff barriers were slashed as India opened its economy to the
outside world. India signed the Information Technology Agreement (ITA), in which participating
countries agreed to bind and then eliminate all customs and other duties and charges on
identified information technology products by the year 2000. India eliminated tariffs on 38 per
cent of the ITA products by 2000 and the rest by 2005. Trade agreements with Singapore,
Thailand, Malaysia, the ASEAN, Korea and Japan also reduced import tariffs. 13 Imports of
electronics increased rapidly, and the number of domestic firms in the sector fell (Annex 1).

Indian electronics manufacturing has been struggling in the domestic market. In 2011,
domestic production met only 36% of India’s consumption of electronics products, and 49% for

12
     Any changes in product line or increased output for a product already approved required permission from DOE
13
     Hoda and Rai (2014)

                                                                                                                                             7
electronic components, with the rest being met through imports. If present trends continue, this
share is likely to come down further.14 Indian manufacturers are losing ground even in areas
where they were historically important. For example, according to the Indian Printed Circuit
Board Association, currently roughly two thirds of the domestic market is being served through
imports, while India’s share of global printed circuit board (PCB) output is only 0.7 percent.15
International firms such as Panasonic, Sony, LG, Samsung have taken a substantial share of
consumer electronics, the largest segment of India’s electronics market, which is now dominated
by imports from China. Even bulky items like air conditioners ($1.6 billion market), refrigerators
($400 million) and washing machines ($158 million) are imported fully assembled into India, not
to mention smaller goods like mobile phones ($1.9 billion)16.


However, Indian manufacturing is showing signs of increasing market share in some areas.
Indian exports of components and products have grown rapidly in areas such as mobile
telephones, audio players and sound equipment, and display technologies. In consumer
electronics and mobile telephony, international brands like LG and Samsung have established
significant manufacturing facilities, and Indian companies like Micromaxx are increasing their
presence. There is also a developing eco-system to support faster growth. More than 50
electronic manufacturing services/original design manufacturers operate in India, including
global players like Flextronics and Solectron, as well as Indian firms such as Deltron, TVS
Electronics and Sahasra. Some international players, notably Foxconn, have recently announced
their decision to enter India (Error! Reference source not found.).

             Box 1: Foxconn enters India

             Foxconn, the world’s largest contract electronics manufacturer, has signed a $5
             billion deal to set up R&D and hi-tech manufacturing facilities in western India
             within the next five years. The $5 billion pledge is the largest foreign investment into
             India’s tech manufacturing sector and a boost for the government’s “Make in India”
             program designed to spur domestic manufacturing. The Taiwan-based firm, which
             manufactures for a host of global device brands like Apple, BlackBerry, Amazon,
             Motorola, Xiaomi and Sony, has the bulk of its factories in China.

             Separately, leading Chinese smartphone maker Xiaomi announced that it will now
             manufacture its devices in India in partnership with Foxconn. The factory will be
             based in the southern state of Andhra Pradesh.

             Going by the recent spate of announcements, Foxconn is becoming one of the most
             aggressive foreign investors in India. Last month, the company announced that it
             would inject $20 billion into India’s solar sector along with Japan’s SoftBank and
             India’s own telecom firm, Bharti. Reports suggested that another Foxconn joint
             venture with billionaire Gautam Adani’s Adani Group could focus on making
             iPhones and iPads.

14
   Ernst (2014)
15
   Indian PCB association (2008)
16
   Figures in brackets are imports in 2012/13

                                                                                                   8
                Also, Foxconn is rumored to have allocated billions of dollars for India’s e-commerce
                and technology startups, and is said to be close to finalizing a $500 million
                investment into online retailer, Snapdeal.

                Setting up manufacturing centers in India could be Foxconn’s attempt to build an
                alternative to its manufacturing base in China, where market growth is slowing and
                wages are rising. Foxconn said it intends to set up 10-12 plants and employ a million
                workers in India by 2020.

                Source: Forbes Asia (http://www.forbes.com/sites/saritharai/2015/08/10/foxconn-
                could-make-india-its-next-manufacturing-base-after-china-investments-suggest/)

Manufacturing is clustering around a few locations. The electronics industry in India initially
grew around three major centers, Bangalore, Mumbai/Pune and Delhi/National Capital Region
(NCR). Bangalore emerged as a hub early on, with major public sector plants in defense and
telecommunication being located there. In recent times, Bangalore also has attracted private
sector firms in computer and industrial products. Bombay/Pune and the NCR have become major
manufacturing centers, and have emerged as favored destinations for MNCs. The NCR region, in
particular, has a large concentration of small scale factories making consumer electronic
products and computers. More recently, Hyderabad and Chennai have become important
manufacturing locations.

Electronics manufacturing in India is largely small scale and oriented to serving the domestic
market. A field survey of the manufacturing units and industry associations at different regions
of the country in 2008 showed that 84% of firms were in the small scale sector. While the
electronics component sector was largely in the formal sector, communication equipment and
computer peripherals were largely in the informal sector. Fully 95% of local manufacturers did
not have any foreign direct investment. The involvement of these firms in international trade was
also moderate - 41% are engaged in exports.17 It is unlikely that this picture has changed
significantly since the survey was taken.

Sri Lanka’s electronics industry is small. The electronics industry in the country started with
manufacturing vacuum tubes and radios. Manufacturing now is concentrated around electronic
components, which includes printed circuits, electronic circuits, transistors, valves, cathode
tubes, refrigerators and freezers, lamp holders, telephone sets, and audi/video equipment and
parts. The industry currently contributes about 2% of the country’s export revenues and absorbs
over 15,750 workers.18 The apparel industry, in comparison, employs more than 8 times that
number. The workforce is drawn from a pool of skilled young men and women with basic
academic and technical knowledge.

Sri Lanka’s electronics industry is also stagnating (Figure 2). The major decline has taken
place in the telephone equipment segment, where exports fell by more than 80% between 2008
and 2013. India remains a major destination for electronic exports from Sri Lanka, particularly

17
     National Productivity Council
18
     Presentation on electrical and electronics sector, export services division, Sri Lanka (2015)

                                                                                                     9
for primary goods (insulated wire). The EU, the United States and Japan are also important
export destinations. However, Sri Lanka’s preferential access to Indian markets under the Indo -
Sri Lanka Free Trade Agreement has eroded, as MFN tariffs in India have fallen and India has
entered into trade agreements with other countries (see Box 2).

           Box 2: Preference Erosion in the India Sri Lanka Free Trade Agreement

           The India – Sri Lanka Free Trade Agreement (ISFTA) was signed in December 1998
           and became operational in March 2000. The agreement covered all items except those
           deemed sensitive by each country. India committed to an immediate elimination of
           1,351 tariff lines, and a gradual phase out for a further 2,797 items. The duty
           concessions under the ISFTA conferred considerable benefits to Sri Lanka compared
           to MFN tariffs.

           The immediate effects of the FTA were very positive for Sri Lanka. Its exports to
           India surged from US$58 million in 2000 to US$566 million by 2005. The
           composition of exports also shifted from primary products towards processed goods
           such as copper products, vegetable oils, pharmaceuticals, and white goods such as air
           conditioners and refrigerators. However, particularly in the case of copper products
           and vegetable oils that witnessed the largest increase, exports appeared to be driven
           by tariff arbitrage by Indian investors seeking to get around the India’s high MFN
           tariff rates.

           The benefits of tariff arbitrage began to decline after 2006, as trade liberalization in
           India led to a gradual erosion of the preference conferred on Sri Lankan exporters. In
           the electronics sector, the gradual implementation of the ITA-1 completed in 2005
           saw tariffs coming down for identified information technology products to zero. India
           also entered into trade agreements with a number of ASEAN countries, most
           importantly with Thailand. Under the “early harvest” provision of this FTA, duties on
           a range of electronic goods were eliminated in September 2006. Electronics had not
           been a traditional export item from Sri Lanka to India. Thus, even while electronic
           exports to India saw a small increase in the early years of the ISFTA, the quick
           erosion of preferences relative to a very competitive Thailand - before buyer
           relationships, markets and supply chains could be fully developed - meant that the
           increase could not be sustained.

Both Sri Lankan and foreign firms are active in the sector. An estimated 70 electric and
electronic component manufacturing factories are operating across Sri Lanka. Nearly a quarter of
these employ less than 20 workers, but an equal number employ 300 workers or more. Some are
Sri Lankan owned companies, such as IE Electronics which manufactures electricity meters and
transmission equipment. Others, like Tos Lanka and Nippon Marudhi Lanka, are foreign-owned.
The most recent entry to the Sri Lankan market is Okaya Denk a major global player in
electronics that specializes in manufacturing of noise suppressors. Lanka Harness manufactures a
range of automotive harnessing and electronics for Toyota in Japan. The sector is moving
towards the higher quality end of the spectrum. The industry is attracting sophisticated buyers



                                                                                                10
from electronics manufacturing services partners operating in Japan, Europe, North America and
India.

Figure 2: Electronics exports from Sri Lanka have fallen since 1999

                        Exports from Sri Lanka ('000 USD)
 140,000

 120,000

 100,000

     80,000

     60,000

     40,000

     20,000

         0
              1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

                             Final electronics          Intermediate electronics

Source: WITS, Staff Estimates


The quality of Indian and Sri Lankan exports remains unchanged. A measure of sophistication
(PRODY)19 indicates that the quality of Indian and Sri Lankan exports has remained practically
constant over time (figure 4). The failure to improve quality may be an important explanation for
the stagnation in electronics exports.


       Figure 4: Sophistication of Electronics Exports from India and Sri Lanka (PRODY)
                    30,000

                    25,000

                    20,000

                    15,000

                    10,000

                     5,000

                         0
                                2004    2005     2006   2007   2008    2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014

                                                                 IND          LKA




19
  PRODY is a weighted average of the per capita GDP of countries producing electronics goods, with weights
derived from Revealed Comparative Advantage.

                                                                                                                  11
        Source: Staff calculations based on UN COMTRADE statistics

Productivity and cost

The lack of competitiveness of South Asian electronics manufacturing after the early 2000s
was apparently not due to low labor productivity or high costs. Labor productivity and total
factor productivity (TFP) growth in information and communication equipment was higher in
India than in China through the 1990s (Wu et al. 2007). However, growth came down steadily,
and by the mid-2000s, India had lost much of its initial advantage (Error! Reference source not
found.4, left panel).20 Similar evidence comes from Ark et al (2008), who find that India had
higher labor productivity and lower labor costs than China through much of the 1990s. China
however saw rapid increases in labor productivity that took it to a level above that of India by the
mid-2000s. Nevertheless, higher compensation levels meant that unit labor costs Chinese
manufacturing were slightly higher than in India (Error! Reference source not found.4, right
panel). Leading firms in India estimate that productivity at their plants is comparable to Chinese
levels. Samsung, in fact, mentioned that their Noida plant is among their three most productive
units worldwide. Similarly, enterprise surveys show that productivity in Sri Lanka is high. Sri
Lanka has a higher value added per worker in the electronics sector than China (USD 24,701 vs.
USD 22, 382—figure 4, left panel).

                Figure 4: Labor Productivity in India’s Electronics relative to comparators
                India/China Comparative (China=100)      Unit labor Costs




                Source: Wu et al (2007)                                       Source: Ark et al (2008)
GVA/L = Gross Value added per worker, K/L= Capital to Labor ratio, TFP=Total Factor Productivity


The main cost disadvantages derive from factors outside the factory. Cost comparisons,
obtained from a global manufacturer with facilities around the world, shows that manufacturing
costs in India are 80% of those in the United States, and importantly, slightly lower than in China
and Vietnam (Figure 5). In large part India’s cost advantage derives from its low labor costs.
However, “Selling, General and Administration (SGA)” costs, which reflect costs outside the

20
     Xu et al. (2008)`

                                                                                                         12
factory, are relatively high.21 The largest driver of costs is the cost of purchased parts. Any tax,
policy, regulation or inefficiency that raises the cost of purchased inputs (including trade
logistics and trade policy as discussed later) could have a large impact on the sector’s
competitiveness.

             Figure 5: India has a cost advantage in labor intensive processes
                        Manufacturing costs relative to the US for labor intensive
                150%          process (simple wire harness assembly), 2012

                 100%

                   50%

                    0%
                              United States             India                Vietnam          China - Shanghai


                         Raw Material                                   Purchased Parts
                         Unskilled Labor                                Semi-skilled Labor
                         Machinery, Equipment, & Tooling                Utilities & Floor-space

             NB: Data is from auto parts manufacturer but is representative of costs in electronics sector

Processing times put South Asia at a disadvantage. The ability to rapidly start and scale up
production of new products and deliver these to the market can sometimes be a more important
consideration for firms than the cost of production. Countries that are able to achieve faster
turnaround time gain significant competitive advantage, especially in the more innovative,
cutting edge products. This is where South Asia may be at a disadvantage. Processing time is
higher in India than in other big electronic manufacturers like China, Singapore & Taiwan
(figure 6).

As will be developed later, one reason for this are delays in procuring imported raw materials
and components that lead to delays in production. Further, delivery time from ports to factories,
and then from factories to final destinations, adds to the overall time required to bring products
to market.




21
  SGA is the sum of all direct and indirect selling expenses, which includes salaries (excluding those related to the
production itself), advertising expenses, rent, and all expenses and taxes related to selling the product.

                                                                                                                    13
             Figure 6: Process times for IT Hardware and Electronics




             Source: D&B Analysis

South Asia also lags in innovation, which is another key success factor in this sector. Most
electronic firms in South Asia report some spending on innovation: of 301 electronic firms
included in the World Bank Enterprise Survey, 69% reported spending on innovation. However,
innovation expenditures were low in a global context: only 1.1% of sales in large firms
employing more than 100 workers, and 4.7% in small firms. The low level of expenditures on
innovation is disappointing, given that the impact of innovation on productivity is large. An
increase in the share of new products in firm’s sales by 1% is associated with a productivity
increase of 2.6%, which is extremely high (on average in other countries this elasticity is one
tenth of this level).22 The percentage of new products in firm’s sales was 7.5% on average.



     3. Drivers of Competitiveness

The global electronics industry is highly competitive, innovative and fast moving. Between
2004 and 2009 global GDP rose by 2.2% annually, but electronics production rose 4.9% per
year.23 Rapid growth was accompanied by rapid change in the main market players. For instance,
IBM was the largest firm in this industry in 2005, but dropped to 5th in 2015. During the same
period, Samsung Electronics started as the 5th largest but ended as the first. Apple was not
ranked in the top ten in 2005 but is currently the second largest.24
Rapid growth presents a number of challenges for all stakeholders, who face constant pressure to
keep up with new developments. Companies need to be innovative and flexible, and government
policies need to support this. In the absence of success in innovation, companies, regions, and
countries can find themselves confined to low value added activities within the highly
fragmented global value chains (GVCs) that dominate the sector. Policy should support
movement towards higher value added niches within GVCs, rather than simply encouraging

22
   Hall and Mohnen, 2013 estimate this elasticity at around 0.25 based on a survey of literature. However, most of
the outcomes in this survey are based on papers from developed countries. Investigating it for developing
countries, Crespi and Zuniga (2012) results suggest an elasticity ranging from 0.24 to 1.92.
23
   World economic growth is from WBDI and electronics production growth is from Lima (2012).
24
   Ranking Global 500 – Fortune CNN.

                                                                                                                14
participation in the sector.25 Finally, globally, the industry is very lean. Excess inventory or
transit time anywhere in the value chain can result in value loss, which can be a severe
disadvantage in such a fiercely competitive industry. Thus, cost and speed - in production and
logistics- are both important determinants of competitiveness. The following discussion of the
strategies of successful South Asian firms in the electronics sector is based on detailed interviews
conducted with large lead and contract manufacturing firms.

Figure xx: Electronics Value Chain




Source: Korea Associates Business Consultancy Ltd (2012)


FDI has played an important role in firms’ success. Some of the most successful firms in India
and Sri Lanka are foreign, with investors bringing in technology, capital and foreign market
linkages. For example, Samsung entered India in the early 1990s when the sector was just
opening up, through a joint venture with Videocon (an Indian white goods manufacturer).
Initially the company produced TVs and computer monitors. This approach helped it overcome
many uncertainties associated with entering a new market, and allowed it to benefit from
Videocon’s market presence. At the same time, Videocon benefited from Samsung’s technology
and capital. Similarly Tos Lanka (see box 2), one of the largest electronic assembly firms in Sri
Lanka, is a wholly owned subsidiary of Toslec Co., based in Kyoto, Japan. Toslec Co. is one of
the leading manufacturers and suppliers of electronic components to Matsushita Electronics,
Hitachi Media, Richo Elemex, Nihon Densan, Japanese Storage Battery Co. Ltd., and Rohm
Company, and brings with it these market connections. These examples highlight the important
role of FDI in international production networks.26

Linking to large markets is important for growing the sector. The bulk of electronics
manufacturing in India is sold domestically, and manufacturers point to growing domestic
consumption as the main reason for investing in electronics manufacturing. International
markets, however, are important in some segments. For example, a domestic producer of medical
equipment emphasized the importance of global partnerships and international markets- “For us
the major reason for expanding manufacturing is to develop partnerships with global industry


25
     Sturgeon (2015)
26
     See for e.g., World Bank 2005, UNCTAD 2013, Hoda and Rai (2014)

                                                                                                 15
leaders.”27 In Sri Lanka, the domestic market is smaller and most successful firms have an
export focus. While exports to India are not growing, the industry is focusing on attracting
sophisticated buyers from Japan, Europe and North America.

                Box 2: Tos Lanka Company (Pvt. Ltd.)

                Tos Lanka is Sri Lanka’s largest electronic assembling solution company. It
                commenced operations at the Biyagama EPZ in 1998, with an initial investment of
                Rs 220 million. Tos specializes in the Surface Mounted Technology (SMT) assembly
                of printed circuit boards, electronic guitar tuners and effectors, coils and electronic
                components for the automotive industry. The products are exported to Japan, the
                United States and the EU.

                The factory has manual and automated electronic assembly lines, supported by chip
                mounting and wave soldering plants, together with extensive testing facilities.
                Female workers dominate the 240-strong workforce . The company has invested in
                training and development of staff to manufacture electronic products and components
                to international standards. Workers at Tos Lanka undergo training in Japan for a
                period between three months to a year. The majority of the work force has been
                trained in Japan under AOTS/JASTECA scholarships in quality-oriented
                manufacturing processes.

                The company has also established its own Research and Development section, and
                looks forward to accessing the huge Indian market through the Comprehensive
                Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA).

Appropriate choice of products, aligned with market conditions and sources of
competitiveness, is critical. Most successful companies in India seek to compete as low-cost
producers, predominantly for lower-end, more mature market segments. Some see potential in
producing in segments that are declining globally, but where the large domestic market provides
opportunities to concentrate global production (examples include CFL bulbs and feature phones).
Presumably for these segments production costs, rather than speed, are the main driver of
competitiveness, and Indian companies feel their productivity and costs compare well with
China. Sri Lankan firms, on the other hand, are moving towards producing more sophisticated
electronic manufacturing products and services that can be exported to the large, lucrative
Western markets. The adoption of ISO certification, Restrictions of Hazardous Substances and
Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment regulations, and decent labor standards in conformity
with ILO requirements have helped it compete in these markets.
In-house R&D capability is a driver of competitiveness. Successful firms report that
investments in developing R&D capacity have enabled them to compete on quality as well as
cost. This is consistent with the empirical finding that returns to innovation are high in South
Asia. In particular, firms identified their ability to innovate and customize products to South
Asian conditions (for example, unreliable power and water supply) as a big advantage vis-à-vis
Vietnam. It is likely that the advantage conferred is more important for consumer white goods,
27
     Ernst (2014)

                                                                                                    16
than for products which are bulk manufactured and require less customization, for example,
mobile phones.
Clustering has helped get around infrastructural weaknesses. Firms in South Asia prefer their
suppliers to locate in close proximity to their plant to facilitate quality control and reduce
transport-related uncertainties in the supply chain. As a result, clusters of firms have emerged
around plants, which is an important part of overall efficiency. In turn, companies support
vendors through vendor development programs aimed at upgrading quality; and through
providing product designs. For example, clusters of suppliers are emerging around Samsung’s
main plants in Noida and Chennai.

Private investments in labor skilling are necessary. Most firms in both countries feel that skill
levels of workers need to be improved, and invest significantly in doing so. For example,
Samsung runs an apprentice program, and up to a year may be required to bring workers up to
speed. This is among the longest training times for their plants around the world. Similarly,
workers at Tos Lanka undergo training in Japan for a period ranging from three months to one
year (Box 2).
Successful firm may benefit from Government subsidies, but do not report them as critical. For
example, Samsung benefited from tax breaks under Uttar Pradesh’s “large plant” policy scheme,
and both the Noida and Chennai plants originally received customs and excise tax benefits by
being designated as Special Export Zones (SEZs). However, Samsung had its land re-designated
as a Domestic Tariff Areas (DTA), at the cost of losing these benefits, as it was not ready to
comply with performance standards set on SEZs. A majority of firms interviewed in Sri Lanka
reported receiving no benefits or incentives from Government. It appears that investment
decisions are based on fundamentals, and incentives are important only at the margin.


   4. Constraints on Competitiveness


This section discusses the main constraints to improved productivity/export performance in
South Asia. The previous section identified non-labor costs, processing time and low innovation
as constraints that have prevented South Asia from integrating more into global electronic
chains. This section examines some of the factors behind this.

Cross-cutting investment climate constraints do not show up as significant in enterprise
surveys in the electronics sector. A regression analysis based on a survey of enterprises across
Bangladesh, India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka (see Annex 6, table 3) reveals little correlation
between cross- cutting investment climate issues (for example, corruption, political instability,
tax rates) and productivity in the electronics sector. This accords well with the observation that
the sector has done well even in countries where the overall environment may not have been as
conducive as others (for example, Vietnam), so long as certain basic pre-requisites for the sector
–ease of trading, logistics and flexibility- are taken care of.

Lengthy and unpredictable import clearance reduces the competitiveness of South Asian
electronics production. South Asian firms are highly dependent on imports, and report that
customs clearance can take considerable time and is unpredictable. Firms compensate by holding

                                                                                               17
higher inventories, which undermines cost competitiveness in this very lean industry. Inadequate
customs services also delay production and increase turn-around times that, as noted earlier, can
severely erode competitiveness. In India, the average time reported to clear customs varied from
2-10 days for large firms, and 14-21 days for SMEs. Lengthy clearance times in part reflect
cumbersome and time-consuming procedures (e.g. due to conflicting interpretations and
ambiguities in product classification) involved in obtaining exemptions to import tariffs on raw
materials and parts & components by IT product manufacturers (exemption notification 25/99).
Mechanisms to address grievances also can take considerable time, and companies fear reprisal,
for example through losing their trusted trader credentials. One firm stated that “The customs
bureaucracy is very difficult to handle when we import various equipment and that creates a big
disincentive for anyone venturing into this market.” Another interviewee said that: “To gain one
rupee in customs duties the country is losing thousands.” Sri Lanka performs better than other
countries in South Asia on trade facilitation, but compares slightly unfavorably with its East
Asian competitors. According to the Doing Business study 2016, it took 72 hours and cost $300
to import into Sri Lanka, compared to 64 hours and $268 in Vietnam, and 50 hours and $233 in
Thailand.

           Figure 7: High cost of importing in South Asia vs. Comparators
                  Documents to import (number)              Cost to import (USD per container)

             Vietnam                                     Vietnam

            Sri Lanka                                   Sri Lanka

            Indonesia                                   Indonesia
                India                                       India
                China                                      China
                        0       5         10     15                 0   500   1000   1500   2000
           Source: Doing Business, 2015

Internal logistics are long and unpredictable, raising inventory costs. Fast and reliable logistics
are extremely important for a lean industry like electronics. However, even after goods exit the
port, poor internal logistics are affecting competitiveness. Indian firms reported that while it
takes 11 days for a container to travel from Shanghai to Mumbai, it takes 20 days to travel from
Mumbai to Delhi. Poor infrastructure is one reason, but a careful survey shows that a quarter of
the journey time is spent at check posts, state borders, city entrances, and other regulatory
stoppages (Figure 8, left panel). The existence of two state borders between origin and
destination can add as much as a week to delivery schedules. Average distances covered are low,
in part because documentation requirements for internal transit are burdensome, and barriers at
the borders create opportunities for delay and rent-seeking (Figure 8, right panel). In order to
deal with the resulting uncertainty, firms in four industries (auto components, textiles,
electronics, and heavy engineering) report maintaining 27 percent higher inventories on average.
Total logistics costs- including inventory costs and lost sales- account for 14 percent of total


                                                                                                   18
costs for electronics firms, high by international standards.28 Foxconn CEO Terry Gou
commented on TV that “Your (Indian) infrastructure will be a big limitation. Today I was told it
will take 20 minutes to reach you, but it took 1 hour 20 minutes because it rained."29 Similarly in
Sri Lanka, the rural infrastructure remains underdeveloped with neglected roads and rail lines
which undermines rapid inland movement and hinders development of the electronics sector in
areas where land may be cheaper and more readily available.30

            Figure 8: Customs Clearance in India




            Source: Jordan and Kamphuis ( 2014)

Inverted tariff structures in India are a constraint in selected products in India. Expenditures
on parts is by far the largest contributor to costs in electronics manufacturing (figure 5), so duties
levied on imported parts and components (P&C) can have a significant impact on domestic
production costs of the final good. Lower duties on final goods than on parts will favor imports
of final goods over domestic manufacturing that relies on imported P&C. This negative
protectionism has been mentioned repeatedly by sector firms, and recently received attention in
policy circles in India.31 Four areas are of concern:
        (i)     The Information Technology Agreement-1 (ITA-1) provided exemptions on
                import duties for parts and components used in information technology products,
                except for “dual use” materials - those used in other industries (importantly
                copper, aluminum, glass and plastics). This problem has been recognized by the
                Government of India, and a notification (notification 25/99) provides duty
                exemption for dual use materials if the end use is for a product covered under the
                ITA. However, as discussed above, the procedures related to claiming this
                exemption are so cumbersome that companies are discouraged from taking
                advantage, which may lead to a preference for importing the final good.
        (ii)    Imports of medical equipment face a duty of 5 percent, while materials for their
                production face a tariff of 5–7.5 percent.
28
   World Bank (2014)
29
   http://www.hindustantimes.com/business-news/now-foxconn-looks-to-set-up-payments-bank/article1-
1385877.aspx
30
   UN ESCAP 2011
31
   Subramanian and Modi, 2015

                                                                                                     19
        (iii)   India’s trade agreements with Singapore, Thailand, Malaysia, the ASEAN, Korea
                and Japan resulted in an inverted tariff structure for some products. However, the
                Government has addressed some of these, most recently in the Budget of 2014/15
                (as in the case of LED TVs).
        (iv)    Finally, a special additional duty of 4% is imposed on inputs for important
                consumer products like refrigerators, air conditioners, and washing machines,
                while imports of the final products are exempted from duty (see Annex 2). As a
                result, big brands may prefer to import these finished goods from their affiliates in
                East and South East Asia, rather than manufacture them in India.32 As one
                manufacturer explained, “Import content on our products is close to 52%, and due
                to the higher duty structure on components, the overall disability is 30-40% on
                the final price of the product.”

Significant investment is required by firms to ensure an adequate supply of skilled workers.
The availability of cheap and adaptable labor is one factor that makes South Asia attractive as a
manufacturing destination. However, capitalizing on South Asia’s advantage in workers requires
significant investment in training and improving people’s productivity. The returns can be large
– international evidence shows that a 1% increase in training is associated with 0.6% increase in
value added per hour.33 The question is who makes this investment? In South Asia public
investment on training has been low and of poor quality, comparing unfavorably with other
competitor nations. For example, vocational education programs in India can accommodate only
5% of secondary school graduates, while China has the infrastructure to train half of all
secondary school graduates. The quality of training is also an issue. Across the region, the
development of new programs and curricula is difficult in public institutions. Quality is further
hampered by the lack of industry participation in training.34 In China, Government finances
hiring and training programs, as well as employee housing, which Government sees as critical to
acquiring sufficient manpower, enhancing productivity, and sustaining long-term
competitiveness. Industrial parks have on-site, well-equipped technical and vocational colleges
and secondary schools, with market-driven curriculum and management. Vietnam provides
subsidized training for employees. Programs include soft skills, technical English, technical
skills as well as on-demand training. Further, companies can set aside 10% of annual taxable
income for R&D. This sharing of skilling costs between the state and private companies can
significantly encourage investment, especially for companies with a long term vision.

Policy clarity and responsiveness in South Asia is lower than competitors. The fast moving
nature of the electronics sector presents unique challenges for policy makers, who need to
constantly stay abreast of developments and respond quickly to emerging challenges. The slow
responsiveness of regulations that hampers firm agility was reported as one of the biggest
constraints on sectoral growth in both India and Sri Lanka. A major challenge for any company
that considers investing in electronics manufacturing is the multiple clearances needed for setting
up a manufacturing facility. India ranked 155 out of 189 economies in terms of starting a
business in Doing Business 2016. Sri Lanka ranked better (98), but it nevertheless cost 18.7% of
income per capita to set up a firm, compared to 6.4% in Thailand and 4.9% in Vietnam. Firms

32
   Hoda and Rai (2014)
33
   Dearden, Reed, and Van Reenen, 2006
34
   BCG (2013)

                                                                                                  20
also complain about the lack of coherence in the regulatory framework, excess paper work, and a
multiplicity of laws, which are often unclear (for example see box 5). Complex and burdensome
tax structures and regulations that impose substantial compliance costs affect all types of
companies, but particularly affect SMEs and start-ups (according to firm surveys). Government
policies, that in themselves were often quite good, were also impaired by weak implementation
capacity. By contrast, other countries with large electronic manufacturing sectors often focus
significant Government attention on easing the regulatory problems facing firms. Vietnam, for
example, has a designated deputy PM dedicated to easing problems in the electronics sector.
Finally, South Asian firms complained about poorly targeted incentives that do not counter
specific locational disadvantages, are not aligned with what other competitors are offering, and
too often are associated with complex procedures that reduce access (see Annex 3 for a
comparison of incentives offered).

           Box 3: The Medical Devices Sector in India

           The Indian healthcare market has been growing by 15% per year and is set to reach $150
           billion in size by 2017. Market spending on medical devices and equipment has grown
           faster, at an impressive rate of 17% per year in recent years, and constitutes 9% of the
           overall market size. The sector remains heavily dependent on imports, which accounted
           for 65% of sales in 2011. Multinationals have around a 65% share of the market and
           dominate the hi-tech equipment and devices. Many of these, for example GE, Siemens
           and Philips, have established subsidiaries in India. In addition, there are around 700
           Indian manufacturers primarily focusing on low-margin, low-technology products like
           disposables and medical equipment. Two thirds of these are SMEs. Like most
           developing countries, India is also predominantly a manufacturer of Class I and II
           devices, i.e. devices that are not considered to be high risk and that do not need extensive
           clinical trials.

           Increasingly, foreign medical device companies are outsourcing activities to India, as a
           way of reducing costs in manufacturing, R&D, clinical trials and other medical services.
           The activities being shifted include business operations for the South Asian region,
           contract manufacturing of components by Indian companies for global markets,
           developing software for advanced imaging equipment, R&D to customize products to
           South Asian conditions, and clinical research and trials. This presents an opportunity for
           India to increase domestic manufacturing and become a more important participant in
           global medical device value chains.

           At the same time, a number of issues are hindering growth of the industry. Part of the
           issue derives from the demand side. Barriers that limit access of a large percentage of
           people in India to healthcare and medical technologies include lack of awareness,
           screening diagnosis, trained surgeons and affordable technologies. Further, the
           government spends only about 1 percent of GDP on health in a country where the
           majority of patients are from low income households.

           The industry is also faced with significant lack of clarity in terms of regulation and
           predictable access to market. The regulatory framework in India applicable to medical
           devices is inadequate. The Indian government has regulated only a few types of medical
           devices. These are being regulated by deeming these medical devices as “drugs” and

                                                                                                    21
               regulating them through the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (“Act”) and the rules framed
               there under viz. Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 (“Rules”). All other types of medical
               devices are unregulated, meaning there is no government oversight on their manufacture,
               import, distribution and sale. The country lacks comprehensive legislation specifying
               standards of safety and quality for medical devices. The absence of this framework
               creates uncertainty in the operating environment, results in inferior quality products
               flooding the market and putting price pressures on genuine manufacturers, and hampers
               the standing of the Indian market.

               Source: ValueOn Shore (2015)

Land is a constraint for large investors and clustering, especially in Bangladesh. Clustering of
lead and supplier firms in close proximity is an important source of efficiency, and allows for
greater quality control (Box 5 lists benefits of clustering for individual firms). However,
clustering in South Asia is rendered difficult because buying land at suitable locations is often an
arduous and expensive task. Verification of titles is complex and procedures for purchasing land
take time. It is difficult for large companies to assemble enough small plots of land. The scarcity
of adequate land is also reflected in very high prices. Companies prefer to locate close to major
markets or ports, but some Indian and Sri Lankan peri-urban areas are among the most expensive
in the world.35 The practical solution to these issues has been industrial zones, which played a
central role in the development of manufacturing, electronics in particular, in East Asia. The lack
of readily-available and well-located industrial land is probably the main constraint on the
development of the sector in Bangladesh. For example, in 2011 Samsung requested 250 acres in
an EPZ to develop an electronics hub in Chittagong ($1.25 billion investment, 50,000 workers).
The investment did not materialize because no more sizeable land was available in the BEPZA
zones, and land in the mostly empty Korean Export Processing Zone is under dispute. By
contrast, Vietnam has been able to provide large, readily-available tracts of land to large
investors as well as their suplliers. One of these, Samsung was able to locate there along with 76
of its Korean suppliers, and now directly employs 100,000 workers .

               Box 4: The Benefits of Clustering for Firms
                  • Reduced dependence on unreliable logistics for lead and supplier firms
                      allowing for predictable supply and tighter inventories
                  • Anchor firms can maintain stronger quality control over suppliers
                  • Increased bargaining power with infrastructure providers can potentially
                      improve access to essential infrastructure or help lower mitigation costs, for
                      example through clusters negotiating a dedicated power distribution station
                  • Easier access to soft infrastructure such as mentoring and sharing of
                      knowledge among entrepreneurs
                  • Improved access to and cost of finance thanks to the pooling and credibility
                      effect of the cluster
                  • Lower skilling costs through provision of common training facilities




35
     Saleman and Jordan (2013)

                                                                                                   22
   5. Policy Recommendations


Cut tariffs all the way up the supply chain to remove the inverted tariff structure in India:
There is a strong case for India to continue its trade liberalization and lower tariffs all along the
supply chain. As noted earlier, the partial relief given through Notification 25/99 is difficult to
implement, and such tariff reductions could help provide an impetus to domestic manufacturing.

In the interim, Government could take steps to reduce the administrative burden involved in
obtaining exemptions (see box 6). Lowering tariffs could also benefit P&C manufacturers across
South Asia, including in Sri Lanka and Bangladesh. For exports, the destination principle of
indirect taxation incorporated in the WTO rules means that import duties and charges levied on
the parts and components imported for use in the manufacture of finished goods that are later
exported, are either exempted or refunded through drawback schemes when the actual exports
take place. In order to make this easier, South Asian Governments may wish to consider
provision of bonded warehouse facilities for firms exporting electronic goods.


Improve trade facilitation measures and infrastructure: There are a number of broader trade
facilitation measures, including commitments made under the WTO Trade Facilitation
Agreement that would speed up clearance processes at the border in South Asia. Key measures
include fully electronic submission of documents, improved coordination of border management
across responsible agencies, and establishment of an effective and quick grievance redress
mechanism.

           Box 5: Options for streamlining the implementation of Notification 25/99

               1. Presently the application for obtaining the concessional rate of duty is to be
                  submitted to the Assistant Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner of
                  Central Excise through the Range Superintendent. This causes undue delay
                  in clearing consignments, and a good number of cases involve demurrage.
                  The application should be countersigned by the Range Superintendent
                  instead of the Assistant Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner of Central
                  Excise

               2. The procedure involves executing a bond for the differential amount of
                  duty, which has to be given individually against each consignment or a
                  running bond for the total amount required for a year. The procedure for
                  extinguishing this bond is also not clear and very cumbersome.
                  Applications are made for each item, separately for each port of import, for
                  requirement of three months.
                  This is a tedious and repetitive procedure and it is recommended that yearly
                  applications be permitted.

               3. Intimation is required to be given to Central Excise within 24 hours of
                  material receipt and the material cannot be used until it is verified.
                  This restriction could be removed, allowing provision of monthly

                                                                                                  23
                   information on the items received to be filed.

               4. Central Excise Department verifies the records and input to output ratio,
                  and issues the End Use Consumption certificate. This procedure takes a
                  long time and serves no purpose, as most items covered under notification
                  No.25/99 can be used only in the manufacture of the related end product.
                  The end result is delay, stock out and stoppage of production.
                  Self-certification / Chartered engineer certification based on the input
                  output ratio and /or norms for consumption of the raw materials should be
                  accepted. It is also recommended that the firms’ records may be accepted
                  for issuing the consumption certificate and the format for this record and
                  the input output ratios may be fixed when a new product is introduced.
                  These can be reviewed and reconfirmed once every year by Central Excise.

               5. The import of raw material/inputs by local manufacturers of Electronic
                  Components and assemblies should be routed through a green channel
                  procedure, based on self-certification. Established and regular
                  manufacturers with a good track record should be provided a Green Card
                  for quick processing of their consignments. There should be no need for any
                  Certificate or Bond, and only a consumption report may be required
                  periodically to confirm genuine use of the imported material.

           Source: ELCINA (2015)


Make land available for specialized clusters, delivered in ways that respond to organic firm
demand: An important consideration is to get the location right. Interviews suggest that
manufacturers seeking to link up to global supply chains prefer to locate in areas that are close to
ports, to speed up supply chains and reduce dependence on local infrastructure. Setting up
clusters in such areas – either as SEZs or industrial parks – that are large enough to house lead
firms and suppliers would help attract electronic manufacturers. Investors would also like to see
world class infrastructure developed around and within the cluster, especially to link it with the
port and to major markets. Another requirement, particularly from SMEs, is for common
facilities for R&D and testing facilities, waste dumping, and recycling. Provisions for worker
housing within or close to the cluster is important. Manufacturing facilities tend to be located
outside urban areas to take advantage of lower land costs. However, ensuring an adequate supply
of labor requires them to pay to transport workers to the sites or to create facilities for them to
stay close by, both of which raise costs. An inventory of existing Government-owned land that
could be made available quickly could be used to allocate parks that are not doing well in their
specified purpose for electronic manufacturing. Allowing parcels of land that are close to,
though not contiguous, with each other to be classified as a SEZ could deliver benefits of
clustering without the difficulties of acquisition. In India, there is a need to remove hurdles and
create incentives for states to reclassify and reuse land. In Bangladesh, a good starting point
would be for the Government to resolve the 15 year old conflict with the Korean Export
Processing Zone, which has led to 2,000 acres of prime industrial land, in a prime location next
to the Chittagong port, staying idle.


                                                                                                 24
Make a concerted effort to strengthen both vocational training and curricula for higher-level
skill development required for electronics manufacturing: Governments in South Asia should
invest more in improving technical and vocational infrastructure (Box 7 shows the example of
training in China). Companies can be provided incentives for investing in worker training and
R&D. However, introducing major design and managerial reforms into public delivery systems
is more critical. This would include, for example, significant involvement of employers in
designing curricula and training to ensure greater responsiveness to sector needs. Companies
could run “train the trainer” programs for public institutions and help them by offering students
live work projects. Another important reform would be to give institutions greater autonomy in
deciding training programs, to enable them to respond to changing trends in this fast moving
sector. Innovative solutions are needed, for which international experience could serve as a
guide.36

          Box 6: China's approach to providing skills to its workforce

          Over the years, the Chinese government has invested extensively in vocational education.
          The quality of training in Chinese vocational institutions is good, mainly due to extensive
          industry participation, favorable government policies and a flexible curriculum. The key
          stakeholders in the ecosystem work hand-in-hand. Chinese courses require students to
          undergo a full year of training for a diploma, ensuring that students are better equipped to
          be absorbed immediately into the job market.

          Similarly, to make sure that the faculty always keeps abreast of the latest industry
          practices, the Chinese government has made it compulsory for vocational trainers to
          spend at least a month every year in manufacturing companies. Additionally, China has
          made it very easy for vocational students to move back into general academic programs
          by sufficiently covering general academic skills in vocational curricula.

          Chinese firms take employee training, one of the top levers to attract best talent in a
          competitive market, very seriously. This is reflected in the fact that Chinese
          manufacturers spend twice the amount on training and development than do their Indian
          counterparts.

          Source: BCG (2013).


Facilitate policy implementation through process changes and institutional innovation: A
major issue firms in the region report is the lack of effective dialogue with Government. Policy
makers should consider building national monitoring and problem-solving processes and
institutions to effectively respond to emerging issues. They could encourage “industrial
dialogues” that involve not only large flagship firms, but also young firms that seek to create and
commercialize new products and processes, as well as other stakeholders such as university and
public R&D labs. These should go beyond being just “talk shops”, and should be linked to
meaningful, action-oriented committees. One innovation could be to use the large South Asian


36
     World Bank, 2006.

                                                                                                   25
diaspora to mentor and guide policymakers and firms in developing the electronics sector in the
region (Box 7).

       Box 7: Leveraging the diaspora to build bridges

       In the 1960s and 1970s, Taiwan and the United States had a textbook first world-third
       world relationship. American businesses invested in Taiwan primarily to take advantage
       of its low-wage manufacturing labor. Meanwhile, Taiwan’s best and the brightest
       engineering students came to the United States for graduate education and chose to stay
       to pursue professional opportunities. Many ended up in Silicon Valley.

       This relationship changed significantly during the 1980s. By the late 1980s, engineers
       began returning to Taiwan in large numbers, drawn by active government recruitment
       and the opportunities created by rapid economic development. At the same time, a
       growing cohort of highly mobile engineers began to work in both the United States and
       Taiwan, commuting across the Pacific regularly. Typically Taiwan-born, U.S.-educated
       engineers, these “astronauts” had the professional contacts and language skills to function
       fluently in both the Silicon Valley and Taiwanese business cultures and to draw on the
       complementary strengths of the two regional economies A closely knit community of
       Taiwanese returnees became the bridge between Silicon Valley and Hsinchu. These
       social ties, which often built on pre-existing alumni relationships among graduates of
       Taiwan’s elite engineering universities, were institutionalized in 1989 with the formation
       of the Monte Jade Science and Technology Association.

       Monte Jade’s goal is the promotion of business cooperation, investment, and technology
       transfer between Chinese engineers in the Bay Area and Taiwan. Although the
       organization remains private, it works closely with local representatives of the Taiwanese
       government to encourage mutually beneficial investments and business collaboration.
       This transnational community has accelerated the upgrading of Taiwan’s technological
       infrastructure by transferring technical know-how and organizational models as well as
       by forging closer ties with Silicon Valley. Observers note, for example, that management
       practices in Hsinchu companies are more like those of Silicon Valley than the traditional
       family-firm model that dominates older industries in Taiwan.

       As a result, Taiwan is now the world’s largest producer of notebook computers and a
       range of related PC components including motherboards, monitors, scanners, power
       supplies, and keyboards. In addition, Taiwan’s semiconductor and integrated circuit
       manufacturing capabilities are now on a par with the leading Japanese and U.S.
       producers, and its flexible and efficient networks of specialized small and medium-sized
       enterprises coordinate the diverse components of this sophisticated infrastructure.

       Taiwan has also become an important source of capital for Silicon Valley start-ups—
       particularly those started by immigrant entrepreneurs who historically lacked contacts in
       the mainstream venture capital community. Formal investments from Asia (not including
       Japan) were more than $500 million in 1997. These investors often provide more than
       capital. According to Ken Tai, a founder of Acer and now head of venture fund, InveStar


                                                                                               26
Capital:“When we invest we are also helping bring entrepreneurs back to Taiwan. It is
relationship building . . . we help them get high level introductions to foundries (for
manufacturing) and we help establish strategic opportunities and relationships with
customers.”

The growing integration of the technological communities of Silicon Valley and Hsinchu
offers substantial benefits to both economies. Silicon Valley remains the center of new
product definition and design and development of leading-edge technologies, whereas
Taiwan offers world-class manufacturing, flexible development and integration, and
access to key customers and markets in China and Southeast Asia

Source: Saxenian (1999)




                                                                                    27
References

Altenburg, Tilman, Meyer-Stamer, JÖRG. 1999. “How to promote clusters: policy experiences
from Latin America, World Development”, Vol 27 Issue 9

Ark B.V., A. A. Erumban, V. Chen and U. Kumar (2008). “The Cost Competitiveness of
Manufacturing in China and India: An Industry and Regional Perspective.” Working Paper 228,
ICRIER, New Delhi

BCG (2013). “People Productivity. Key to Indian Manufacturing competitiveness.” Boston
Consulting Group, March 2013. Available at
http://www.bcgindia.com/documents/file130179.pdf

Bozz & Company (2008). “Global Innovation 1000” in Bampi, S. (Coord.). Projeto PIB:
Perspectivas do Investimento em Eletronica. Rio de Janeiro: UFRJ. Available at
http://www.ie.ufrj.br/projetopib/arquivos/ie_ufrj_sp08_eletronica.pdf

Choudhary, S., M. Kallumal, and P. Varma. (2013). “Trade Creation and Trae Diversion in the
India Sri Lanka FTA- A Sectoral Specific Analysis.” Working Paper, Center for WTO Studies,
IIFT Delhi.

Colecchia, A., & Schreyer, P. (2002). “ICT investment and economic growth in the 1990s: is the
United States a unique case?: a comparative study of nine OECD countries.” Review of
Economic Dynamics, 5(2), 408-442.

Crespi, G. and Zuninga P., (2012). “Innovation and Productivity: Evidence from Six Latin
American Countries.” World Development, 40(2), 273-290.

D&B Analysis. “IT Hardware & Electronics: Productivity & Efficiency Benchmarking.”
http://www.dsir.gov.in/reports/isr1/IT%20Hardware%20and%20Electronics/4_9.pdf

Ernst, Dieter, 2014. “Fast Tracking India’s Electronics Manufacturing Industry: Business
environment and industrial policy.” World Bank.

Goldar, Bishwanath and A. Sadhukhan. 2015. Employment and wages in Indian manufacturing:
Post-reform performance. ILO Employment Working Paper No. 185

Griffith, R., Huergo, E., Mairesse, J., and Peters, B., (2006). “Innovation and productivity across
four European countries.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 22(4), pp.483-498.

Hall, B.H., Lotti, F., and Mairesse, J., (2009). “Innovation and productivity in SMEs: Empirical
evidence for Italy.” Small Business Economics, 33(1), pp.13-33.

Hall, B. H. and Mohnen, P., (2013). “Innovation and productivity: an update.” Eurasian Business
Review, 3(1), 47-65.



                                                                                                 28
Hoda, A. and D. K. Rai (2014). “Trade and Investment Barriers affecting International
Production Networks in India.” Working paper 281, ICRIER, New Delhi

ILO, 2014 (A). “Better Work: Electronics feasibility Study” Available at
http://betterwork.com/global/wp-conten/uploads/Better-work-Electronics-Feasibility-Study-
Executive-Summary.pdf

ILO, 2014 (B). “Ups and Downs in the Electronics industry: Fluctuating Production and the use
of temporary and other forms of employment.” ILO, Geneva

India Printed Circuit Board Association (2008). Presentation of Dr. Hayao Nakahara (N.T.
Information Ltd, Japan) at November 2008,
http://www.ipcaindia.org/pdffiles/PCBMktOppDrNakahara.pdf

J Manyika et al, 2012. “Manufacturing the future: The next era of global growth and innovation”,
McKinsey Global Institute, November 2012

Jordan L.S. and B. Kamphuis (2014). “Supply Chain Delays and Uncertainty in India: The
hidden constraint on manufacturing growth.” World Bank, New Delhi, March 2014

Korea Associates Business Consultancy Ltd (2012). “Global Value Chain Analysis on Samsung
Electronics.” Reported submitted to the Commercial Section of the Canadian Embassy in the
Republic of Korea.

Lima, R. R. S. (2012) “Complexo Eletronico: Evolucao Recente e os Desafios para o Setor e
para a Atuacao do BNDES” in: Lage de Sousa (Org.). ‘BNDES 60 Anos: Perspectivas Setoriais’
Limited Edition, Vol. I, pages 42-96, BNDES, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Available at
http://www.bndes.gov.br/SiteBNDES/export/sites/default/bndes_pt/Galerias/Arquivos/conhecim
ento/livro60anos_perspectivas_setoriais/Setorial60anos_VOL1ComplexoEletronico.pdf

Musolesi, A. and Huiban, J.P., (2010). “Innovation and productivity in knowledge intensive
business services.” Journal of Productivity Analysis, 34(1), pp.63-81. Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD), 2005. Oslo Manual, 3rd ed. Paris: OECD.

National Productivity Council. “Productivity and Competitiveness of Indian Manufacturing: IT
Hardware and Electronics.” Submitted to the National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council

OCDE (2010) Information Technology Outlook 2010. Figures 2.22 (page 87) and 2.23 (page
88). Available at
http://www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/docserver/download/9310021e.pdf?expires=1455045589&id=id&accname=ocid195
787&checksum=BA0C9BBED864FF2D7CC35A068A2D6365

Oliver Wyman (2007) “A comprehensive study on innovation in the automotive industry” apud
Lima (2012) “Complexo Eletronico: Evolucao Recente e os Desafios para o Setor e para a
Atuacao do BNDES”


                                                                                             29
Poh-Kam, Wong. 1995. “Competing in the global electronics industry: A comparative study of
the innovation networks of Singapore and Taiwan” Journal of Industry Studies , Volume 2, Issue
2, 1995

Saleman, Y and L. S. Jordan (2013). “The Implementation of Industrial Parks: Some Lessons
Learned in India.’ World Bank, 2013

Saxenian, AnnaLee (1999). “Silicon Valley’s New Immigrant Entrepreneurs.” Public Policy
Institute of California, Palo Alto 1999.

Sincavage, Jessica R., Carl Haub, and O.P. Sharma. 2010. Labor costs in India’s organized
manufacturing sector. Monthly Labor Review, May 2010

Sturgeon, Timothy (2015). “Vietnam’s Current and Future Role in Information and
Communications Technology (ICT) Global Value Chains (GVCs)”. Mimeo, World Bank & IFC

Subramanian, Arvind and A. Modi. 2015. “’Make in India’ not by protecting but by eliminating
negative protectionism” Business Standard http://www.business-
standard.com/article/opinion/make-in-india-not-by-protecting-but-by-eliminating-negative-
protectionism-115050100026_1.html

UNCTAD (2013). World Investment Report 2013: Global Value Chains- Investment and Trade
for Development. United Nations, New York and Geneva 2013

ValueOnShore (2015). “Medical Devices Sector in India,” mimeo, ValueOnShore Advisory
Services. May 2015

Weerakoon D. and J. Thennakoon. “India Sri Lanka FTA; Lessons for SAFTA”Institute for
Policy Studies, Sri Lanka.

World Bank (2005). “Linkages between Foreign Direct Investment and Trade Flows. From
Disintegration to Reintegration: Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union in International
Trade.” Washington DC 2005. Available at
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTECA/Resources/tradereport-complete.pdf (accessed
November 5 2013).

Wu, H. X., B. L. Lee, and D.S. Prasada Rao (2007). “COMPARATIVE PERFORMANCE OF
INDIAN AND CHINESE MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES, 1980-2004.” Presented at the
Special Conference of the International Association for Research in Income and Wealth
(IARIW) on Transition Economies, 18-21 Beijing, People’s Republic of China.




                                                                                               30
Technical Annexes

Annex 1

Trends in Registered Manufacturing of Electronics and IT Hardware Industry in India




Source: National Productivity Council




                                                                                      31
Annex 2
Schedule of Tariff concessions under India Sri Lanka FTA




Annex 3
India’s Average Applied MFN and Preferential Tarff under India Sri Lanka FTA




Source: Choudhary et al (2013)




                                                                               32
Annex 4: Duty Inversions impacting the Electronics Sector in India




Source: FICCI




                                                                     33
Annex 5: Key Incentives Offered in SEZs for Electronic Manufacturing


               Fiscal Incentives             Logistics                     Other Features



               Duty free imports of          Processing of import/export Subcontracting for urgent
               capital goods and raw         documents, on-site          production orders between SEZ
               materials                     examination of cargo        companies
  Sri Lanka




               Exemption from VAT and
                                             Temporary export of captial
               Ports and Airports
                                             goods for repair
               Development Levy (PAL)

                                             Non-export oriented
                                                                           Total foreign ownership permitted
                                             companies are entitled to
                                             import project related
               Exchange control
                                             capital goods free of
               exemption
                                             Customs Duty, during the
                                             project implementation
                                             period
               Duty Free imports of
               machinery and raw
                                                                           100% foreign equity allowed; full
               materials, construction
                                                                           repatriation in case of exit
               materials and 3 motor
               vehicles; duty free exports
               Tax holiday for 10 years,
                                             Export and import permits
               concessionary tax for 5
                                             issued same day; customs
               years after; exemption
                                             clearance at plant
  Bangladesh




               reduced throughout 10
               years: 1st and 2nd year                                     No restrictions on issuance of work
               100%, 3rd year 80%, 4th                                     permits on project related foreign
               70%, 5th 60%,6th 50%, 7th                                   nationals and employees but
               40%, 8th 30%, 9th 20% and                                   limited up to 5% of total
               10th year 10%                                               employees; 50% Rebate of income
                                                                           tax on salary income of expatriates
               80% exemption of VAT on
                                                                           for 5 years
               all utility services
                                             Option to relocate from
               consumed inside the zone;
                                             one EPZ to another
               50% exemption of stamp
               duty and registration fees




                                                                                                           34
          for registration of
          leasehold land/ factory
                                                                         Secure land and factories for rent;
          space; Exemption from            SEZ is considered a customs
                                                                         electricity, telecommunications,
          dividend tax for 3 years,        bonded area
                                                                         gas and water facilities
          exemption from capital
          gains tax
          Tax holiday for four years.
          Then corporate income tax
          increases to 5% for years
          5-13 and then to 10% from
          years 13-15. Rate then
                                                                         Companies pay reduced tax (10%)
          reaches country-wide tax
                                           On site electronic customs    on income from corporate
          rate of 22% (will be
                                           clearance                     workforce training for the lifetime
          lowered to 20% in January
                                                                         of the project
          2016). Rate stays at 10%
          for 30 years if the project is
          large and involves a new
          technology in an
          incentivized sector (ICT)
          Duty free import of                                            Subsidized training for hired and
          equipment and machinery,                                       pre-hired employees. Programs
          transport vehicles for                                         include soft skills, technical
Vietnam




          workers including 24 or                                        English, technical skills as well as
          more seat motor vehicles                                       on-demand training
          and boats, components
          and spares for both
          categories of goods,
                                           One stop shop: approval of
          components, raw
                                           work permits (for             Access to preferential loans (up to
          materials, and construction
                                           foreigners), construction     70% of the project’s total
          materials that cannot be
                                           permits, environmental        investment) and grants (up to 30%
          produced domestically.
                                           assessments, and              of the project’s total investment)
          Also import duty and VAT
                                           investment certificates
          exemption on goods used
          in scientific research and
          technological development
          Export duty and VAT
          exemption on high
                                                                         Companies can set aside 10% of
          technology products (full
                                                                         annual taxable income for R&D
          list in tab titled "Vietnam
          High Tech Products")




                                                                                                            35
        Duty free import of
                                                                     The minimum area requirements
        required machinery,
                                                                     for multi-product SEZs is now
        production lines and
                                                                     reduced from 1000 hectares to
        related equipment; import
                                                                     500 hectares, or from 100 hectares
        and domestic procurement
                                     On-site customs clearance,      to 50 hectares for sector-specific
        of component parts as
                                     post and telegraph office,      SEZs and SEZs with one or more
        required for the final
                                     satellite data link facility    services
        product
                                     required for software
                                     exports
                                                                     Minimum area requirement of 10
        VAT rebate of 100% on
                                                                     hectares for SEZs proposed to be
        exported India sourced
                                                                     set up exclusively for electronic
        components
                                                                     hardware and software

        Corporate Income Tax         Noida SEZ Logistics: NSEZ
        exemption on export          has been declared as an         Unit may now opt out of a SEZ by
        income for first 5 years,    Inland Container Depot          transferring its assets & liabilities
        50% for next 5 years         (ICD) under the Customs         to another person by way of
        thereafter and 50% of the    Act, 1962 to facilitate         transfer of ownership, including a
India




        ploughed back export         inward/outward movement         sale of the SEZ Unit.
        profit for next 5 years      of cargo

        Exemption from Service
        Tax, Minimum Alternate
        Tax, Central Sales Tax,      Madras SEZ Logistics: SEZ
                                     firms can file their bills of   Single window clearance for
        State Sales Tax and other
                                     entry from their factory.       Central and State level approvals
        levies as extended by the
        respective State             The Preventive Wing of the
        Governments                  SEZ's customs division has
                                     11 staff members, 24/7 to
                                     process goods entering the
                                     zone from abroad or             External commercial borrowing by
                                     elsewhere in the country        SEZ units up to US $ 500 million in
        Subsidy of 20% for capital
                                                                     a year without any maturity
        expenditures
                                                                     restriction through recognized
                                                                     banking channels




                                                                                                        36
                                 Corporate income tax
                                 exemption for first two
                                 years of operation.
                                 Foreign-owned firms pay
                                 half of corporate tax rate
                                 for ensuing three years
                                 (15%). Tax rate is 10% for
                                 certified firms that export
  (Foreign Invested Companies)




                                 at least 70% of production.                                 Foreign invested companies must
                                 Potential additional three-                                 apply for foreign exchange
                                 year extension at 10%.                                      registration with SAFE. These
                                 Rate eventually rises to                                    companies can take on foreign
                                 normal tax rate of 25%                                      debt without SAFE's approval.
                                 (Including national and                                     However, the total amount of
                                 state taxes). High-tech                                     foreign debt cannot exceed the
                                 enterprises that invested in                                difference between registered
                                 or after 2008 can also                                      capital and total investment
                                 apply for a two-year tax                                    amount
                                 holiday followed by three      Transportation service
                                 years of a 12.5 percent        provided from a Chinese
                                 rate                           company to a foreign
                                 Land use fee will be cut in    company is subject to 0%
                                 half for five years for        VAT; VAT for international
                                 certified exporters that       logistics can be exempted.
                                 import state-of-the-art        However, each company
                                 technology                     has to apply at the tax
                                 Integrated circuit             bureau for VAT exemption
                                 production companies
                                 receive a five-year
                                 corporate income tax
                                 holiday, followed by five
                                 years at 50% the normal
                                 rate (25%) when slated for
                                                                                             Foreign invested companies can
                                 at least 15 years of
                                                                                             repatriated profits once taxes have
                                 operation, and when total
                                                                                             been paid in full, dividends have
                                 investment exceeds RMB 8
  China




                                                                                             been declared, and losses from
                                 billion or where produced
                                                                                             previous years of operation have
                                 ICs have a width of less
                                                                                             been made up
                                 than 0.25μm
                                 If R&D expenditures
                                 increase by 10% from the
                                 previous year, companies
                                 are eligible for 50%
                                 corporate income tax
                                 deduction
Source: Staff, based on publicly available information



                                                                                                                             37
Annex 6: Data and analysis of innovation and obstacles to productivity

         Table 1: Innovation Expenditures by Electronic firms in South Asia
                                  No. of         % of Firms with      Innovation Expenditure
         Size                Electronic Firms       Innov. Exp.              per Sales
         SMEs (<100)               202                67.3%                    4.7%
         Large (>=100)              99                73.7%                    1.1%
         Total                     301                69.4%                    3.5%

          Table 2: Avg. of Expenditures and New Products over Sales for Electronics in South Asia
          Size                       Machinery      Non-Machinery         Total     New Products
          SMEs (<100)                   3.9%              0.9%            4.7%           6.1%
          Large (>=100)                 0.4%              0.7%            1.1%          10.3%
          Total                         2.7%              0.8%            3.5%           7.5%


         Table 3: Obstacles to Productivity - Electronics
                                         (1)              (2)             (3)
                                                                    Prod Growth -
         VARIABLES                Labor Prod - All4    TFP - All4        All4
         Finance                      -0.0146           -0.0066        -0.0105
                                       (0.015)          (0.015)        (0.009)
         Political                     0.0334           -0.0710        0.0146*
                                       (0.061)          (0.027)        (0.004)
         Crime                         0.0583           -0.0446        0.0208*
                                       (0.258)          (0.039)        (0.007)
         Taxes                        -0.0463           0.0938*         0.0053
                                       (0.234)          (0.022)        (0.007)
         Corruption                   -0.0193            0.0188         0.0116
                                       (0.022)          (0.024)        (0.007)
         Informal Sector              -0.0598            0.0760         0.0262
                                       (0.142)          (0.034)        (0.020)
         Labor Regulations            -0.0569         -0.1465***       -0.0402
                                       (0.111)          (0.009)        (0.018)
         Workforce Education           0.0299           -0.0545        -0.0054
                                       (0.094)          (0.022)        (0.009)
         Electricity                  -0.0901           -0.0259         0.0080
                                       (0.031)          (0.039)        (0.011)
         Constant                    9.7807***           1.0413        -0.1110

         Observations                    609             422             521
         R-squared                      0.0598          0.0915         0.0716
         Robust standard errors in parentheses
         *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                38
Table 4: CDM Model solved sequentially for Electronics in South Asia
                                          (1)                 (2)               (3)
Stage                                  1st Stage           2nd Stage         3rd Stage
                                      Log(Innov.            Log(New         Log(Labor
Dependent Variable                 Expenditures/Sales)   Products/Sales)   Productivity)

Predicted Log(Expenditure/Sales)                           22.2136*
                                                           (11.530)
Predicted Log(New
Products/Sales)                                                             2.5828**
                                                                             (1.204)
Log(Size)                              -0.0136***          0.3094**          0.1238
                                         (0.005)             (0.154)         (0.120)
Log(Age)                                 0.0136*           -0.3412**
                                         (0.007)             (0.163)
Export                                    0.0053             0.0182
                                         (0.012)             (0.094)
Foreign Status                           -0.5074             8.9797
                                         (0.000)             (0.000)
Internal Funds                           -0.0103             0.2042
                                         (0.012)             (0.153)
Duopoly / Monopoly                        0.0080
                                         (0.014)
Capital Labor Ratio                                                          0.0000
                                                                             (0.000)
Process Innovation                                                           0.3063
                                                                             (0.274)
Organization Innovation                                                      0.1889
                                                                             (0.203)
Constant                                -0.0192              0.1755        10.0211***
                                        (0.046)              (0.356)         (0.892)

Observations                              290                 295              155
R-squared                                                                     0.1243
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                           39
The analysis of the drivers of productivity based on the World Bank Enterprise Surveys confirms
that size and export status are positively associated with productivity in this sector across
Bangladesh, India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka (see Table 5 below).

Table 5: Drivers of Productivity - Electronics
                              (1)             (2)            (3)
                                                        Prod Growth -
VARIABLES              Labor Prod - All4   TFP - All4       All4

Log(Size)                  0.2155***         0.0660         0.0130
                             (0.011)        (0.024)        (0.015)
Log(Age)                     -0.1457        -0.0967        -0.0148
                             (0.130)        (0.064)        (0.018)
Foreign                      -0.3572         0.1694        -0.0375
                             (0.544)        (0.428)        (0.201)
Exporter                      0.2684        0.3433*      -0.0583***
Constant                   9.7807***         1.0413        -0.1110
                             (0.496)        (0.395)        (0.078)
Observations                   609            422            521
R-squared                     0.0598         0.0915         0.0716
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                            40
