Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Sixth Global Pension and Saving Conference, Washington DC 2-4 April 2014 (Ctrl+ Click
                               highlighted links for presentations)
                               Loïc Chiquier, Director for the Capital Markets Practice and Middle East
                               and North Africa Region and Arup Banerji, Director for Social Protection
                               and Labor at the World Bank Group welcomed the Conference
                               delegates. They stressed the importance of the core themes of learning
                               lessons, developing solutions and improving outcomes if pension
                               reform was to help eradicate poverty and boosted shared prosperity
                               sustainable. They welcomed over 150 delegates from nearly 50
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               countries - a mix of government, regulators and supervisors, private
                               sector and academics practitioners and regional and international
                               organizations including the World Bank, IMF, OECD, Asian Development
                               Bank and Interamerican Development Bank. The conference aimed to
                               use this powerful global expertize explore the ‘iron triangle’ of sustainability, coverage and adequacy alongside
                               efficiency and security that together made up the key outcomes of pension systems.

                               Session 1: Setting the Scene: 20 years of Global Pension Policy
                               The opening session heard from the lead author of ‘Averting the Old Age Crisis’ Estelle James, Professor SUNY
                               and former Lead Economist, World Bank. She returned to the fundamental insight of using different tools to
                               meet separate objectives for income redistribution and saving. Redistribution via a DB pillar can take many
Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                         forms but would require direct financing from general revenue. But
                                                                         this poverty alleviation focus would not provide adequate income in
                                                                         retirement for all, so additional saving was needed – with mandatory
                                                                         DC schemes a key recommendation, along with voluntary saving. Over
                                                                         40 countries had undertaken (country-specific) reforms along these
                                                                         lines – because the demographic challenges outlined in the book made
                                                                         reform essential. Many criticisms of the book came when people had
                                                                         not read its nuanced – public and private, DB and DC message. Policy
                                                                         reversals had occurred in some countries where political consensus
                                                                         was absent but most countries were sticking to their reforms. In some
                               cases huge implicit pension debts had not been tackled sufficiently. A major legacy from the book has been the
                               extensive research into the practical aspects of pensions reform, including behavioral economics and payouts.
                               Robert Palacios, World Bank Group, provided a broad survey of pensions over the previous centuries. The Pay
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               As You Go DB model had expanded massively before its critical
                               sustainability issues were acknowledged. But the shift to add DC
                               pillars (as in Averting) rightly did not mean getting rid of DB but
                               reforming it. A second shift was from exclusive reliance on payroll
                               tax/contributions towards general taxation and ‘social pensions’ to
                               improve coverage. Dalmer Hoskins, US Social Security
                               Administration chaired a lively discussion including whether
                               Notional Defined Contribution systems could operate well in
                               developing economies with volatile employment and wages, the
                               importance of labor market incentives, the need for clarity on the
                               long run costs and benefits in pensions and the importance of
                               diversified solutions - not public or private - but both.
Session 2: The Sustainability and Adequacy Trade-off as Countries Age
Anita Schwarz, World Bank Group, examined the experience in Europe and
Central Asia drawing on the recently published ‘The Inverting Pyramid’. The
demographics in some countries had been even worse than expected as aging
and falling birth rates were exacerbated by emigration. There had already been
significant reform but often increases in coverage and generosity of benefits as
well. The presentation showed a policy options exercise highlighting the need
to focus state budgets on preventing old age poverty given fiscal capacity and
to expand saving for income replacement – using a wide range of options from
traditional ‘mandatory’ savings to the use of auto-enrolment alongside longer
working lives. ‘Active aging’ policies could ensure older workers continued to play a productive role.
Ambrogio Rinaldi, COVIP, Italy and Chair of the OECD Working Party on Private Pensions, highlighted a range
                                 of reforms that had been popular and successful globally to achieve a better
                                 balance of coverage, adequacy and sustainability. These included extending
                                 working lives, improving efficiency through lower costs, improving
                                 diversification through the use of multiple pension pillars or tiers and
                                 improving the security of pension systems through regulation and
                                 supervision. Notional DC systems should be considered where appropriate.
                                 Clarity was needed on intended and unintended redistribution between
                                 generations. In the EU the Stability and Growth Pact created a specific
negative incentive towards ‘hiding’ pension liabilities in implicit debt instead of
improving sustainability through funded pensions.              Agnieszka Chlon-
Dominczak, Warsaw School of Economics, gave the history of the Polish
reforms 15 years ago and their implementation. The system had gained scale
and had relatively good underlying performance. But pension contributions
diverted to private pensions were not replaced in the public budget by other
tax revenue. Privatization proceeds were not high enough, or were used for
other priorities. And the original system was made more generous than initially
intended. So tackling fiscal issues during the transition was a critical lesson. In
the future labor markets needed to support longer working lives. However, trust in the system was now low.
                                Donghyun Park, Asian Development Bank, spoke about the challenge of rapid
                                aging in Asia. Coverage, adequacy and indeed equity are lacking, while public
                                pension costs are expected to rise sharply. Urgent structural responses to
                                ageing populations are needed; increasing the credibility and reach of funded
                                pension systems, investment professionalization, cost reduction, and removing
                                serious barriers to labor market participation by older workers. Despite the very
                                rapid speed of developing and demographic transition there was so far less
                                reform than would be expected. Leaders
                                needed to seize the challenges urgently. In
discussions the session chair Heinz Rudolph, World Bank Group, observed
that policy makers need to act now while a trade-off is possible rather than
wait until drastic action was needed. Other comments included the need to
use general taxation to reduce payroll taxes for state pensions to allow
contributions to private pensions, the need to focus more on politics and
communication, promoting strong evidence that longer working lives do not
mean fewer jobs for the young and the continuing role of intra-family support.
At lunch George Symeonidis,         Hellenic Actuarial Authority, Greece spoke on the
Greek experience. Unsustainable growth in PAYG costs and promises had finally to be
tackled after the 2008 crisis. The EC’s policy of increasing working lives and retirement
ages as well as reducing excessive employer contributions and the generosity of PAYG
promises have been largely adopted. But the changes were very tough because the
issues had been ignored for too long. Proactive reform is essential.

Session 3: Challenges and Innovations in Expanding Coverage
Maximizing coverage, or financial inclusion, is an essential outcome for pensions.
Brigitte Madrian of Harvard University presented the latest evidence on effective
policies and interventions to increase coverage in voluntary systems . She showed
financial incentives are often much less effective than ‘nudge’ mechanisms like auto-
enrollment. For governments wanting to maximize the efficiency of spending on
retirement, she presented a broad menu of options. Some, like auto-enrolment, have
sizable effects; others, like making plan simple to understand and join, may have less
dramatic impacts, but are still very cost effective. Politics and views on paternalism can
also influence design choices – but this will be very country-specific.
Mariano Bosch, Inter-American Development Bank, presented results from ‘Better
Pensions, Better Jobs’ on Latin America and the Caribbean. The labor market is at the ‘epicenter’ of the
                            problems and solutions due to the challenges of informality at all income levels and
                            across many professions. It was critical to understand the impact of income,
                            occupation and firm size and design policies that would target the specific issues.
                            Simple subsidies or tax relief may be ineffective. Creative solutions – using the media
                            or social pressure for example to increase coverage among domestic workers could
                            work. But always it was important that each intervention was part of a coherent
                            overall pension system. Guatam Bhardwaj, Invest India
                            Micro Pension Services, followed with a case study on
                            increasing coverage in India. There are many challenges
in providing pensions in an economy with 450 million workers but only 30million tax
payers. Over 300million workers are excluded from the formal pension programs. In
addition to informality there are issues of cost, access, literacy and geography to
overcome. The solution uses existing payments and mobile phone infrastructure
which has transformed the access to the poor in remote locations with very irregular
income (see video). Charles Counsell, The Pensions Regulator, UK, explained how auto-enrolment developed
                           from concept to over 3.2 million more pension savers. Employers must offer,
                           contribute to and put workers into pensions automatically. Workers can then choose
                           to opt out. This has reversed the declining trend in coverage. Opt-out rates so far
                           under 10%. He contrasted the focus in the UK on the employer to choose a pension
                           and compliance via the Pension Regulator with the New Zealand approach of default
                           funds and individual choice and compliance by the tax office. In the UK there has
                           been a big focus on educating employers and the supply chain, such as payroll
                           software providers, as well as on individual to deliver high awareness and low opt-
                           outs. Edward Odundo, Kenya Retirement Benefit Authority moderated an
interesting discussion that included how to establish an integrated eco-system of suppliers and savers; whether
auto-enrolment is more than just a second-best to mandatory schemes; appropriate models for emerging
countries with limited but expensive existing coverage; whether sustainable programs exist for the self-
employed; and the mechanics of how the Indian and UK systems work in practice.
Session 4: Global and Regional Reflections Roundtable
                          Ana Revenga, Acting Vice President of Poverty Reduction and
                          Economic Management, World Bank Group moderated a
                          roundtable providing external reflections. Benedict Clements,
                          Division Chief IMF, set out the current and future costs of
                          aging from the IMF’s ‘Equitable and Sustainable Pensions’.
                          Pension expenditure was set to increase by 2.5% of GDP by
                          2050 with health spending going up even more. Many
                          countries had already reformed but there was more to do. A
                          range of policies are needed to ensure cuts in benefit levels do
                          not take all the strain as this would increase risks of poverty.
                           Edward Odundo, CEO, Retirement Benefits Authority, Kenya
                           and President IOPS, highlighted innovations in targeting the
                           informal sector. As in India mobile phone money transfer was
                           central for access and costs. The funds could then be managed
                           by fund managers with custodians to ensure security of
                           accounts. Carlos Ramirez, President, CONSAR, Mexico
                           reminded people about the successes of funded pensions in
                           Latin America, coupled with continuing coverage challenges
                           and the importance of individuals being educated to be more
responsible for their pension provision.
                             Uluc Icoz, Head of Private Pensions, Turkish Treasury, outlined recent changes to
                             replace tax incentives with matching contributions. In the first year of operation
                             more people were contributing, average contributions had increased and
                             withdrawals had decreased. Other reforms were focusing on lowering fees,
                             improving investments and exploring auto-enrolment.
                             Junichi Sakamoto, Chief Adviser, Nomura Research Institute
                             highlighted the strong political opposition in Japan to any
                             ‘privatization’ of social security. There had been a series of
changes to contributions and benefit levels across the pension system which ranged
from the (world’s largest) social security fund through to corporate DB and DC plans.
Although it had been much discussed defining inter-generational equity remained
difficult Finally, Edward Whitehouse, Axia Economics retuned to some of the key
                             modelling in Averting the Old Age Crisis. Understandably in
                             some areas the demographic projects from 1994 were too optimistic but in others
                             aging had been somewhat slower. Multiple reforms had helped to improve the
                             situation compared to that which would have been faced. But there was still much to
                             do. It was critical to create diversified systems with broad based but affordable public
                             provision matched by increased private saving. A range of
                             questions and comments then followed. Some worried
                             increased retirement ages would reduce youth employment
                             but in fact the evidence did not support this fear. More
attention was needed on politics and simple communications as well as the technical
demands of the IT and infrastructure at the other end of the spectrum. Tax subsidies for
higher income savers seemed poor value for money. Overall, there was a need to
improve the clarity on ultimate objectives and a focus on tools to target different
problems as well as a call for more focus on the most challenging country cases.
Session 5: Delivering Better Costs and Investment
Improving net of fee returns improves the efficiency of a system and can
contribute to easing the adequacy-sustainability-coverage issues discussed on the
first day. Mike Heale, CEM Benchmarking, used their unique long run data base
to show what drives costs and returns. Simply put high costs do not lead to
higher investment performance. The best long run predictor of investment returns
net of fees is the level of fees themselves. This is because it is possible, particularly
in large organizations, to combine both low costs and good investment
performance. This can be from buying power with external managers or by having
the scale to do investment in-house. The wide cost dispersion of similar services
                              shows the scope to improve outcomes for many funds. Will Price, World Bank
                              Group, then considered how market structure, scale, expertise and governance
                              act as drivers of improved costs and investments. He argued it was critical to pay
                              attention to the full value chain of a pension system – to demand and supply and
                              distribution channels. Good systems focus on all aspects. These include strong
                              governance in member interest, large scale (which can be done even in small
                              countries), rigorous expertize and sensible direct controls of fees. Evidence of good
                              practice ranged from state, employer based and private systems in Sweden,
                              Denmark and (parts of) the US and UK through to
                              Kosovo, Peru and Malaysia. Annika Sunden,
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency, provided a case study
on Sweden. The public pension and mandatory DC ‘second pillar’ share an
administration platform that keeps costs low. The second pillar uses a blind
accounts or central clearing house model so that fund managers receive bulk
transfers to invest but do not manage individual member accounts or know their
individual customers. Fund managers have to provide fee discounts that rise with
assets under management – ensuring scale economies are passed on to
members. And a default fund ‘AP7-Safa’ was established with a low cost
diversified investment focused on long run returns. It has outperformed the market average after costs and
operates at around 12 basis points compared to over 30 basis points for the average fund. Michel Canta,
                           Superintendent of Insurance and Pensions, SBS, Peru, considered the impact on
                           costs and investment of auctions in Peru and Chile. In both countries the auctions
                           had reduced costs. In Chile the cost reductions apply only to new entrants to the
                           market. In Peru the cost reduction must be applied to all members of the successful
                           firm. But, in addition, even unsuccessful bidders must offer their existing members the
                           (lower) fees at which they bid into the auction. The full impact in Peru has been
                           limited by the existence of the public Pay As You Go system as a default ‘choice’ (even
                           though it is unsustainable) so fewer people have private
                           pensions. The discussion chaired by Carlos Ramirez,
                           CONSAR Mexico probed issues including: the lack of
persistence in pension fund performance; how to reduce costs of UCITs providers,
and ensure lower cost are passed to consumers; the role of voluntary savings and
fee caps in Sweden; the power of pension funds internalizing fund management to
drive down costs; how to achieve increased scale; and how to cope where lack of
scale in funds or markets is inherent. Participants heard examples from India
where good design allowed access to professional fund management at low cost.
Session 6: Investment: Global Trends to Practical Infrastructure Projects
This session continued the theme of improving the efficiency of pension systems by
looking at investments in practice. John Rogers, CFA Institute delivered a broad
ranging overview of investment practice and challenges pre and post crisis. He
explained how sophisticated investors are moving away from policies built on fixed
allocations to narrowly defined asset classes. It was essential to manage individual
behavioral flaws such as suspending re-balancing during extreme periods and
herding. Overall he saw a return to an era of Fiduciary Capitalism based on long run
owners investing for the long term. Fiona Stewart, World Bank Group, then
                               started a focus on the potential role of pension
                               funds in infrastructure investment. She explored
                               the wide range of different project types with different risk-return profiles which
                               are suited to some country circumstances but not others. She advanced a
                               decision tree of questions that could be used to determine which approach might
                               work depending on country circumstances. This work was aimed at helping
                               countries at all levels of development assess how best to develop good quality
                               projects. Kirstine Damkjaer, Global Infrastructure Fund, IFC, then spoke about
                               building the capability to develop infrastructure
investments. She noted that the infrastructure funds market is still at an early stage
of development and may not meet institutional investor needs. She highlighted that
most funds are in developed countries. There are many ways countries can package
investment with different amounts of risk transference and potential liquidity. The
                                 IFC’s Global Infrastructure Fund had one of the
                                 longest track records and provides features pension
                                 funds should be looking for in such investment.
                                Clemente Del Valle, Financiera de Desarrollo
                                Nacional, Colombia, provided a case study on developing investment in
                                transport infrastructure. The Colombian Government responded with an
                                ambitious public private partnership model that learnt from past failures.
                                Critical to its design was a clear regulatory framework, clarity about risk sharing
                                and improvements in the capacity of the organizing institutions. The
                                investment instruments will have strong governance and investor protection
                                mechanisms to make investment secure enough for pension fund participation.
The ensuing discussion was moderated by Satheesh Sundararajan, World Bank Group. There was much focus
on how the daily pricing required in many DC pension funds and IFRS rules on market to market valuation make
                                it difficult for pension funds to invest in infrastructure. There were examples of
                                Government guarantees assisting infrastructure
                                investment but concerns that such investment
                                would not assist diversification in portfolios
                                already heavily exposed to sovereign debt risk.
                                There was a call for some best/international
                                standards for infrastructure instruments. Issues
                                of capacity building, governance and good
                                regulatory design were also covered. A key
                                takeaway was the need to build better data and
have a rigorous and systematic approach to ensuring infrastructure was a good investment for pension funds.
At lunch,      Stephen Goss, US Social Security Administration, set out the funding
challenges to the US Social Security pillar. He showed that longevity was responsible
for only 20% of the funding pressures. Far more important were the very significant
falls in the birth rate. Falling fertility rates have caused a permanent rise in retirement
cost per worker that requires lower benefits paid or higher contributions. The issue
was politically very contentious and there was no sign of a ‘grand bargain’ yet. But the
issue was too important to leave so the debate would continue.

Session 7: The Payout Phase: Products, Providers and Structures
This session highlighting how many of the insights into improving the accumulation phase for members are
                              directly applicable for the payout phase. Edward Whitehouse, AXIA Economics,
                              focused on the size and nature of the retirement income challenge. Using the
                              replacement rate he showed the variation in outcomes across OECD countries using
                              the latest system parameters. He then highlighted the need to look at both average
                              contribution rates and average number of years of contributions in order to find a
                              combination that would deliver a decent retirement income. Clearly if people
                              contributed for fewer years their average contributions had to rise. Echoing earlier
                              contributions he highlighted how tax incentives are
                              often expensive ways to improve coverage and
                              contributions to fill a pension gap – and auto-
enrolment and mandating enrolment may be more effective. Craig Thorburn
World Bank Group, noted that the design of the payout phase needs to be
integrated with the goals and targets of the accumulation phase. This emphasized
the message from other speakers about the need for clarity about long term
objectives – and ensuring different parts of the system delivered both poverty
                              reduction and ensured adequate income smoothing in
                              retirement. He reviewed different payout options and who could provide them
                              across the public and private sectors. He then considered distribution and advice
                              issues and noted how simple it was for advisers to manipulate projected payout
                              illustrations. Annika Sunden, Swedish International Development Cooperation
                              Agency, explained the automatic balancing in the Swedish system to adjust for
                              lower investment returns or increased longevity. This was not risk sharing so much
                              as risk smoothing as individuals ultimately saw the impact of investment returns or
                              rising longevity in their pension payouts. A recent
                              temporary change in the default option at retirement
had seen a massive temporary change in the ‘choice’ of retirement product –
emphasizing again the power of defaults to direct consumers to a particular option.
Carmen Hoyo, BBVA, then outlined the role of private sector providers in
delivering annuities in developing and developed markets in Latin America. She
contrasted a range of features of the Chilean, Peruvian, Colombian and Mexican
markets from capital rules to mortality assumptions. She noted the need to raise
the levels of voluntary saving and hence financial education, and considered the
use of intelligent pricing. The ensuing discussion, chaired by Roberto Rocha, World Bank Group, focused on:
having the right menu of payout choices for country circumstances; intelligent pricing; the lessons from
behavioural economics given the greater complexity of payout products; the merits of risk sharing as opposed to
age-indexing of pensions; the negative implications of recently announced changes to UK payout rules; and the
poor track record of reverse mortgages which highlighted they were not a magic solution.
Session 8: Bringing it all together: Lessons, Solutions and Outcomes
This session focused on the overall themes of learning lessons, developing solutions
and delivering outcomes that matter. Richard Jackson, Senior Associate Center for
Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), warned global ageing would challenge the
ability to provide decent living-standards for the old without a crushing burden on the
young. The CSIS’ ‘Global Ageing Preparedness Index’ is based on projections of total
government benefit spending and total household income by age. Most countries
appear to be making worrisome trade-offs between adequacy and sustainability. Of
                            20 countries in the index, only Australia, Canada, Chile and
                            Sweden score well on both dimensions of “ageing preparedness.” (See video) Solange
                            Berstein, former Superintendent of Pensions, Chile and Chair of IOPS Technical
                            Committee, returned to the core purpose of pensions as savings or insurance. The
                            Bismarckian model had been adopted by many countries as insurance for the unlikely
                            event of a worker outliving their productive capability. Now the aim was that
                            everyone could have a retirement period. So savings had
                            become a dominant driver – but without the full costs
                            always being appreciated. She summarized relevant
experience in Chile, including the negative impacts of affiliate portfolio choice where
most people who switch performed badly. Will Price and Robert Palacios of the World
                            Bank Group highlighted the importance of a broad based
                            and diversified approach to building strong pension
                            systems. There was a need to bring together the best mix of
                            public and private provision to get the best deal for current
                            and future pensioners. We had learnt a lot in the past 20 years. Social pensions had a
                            clear role but the costs needed to be controlled – following clear lessons from the
                            health sector on how to achieve universal coverage. Instead of a blue print for all
                            countries there was a need for rigorous review of objectives and conditions followed
by carefully design and implementation to deliver objectives in a politically and technically sustainable way.
Discussion then focused on: the challenges of economies where 60-80% population
make pension contributions for less than 20 weeks a year; the inability to separate
informality and ageing challenges and the importance of good labor markets; the
importance of improving compliance with taxation and pensions, calls for standardized
                             reporting of unfunded pension liabilities; the scope to use
                             pension or income transfers through social pension or social
                             assistance. A key conclusion was that there is no one recipe
                             for every country. Closing this part of the Conference, Loïc
                             Chiquier, World Bank Group noted the persistent theme of
                             clarity on the long run objectives of sustainability, adequacy and coverage with
                             efficiency and security. It is a tricky equation but a clear message was the need to
                             use all parts of the toolkit. A strong political economy focus
                             was essential to build a lasting consensus. So was a
detailed focus on implementation, including mobile and IT solutions that could drive
access and inclusion at low cost. The roundtable to come would continue the
exchange of practical reform examples from countries across the income scale seen
so far in the conference. The 7th Conference would showcase successful solutions and
collaborations with partners. Better pensions for all generations would provide an
important contribution to eradicate poverty and boost shared prosperity sustainably.
Day Three: April 4 Roundtable on Regulation and Supervision.
                           The final day of the conference moved to a seminar format
                           to focus on improving supervision and strategy, investments
                           and data. It focused on issues and solutions encountered in
                           multiple examples of practical reform programs. Introducing
                           it, Fiona Stewart, World Bank Group and Edgar Robles,
                           Superintendent SUPEN, Costa Rica and IOPS Vice-President,
                           noted that low investment yields since the 2008 crisis and the
                           administrative costs of pension funds remain big issues.
Compliance costs make systems so expensive that there are high barriers to entry and less competition. So there
was a constant need to do more with less and to ensure that supervisors allocated their scarce resources
effectively. Limitations of individual choice and the need to deliver pensions in all countries were also critical.
In Part 1 Michael Hafeman, Chair, Toronto Centre Insurance and Pensions Advisory
Board, presented work conducted with Will Price and John Aschcroft on an Outcomes
Based Assessment Framework (OBA) and the arguments for Risk Based Supervision
(RBS). The OBA approach aimed to address the issues raised in the first 2 days of the
conference of how to set a clear long run objective and then build a system that
brought international best practice tailored to a country’s specific circumstances. He
then showed how RBS should be seen in this broader context as a way for supervisors
to increase their capacity to drive change, strengthen their ability to deal with
challenges and leverage off the knowledge of others. RBS was not about eliminating all
compliance and equally it was not about light-touch regulation. He highlighted the range of tools to implement
RBS approaches. His own institution - the Toronto Centre – worked with regulators and supervisors across the
                            world. The Centre focused on giving participants the strategic and technical tools to
                            implement RBS, emphasizing the importance of improving governance across the
                            industry as a critical way to reduce risks to members and the importance of not using
                            any tools or rules mechanistically. In discussions that followed delegates from the
                            Albanian, Egyptian, Hong Kong, Mexican and Turkish supervisory authorities and
                            John Ashcroft, senior consultant, then shared experiences. These were of countries
                            considering or already implementing RBS. Insights included the importance of capacity
                            building and understanding that a risk-based approach is about strengthening capacity
                            to protect members by ensuring that new risks or behaviors will be tackled as they
                            arise. Peter Penzes from Slovakia summarized some EU work on consumer protection
                            in which they have been playing a leading role. The member or consumer needed to
have confidence in the long run products that were essential for retirement income. Further points made in the
discussion included: the need for RBS to focus on reversing the damaging short-term bias of pension investment
managers; the big differences in the design of RBS between countries with large
numbers of heterogeneous or occupational funds and those with mandatory systems
and a small number of funds; how RBS can apply to governmental pension
institutions; and fraud risks in long term investment products.
Part 2 of the Roundtable considered the investment governance and benchmark
strategies, introduced by Heinz Rudolph. He noted how the open fund model, that
assumed effective competition on investment returns, had in practice resulted in a
focus on the short term rather than strategic asset allocation. He explained that it was
essential for pension funds to have a clear long run objective to deliver a future
replacement rate target since this was what the member ultimately cared about. Benchmarks could be designed
that would target this long run outcome and against which pension fund performance would be assessed rather
                             than short term year on year changes. Solange Berstein, Chile reviewed the
                             investment experience in Chile. She noted that as pension funds increased in size
                             diversified portfolios become increasingly important, as does ensuring that there is
                             good investment governance in the best interests
                             of affiliates. Delivering a long run outlook was
                             essential to good retirement income provision.
                             Luis Mario Hernandes, Consar, Mexico, explained
                             latest developments in their supervisory
                             approach. They had moved away from the
                             previous focus on value at risk (VaR). This was
because the aim of controlling short-run volatility could have negative
consequences for building long run portfolios. The VAR was now only used to
control the use of derivatives. Discussion then ranged over: the importance of
combining a focus on governance with the use of benchmarks; educating politicians on what constitutes
effective long term investment; whether the herding that would accompany benchmark portfolios is desirable;
and the scope for financial education to drive better competition – on which views differed.
Part 3, moved to the important technical issues involved in recordkeeping and payment infrastructure,
introduced by Oleksiy Sluchynsky, World Bank Group. He noted that the core business is liability management
whether in DB or DC – and pension funds need data to establish accurately their liabilities. He reviewed the
problems associated with obtaining, validating and preserving data of the necessary quality, and the approaches
                              adopted to address these issues. The core principle was that it is best to start with
                              clean data than to try to clean it later. The contrasting experiences of Tanzania,
                              Kenya, Turkey, the UK, New Zealand, Poland and Egypt were then shared. Despite
                              the differences there were also a surprising number of common themes. These
                              included the need for good tax or ID numbers,
                              ensuring employers contributions were accurately
                              and properly paid (utilizing the tax authority can be
                              effective), and how to deal with duplicate and
                              dormant accounts. The UK experience in building
                              compliance for the new auto-enrolment reforms
highlighted that even if a tax authority was in theory the right organization in
theory (and had been in New Zealand as explained by Darren Ryder) it was
critical to assess if its current capacity and other tasks would allow it to take on
an important new function. Developing countries could have an advantage over those with long standing
pension systems that were originally designed for paper because they could start with a modern IT enabled
approach. The experience in Kenya and India showed that much of the payments
infrastructure might be able to use new mobile and IT platforms – removing the need
for costly distribution networks and error prone record keeping systems. The range of
the discussion on the final day mirrored one of the key messages from the first two
days – with a need to consider issues of the ultimate long run outcomes and the
political economy of pensions through to the essential practical issues of data,
information and IT that underpin a well-built system. Closing the Roundtable Fiona
Stewart welcomed the lively interaction and many country experiences shared. She
thanked everyone and wished them well in future projects that would put the
discussions at the conference into practice and be material for the next Conference.
