 Do the poor pay twice?
Impact of Corruption in the Kyrgyz Republic
         A Poverty and Social Impact Analysis

                  October 14, 2016
CONTENTS

List of Figures……………………………………………………………………………..……….. 2
List of Tables……………………………………………………………………………………….. 2
List of Boxes……………………………………………………………………………………….. 2
List of Acronyms…………………………………………………………………………………… 2
Executive Summary….. ……………………………………………………………………………. 3
1.       Introduction….. ……………………………………………………………………………. 5
2.       Defining Petty Corruption…….. …………………………………………………………... 6
         2.1.    Corruption as a Key Governance Challenge…….……………………….……….. 7
         2.2.    Petty Corruption and Poverty: a Hypothesis…….…………………………………9
3.       Study Methodology…………………………………………………………………………10
         3.1.    Survey Instrument and Sampling……… …………………………………………. 10
         3.2.    Measuring Consumption……….………………………………………………….. 11
4.       Summary of Results………...……………………………………………………………… 12
         4.1.    Perceptions of Corruption in Kyrgyz Republic……..…………………………….. 13
         4.2.    Perceptions of Commonality of Informal Payments……………………………….14
         4.3.    Experiences with Corruption……………………………………………………… 16
         4.4.    Who is Most Vulnerable to Corruption? ........……………………………………..19
         4.5.    Costs of Corruption………………………………………………………………... 22
5.       Discussion and Conclusions…………………………………………………..................… 24
References …………………..…………………………………………………………………….... 28
Annex………..……………………………………………………………………………………… 30
         Annex 1: Survey to Survey Imputation………………………………………………….… 30
         Annex 2: Service Level Measures ………..……………………………………………...... 31
         Annex 3: Focus Group Questionnaire ….…………………………………………………..34




                                          1
LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1. WGI Control of Corruption 2013 (Eastern Europe and Central Asia) .......................................... 7
Figure 2. Frequency of Informal payments when Interacting with the Authorities (2006 & 2010) ............. 8
Figure 3. Percentage of Respondents who have Paid a Bribe while Accessing the Service
in the Last Year (2013) ................................................................................................................................. 8
Figure 4. Perceptions of Corruption as a Problem by Consumption........................................................... 13
Figure 5. Perceived Frequency of Bribes for Different Types of Interactions with Government ............... 14
Figure 6. Graft Index by Service ................................................................................................................ 17
Figure 7. Percentage of Interactions with Government Agencies in which a Bribe was
Requested by Consumption Level .............................................................................................................. 19
Figure 8. Bribe Pay Rate: Percentage who Paid a Bribe when Requested.................................................. 20
Figure 9. Bribes as a Percentage of Annual Household Consumption ....................................................... 23



LIST OF TABLES

Table 1. Geographic Distribution of Respondents ...................................................................................... 11
Table 2. Model Sample Demographics by Consumption Quintile ............................................................. 12
Table 3. Graft Index by Strata..................................................................................................................... 16
Table 4. Costs of Corruption by Consumption Quintile ............................................................................. 22
Table 5. Consumption Estimates and Bribes as a Share of Consumption .................................................. 23



LIST OF BOXES

Box 1. Causes of Corruption in the Kyrgyz Republic ................................................................................ 15
Box 2. Corruption Mechanisms: Who Initiates the Transaction? ............................................................... 18
Box 3. How to Combat Corruption: Results of the Focus Groups.............................................................. 26



LIST OF ACRONYMS

  CAPI              Computer Assisted Personal Interviewing
  CSO               Civil Society Organization
  EBRD              European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
  GCB               Global Corruption Barometer (Transparency International)
  KIHS              Kyrgyz Republic Integrated Household Survey
  LiTS              Life in Transition Survey (European Bank for Reconstruction and Development)
  NSDS              National Sustainable Development Strategy
  PSIA              Poverty and Social Impact Analysis



                                                                            2
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The report was prepared by a team co-led by Kimberly Johns (Senior Public Sector Specialist, Governance
Global Practice) and Sarosh Sattar (Senior Economist, Poverty and Equity Global Practice). The team was
composed of Aibek Baibagysh Uulu (Consultant), Branco Ponomariov (Consultant), Alisher Khamidov
(Consultant), Minh Cong Nguyen (Economist), and Lilia Saetova (Consultant). The report was prepared
under the framework of the Central Asia Poverty and Equity Program. The analysis was partially funded
by the Poverty and Social Impact Analysis Multi-Donor Trust Fund.

The report was prepared under the guidance of Adrian Fozzard (Practice Manager, Governance Global
Practice), Carolina Sanchez-Paramo (Practice Manager, Poverty and Equity Global Practice) and Jean-
Michel Happi (Country Manager, Kyrgyz Republic). The team is grateful for comments and technical
advice provided by David Bernstein (Lead Public Sector Specialist , Governance GP), Judy Yang
(Economist, Poverty GP) and participants of Poverty and Social Impact Analysis workshop on Poverty and
Corruption in the Kyrgyz Republic. Excellent administrative support was provided by Helena Makarenko
and Nargiza Tynybekova.




                                                  3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This study examines household perceptions and experiences with corruption in the Kyrgyz Republic.
The aims of the study are two-fold: first, to assess the level of administrative corruption in public service
agencies, and second, to assess the impact of corruption on different income groups. This Poverty and
Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) included a nationally-representative survey covering over 1,000 households
in all regions of the country and focus groups with citizens, civil society organization (CSO) representatives,
media and students.
The fight against corruption is a key objective of the National Sustainable Development Strategy for
2013-17. This strategy states that the Government’s goal is to be in the top 50 of the least corrupt countries
on the Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index ranking by 2017. The study demonstrates
the importance of the Kyrgyz Government anti-corruption agenda by revealing the extent of corruption and
its impact on the poor.
The study demonstrates the impact of petty corruption on the economic well-being of the poorest
citizens. Often petty corruption represents a form of rent-seeking demanded by civil servants for access to
public services, for example, healthcare, education and pensions. Inability to access these services will
impact the economic wellbeing of citizens. The poorest citizens are unlikely to be able to access alternative
services, such as private hospitals. These poorest citizens will also be least likely to offer bribes simply to
speed up a service they might receive anyway without a bribe. The study explores the dynamics and unique
impacts of such rent-seeking, if any, on different income groups.
The results of the analysis shed light on the frequency and level of informal payments to obtain public
services, as well as the impact on household consumption. Main findings:
       Similar to previous studies, the survey revealed a vast majority (91%) perceive corruption as a
        problem in the Kyrgyz Republic. Forty nine percent of respondents question the sincerity of the
        government’s desire and will to combat corruption and only 26% believe that the government’s
        corruption strategies were effective.
       Nationwide, nearly one in six interactions with public service agencies are characterized by
        corruption. Based on interactions with 18 different public service agencies, the national level graft
        index (measured as the proportion of interactions with government officials in which a bribe was
        expected or requested) is 16%.
       Traffic police had the highest incidence of graft, followed by non-traffic police and the National
        Registration Office. Focus group participants named health, education, and social services such as
        pensions as the most corrupt.
       The majority of respondents (39%) state that most commonly, a government agent indicates or asks
        for a payment, while 33% offer payment on its own accord. The focus group participants also noted
        the role of the citizenry in perpetuating corruption.
       Examining the experiences with corruption by consumption quintile, two groups are most exposed
        to petty corruption: the poorest quintile and the richest. The poorest quintile experienced corruption
        20% of the time while accessing public services; the richest experienced corruption 22% of the
        time, both above the country average of 16%. While these two groups pay more often, evidence
        shows they likely do so for different reasons.


                                                      4
       The economic impact of informal payments is substantial: for the poorest quintile, bribes accounted
        for 6.3% of their estimated annual household consumption. For the poorest households, this is twice
        the average spent on electricity for 2012.

The results of the PSIA reveal important differences in how different income groups are vulnerable
to and affected by corruption in the Kyrgyz Republic. While overall corruption related attitudes do not
appear particularly sensitive to household characteristics and socioeconomic descriptors, actual experiences
with corruption and the costs of corruption differ across consumption groups. The findings support the
hypothesis that the poorest citizens’ are likely to be more vulnerable to rent -extraction through petty
corruption than richer strata of society because their ‘ability to pay’ is the lowest.
This investigation of the differences in the dynamics of corruption between government officials and
citizens of different economic groups informs the design of mechanisms for tackling corruption. For
example, if the poor are particularly targeted for bribes, policy prescriptions could seek to at least indirectly
minimize the status and information differentials between officials and citizens. These mechanisms include
both supply and demand side interventions. On the supply side, corrective actions aiming to discourage
corruption among civil servants include better training and enforcement mechanisms for corrupt behavior.
On the demand side, interventions can include outreach and educating citizens about their rights, and
providing clear and accountable avenues for appeal and corrective action. Focus group participants offered
suggestions for reducing corruption, including enhanced training of civil service, and other actions that
target the youth of the Kyrgyz Republic through outreach and media campaigns to show the negative
consequences of corruption to foster change in the next generation.




                                                       5
1. INTRODUCTION
Corruption is a significant challenge to the social, political, and economic development of the Kyrgyz
Republic and is a high priority for the current Government. In an effort to combat corruption, the
Government committed to a broad medium-term anti-corruption program in 2013. The National Sustainable
Development Strategy (NSDS) for 2013-17 identifies combating corruption as a key objective, and
prioritizes improved governance for the country’s economic development. The anti-corruption program is
based on three broad priorities: elimination of corruption schemes; reform and modernization of public
sector governance in order to increase transparency and accountability of the government bodies; and
interaction with the civil society in order to combat corruption in public sector 1. The NSDS commits the
Kyrgyz Republic to become one of the top 50 least corrupt countries on the Transparency International
Corruption Perceptions Index by 2017.
This report presents the results of a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis conducted in the Kyrgyz
Republic. The objective of the study is to examine the impact of petty corruption on Kyrgyz households.
The aim of the study is two-fold: first, to determine the extent of administrative (petty) corruption2 in the
Kyrgyz Republic; and second, to construct the profile of the affected households, including by
socioeconomic status.
Of particular interest for this analysis is the relationship between petty corruption and the economic
well-being of the poorest citizens. Often petty corruption represents a form of rent-seeking3 that limits and
increases the cost of access to government services, for example health and education services. It is
important to identify the “signature” of such rent-seeking, if any, on different classes and income groups.
Inability to access services impacts citizens’ immediate wellbeing and their economic prospects. The
poorest citizens may be least likely to offer bribes simply to speed up a service they might receive anyway
without a bribe and so may be the most adversely affected by these practices. Investigation of the different
dynamics of corruption between government officials and citizens of different social classes may inform
the design of mechanisms for alleviating corruption.
In order to examine the extent of corruption and its impacts on household welfare, a nationally-
representative survey was implemented in late 2014. The survey instrument was based on the World
Bank Governance Diagnostic that has been implemented in Latin American and African countries including
Peru, Zambia, and Sierra Leone. The survey included questions on perceptions of corruption and as well as
experiential questions regarding interactions with public service agencies and providers. The quantitative
results are supplemented by qualitative information gathered through four focus groups held in Bishkek
and Osh.
The report is structured as follows: Section 2 provides background on the country context and
definitions of corruption, as well as the proposed hypothesis of the study. Section 3 provides detail on
the study methodology, including the survey sample and discussion of the consumption estimation. Section
4 presents an analysis of the experiences of different income and demographic groups with corruption


1
  National Council for Sustainable Development of the Kyrgyz Republic, 2013, Ch. 2
2
  For the purpose of the survey, corruption was defined as “the abuse of public power for private gain, through
dishonest or illegal behavior by government officials or service providers”.
3
  Understood as “the direct use or waste of economic resources for non-economic gains” (Gallagher, 1991)

                                                      6
including statistics from the nationwide survey supplemented by focus group evidence. The report
concludes with a discussion of the results and next steps.



2.   DEFINING PETTY CORRUPTION
In the literature and in practice, corruption is seen as an aberration from a prescriptive model of
public administration in the modern state, where administrative practices are rational, transparent,
universally binding and accountable (e.g., Bardhan, 1997; Granovetter, 2007; Leff, 1964). Absence of
real state capacity for direct management and control cultivates corruption, leaving much room for
discretion for state agents, resulting in negative governance outcomes (Breen & Gillanders, 2012). Petty
corruption, defined as small acts of rent-seeking by civil servants, captures only one aspect of the corruption
that may take place. However, it is also the form of corruption that a majority of citizens experience directly.
Not all instances of petty corruption can be classified as “rent seeking” by government officials. While
it is plausible that civil servants might withhold or delay a service they are expected to provide by law
unless a bribe is provided, administrative corruption by definition also means influencing the
implementation of existing laws (Knack, 2007). For example, citizens might provide bribes not only under
pressure from government officials, but could do so in order to influence bureaucratic rules or decisions in
their favor, to receive speedier service, or “jump the queue” by paying bribes to circumvent the rules
(Bardhan, 1997). In such cases, it could be argued that corruption can improve efficiency. For instance, if
paying bribes leads to outcomes sought by citizens or economic agents that would not be obtained otherwise
or only with great delay (Leff, 1964).
With regards to citizens, the impacts of corruption are less ambiguous than for businesses or other
stakeholders. While it is plausible that corruption may be efficient from businesses’ point of view (e.g.,
Hellman, Jones, & Kaufmann, 2003; Leff, 1964), from the point of view of citizens it is difficult to envision
a scenario where petty corruption does not represent a burden or an implicit tax on consumption. If a citizen
needs to pay a bribe to access a service that is nominally free, the bribe paid is diverted from other
consumption. If a citizen pays a bribe to receive a faster or preferential treatment, the bribe still represents
an implicit “tax”, resulting from limited government capacity to satisfy demand for services. Only in cases
where citizens paying bribes do so in order to achieve an illegal or improper end (e.g. to falsify the number
of years work in order to qualify for higher pensions) it is plausible to talk of corruption as “efficient”
practice optimizing the well-being of participating agents (though not society as a whole).



2.1.    CORRUPTION AS A KEY GOVERNANCE CHALLENGE

Corruption is a recognized problem for both government and citizens in the Kyrgyz Republic. The
results of a 2015 IRI poll showed that 93% of citizens identified corruption as a big problem for the country4.
The Kyrgyz Republic has consistently ranked below the Europe and Central Asia regional average on the
World Governance Control of Corruption indicator, most recently scoring in the 11th percentile in 2013 (see

4
 http://www.iri.org/resource/iri-kyrgyzstan-poll-kyrgyz-concerned-over-corruption-supportive-democratic-
development

                                                        7
Figure 1). Other global indicators also show room for improvement: Kyrgyz Republic is ranked 136th out
of 175 countries in the 2014 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index5.


Figure 1. WGI Control of Corruption 2013 (Eastern Europe and Central Asia)

    100
     80
     60
     40
     20
      0



Source: World Governance Indicators, 2014



One reason for the country’s poor performance on these indicators is the prevalence of petty
corruption. Evidence from multiple sources reveals high incidence of corruption in key public services
and institutions, with police, education, health services and the judiciary consistently listed as among the
institutions perceived or experienced as most corrupt. For example, according to the Life in Transition
Survey (LiTS) completed in 2006 and 2010, informal payments to obtain certain public services rose
dramatically from 2006-2010 (see Figure 2). More recently, the 2013 Global Corruption Barometer (GCB)
found that 45 percent of Kyrgyz respondents admitted that they paid a bribe while accessing public services.
In both the LiTS and the GCB, key public services such as education and healthcare are characterized by
high levels of informal payments (see Figure 3). A survey conducted by the Kyrgyz Ministry of Economy
published in 2014 showed 50% of citizens and 56% of entrepreneurs reported having to make an informal
payment in the last three years6.




5
 http://www.transparency.org/cpi2014/results
6
 CAIC consulting (2014). "Corruption in Kyrgyzstan: prevalence, causes, and potential remedies". Ministry of the
Economy of the Kyrgyz Republic.



                                                        8
Figure 2. Frequency of Informal payments when interacting with the authorities (2006 & 2010)

                                                                                      49               49
              41
                              36                                    36
                                                 32                                                                                   32
                                                                                28                28                  28
         24              22
                                           17
                                                               13                                                11              13



       Road police    Request official    Civil Courts        Primary or       Vocational     Public Health   Unemployment   Other social
                     documents from                           Secondary        education        System           benefits  security benefits
                        authorities                           Education

                                                                      2006     2010


Source: EBRD Life in Transition 2006-2010



Figure 3. Percentage of Respondents who have Paid a Bribe while Accessing the Service in the Last
Year (2013)


                               Police                                                                                                 61%
                           Judiciary                                                                                    52%
               Education Services                                                                                  48%
    Medical and Health Services                                                                        38%
                     Land Services                                                                34%
    Registry and Permit Services                                                            29%
                      Tax Revenue                                                     26%
                              Utilities                  6%


Source: Transparency International Global Corruption Barometer, 2013


The prevalence of corruption appears to be worsening despite the government’s efforts. The 2013
Global Corruption Barometer showed 20% of respondents indicated corruption had “increased a lot” in the
past two years. 7 This downward trend signals an implementation gap between the Government’s anti-
corruption program and the citizen experience with different public agencies. The 2015 IRI poll showed
that 73% of respondents did not think the government was doing enough to fight corruption.8
The deterioration in the perceived and experienced level of corruption is not unique to Kyrgyz
Republic. A recent Gallup poll showed that a majority of respondents in 108 out of 129 countries surveyed
reported that corruption is pervasive in their governments, including many developed countries (Gallup,


7
 http://www.transparency.org/gcb2013/country/?country=Kyrgyz Republic
8
          http://www.iri.org/resource/iri-kyrgyzstan-poll-kyrgyz-concerned-over-corruption-supportive-democratic-
development

                                                                           9
2015). Some of these countries also have experienced an increase in perceptions that corruption has
worsened between 2012 and 2014, including Australia and Spain (Transparency International, 2015).


2.2.     PETTY CORRUPTION AND POVERTY: A HYPOTHESIS

The proposed hypothesis is that the poorest citizens are more vulnerable to rent-extraction through
petty corruption than richer strata of society because they are the least ‘able to pay’. Corruption as
rent-seeking or victimization of the lowest strata is conceptually distinguished from the dynamics of bribe-
making and bribe-taking occurring in interactions between civil servants and citizens in upper income and
consumption brackets. Such distinctions are likely as the configuration of social networks and social status
differences between those who need favors and those in a position to provide them strongly shapes the
modalities, the costs, and likelihoods of such favors being provided (Granovetter, 2007), as well as the
extent to which they are perceived as corruption.
Prior studies suggest the possibility that the poorest strata are more vulnerable to bribery and
corruption. In a study in Peru and Uganda, Hunt and Laszlo (2012) show that the poor households spend
larger shares of their income on bribes, even though richer households use more government services and
bribe more frequently. Justesen and Bjornskov (2014), studying 18 countries in Africa, find that the poor
are much more likely to experience having to pay bribes. Others have found that vulnerable populations are
more likely to have to pay a bribe, e.g. crime victims (e.g., Hunt, 2007), or households particularly heavily
affected by an economic crisis (e.g., Ivlevs & Hinks, 2015).
In the Kyrgyz Republic, civil service wages are low and this may lead some civil servants to
supplement their income through informal payments.9 Those appointing civil servants acknowledge
that wages are unrealistically low and expect some income supplementation through accepting bribes. Some
appointments are the result of a bribery provided by the appointee, who in turn recoups their “investment”
in securing the position by engaging in bribes (e.g., Liebert, 2014). These practices are not unique to Kyrgyz
Republic, but fairly common throughout the world, including in private organizations (Jason, 1977), thus
normalizing corruption (Ashforth & Anand, 2003).
Rent seeking behavior may be influenced by social conditions. Most government officials occupy at
least middling positions in the distribution of income and social capital in Kyrgyz society. As a result they
are likely to interact with citizens below, at, and higher than their class position. Bribe dynamics are likely
to be influenced by the relative social status of the protagonists as suggested by the sociological literature
(e.g., Lomnitz 1988, Lin 2001). In some contexts the acceptance of a bribe is considered an
acknowledgement of social inferiority (Lomnitz, 1988, pp., in her studies in Chile)10. Accordingly, the
extent to which bribery is widespread in a society is partially a reflection of the status differences between
government officials and private economic actors. Specifically, when there is a status difference between
the briber and the government official bribes may be more common than if they are of equal status.


9
  It is empirically established that low civil service wages are correlated with higher degree of corruption (e.g., Van
Rijckeghem & Weder, 2001). Further, substantial increases in wages in general would be required to reduce corruption
exclusively by means of wages (ibid.)
10
   “Material payment in return for favors is graft. It means the absence of any possibility of personal relationship or
having friends in common. Accepting a bribe is an acknowledgment of social inferiority, like accepting a tip or
gratuity” (Lomnitz, 1988:44, cited in Granovetter, 2007).

                                                         10
However, the mechanism of bribery might be different in cases where the briber is of higher status or higher
income, when compared with situations when the person providing the bribe is of lower status or income.
When the bribe giver is from a higher status or income group, the bribe may be simply an expedient way
to receive a service, to reduce waiting time, or even to influence a government decision so that is it more
favorable to the person paying the bribe. In these circumstances, those with higher incomes are less likely
to perceive corruption as a serious problem. When the bride giver is from a lower status or income group,
the motivation for bribery is likely very different. Since the poorest households would not pay a bribe unless
absolutely necessary (i.e. they would be less likely to pay simply to speed up a service), it is likely that
when they pay, this is the result of some degree of pressure coming from the government officials to do so.
In this context, bribery entails rent extraction by government officials and so corruption is likely to be
perceived as a serious problem by lower status and lower income households. The prevalence of corruption
is likely to be the lowest when government officials interact with citizens of roughly the same social status
as themselves - given the similarity in status, bribery would go against the grain of normal social interaction
and thus is more ambiguous and requires more extensive management, buffering, and skill than simple
monetary payments (Granovetter, 2007).



3.     STUDY METHODOLOGY

The study employed a mixed-method approach of a quantitative survey and qualitative data collected
via focus groups. In November of 2014, a nationally–representative survey was administered to 1,080
heads of households in seven oblasts including Bishkek and Osh cities of Kyrgyz Republic11. The survey
results are supplemented by qualitative information gathered from four focus groups. The focus groups
were held in the cities of Bishkek and Osh to gather qualitative information about causes of corruption,
corruption practices and coping mechanisms when faced with corruption.12


3.1.       SURVEY INSTRUMENT AND SAMPLING

The survey instrument was designed to capture data on a number of topics including social
protection, heating and consumption in addition to corruption. The corruption module of the survey
questionnaire was patterned after the World Bank Governance Diagnostic. The survey includes questions
on perceptions of corruption and corruption reporting mechanisms, as well as experiential questions
regarding interactions with 18 different public service agencies. The agencies were chosen based on the
Governance Diagnostic, and were modified to reflect the Kyrgyz context. The survey was piloted and
revised before being launched nationwide. The interviews were conducted using Computer Assisted Personal
Interviewing (CAPI).
The survey sample was designed to be nationally representative, using a sample frame based on
data from the 2009 census. The sample was stratified by urban/rural area and Bishkek City. The



11
     The survey data was collected between November-December 2014.
12   See Annex for focus group questionnaire.

                                                      11
distribution of respondents by strata is shown in Table 113. All households in the data set are assigned
sampling weights reflecting their actual distribution within the population, and all data reported below are
weighted accordingly.


Table 1. Geographic distribution of Respondents
 Region                                    Total                    Urban                 Rural
 Batken                                      72                        36                   36
 Djalal-Abad                                168                        84                   84
 Issyk-Kul                                   84                        48                   36
 Naryn                                       36                        12                   24
 Osh Region                                 108                        24                   84
 Talas                                       36                        12                   24
 Chui                                       120                        48                   72
 Osh city                                    96                        96                     0
 Bishkek                                    360                       360                     0
 Kyrgyz Republic                           1080                       720                  360


3.2.     MEASURING CONSUMPTION

In order to measure the impact of corruption on different income groups, the survey also included a
consumption module to estimate the level of welfare of the household. While the survey did not include
questions on income, the questions on consumption were carefully selected as proxy variables in which to
model estimates of household income. The variables used for the statistical models were based on data
collected by the Kyrgyz Republic’s Integrated Household Survey (KIHS) for 2009-12. The data from the
2014 survey was then entered into the model to estimate consumption levels of the household (see Annex).
The statistical models from the 2014 survey were compared to the results of the KIHS, and were found to
be statistically similar. The model was then used to assign households into welfare quintiles, allowing for
comparison of results across levels of consumption.
The imputed per capita daily consumption estimates allow the tabulation of respondents by
consumption percentile. For the purposes of this analysis, the sample is divided into quintiles. As would
be expected, the characteristics of the households vary across consumption quintiles. Table 2 provides an
illustration of selected socio-demographic characteristics estimated for the different quintiles.




13
  Given the sensitivity of the corruption related questions and others, there was a higher level of non-response and
refusals noted by enumerators in Chui and Issyk-Kul Oblasts, as well as Bishkek city.

                                                         12
Table 2. Model Sample Demographics by Consumption Quintile
                                          1st        2nd        3rd         4th        5th         TOTAL
                                          Quintile   Quintile   Quintile    Quintile   Quintile
 Household size (mean)                    5.6        4.4        3.7         2.9        2.1         3.7
 Years of education (mean)                10.8       11.4       11.8        12         12.4        11.7
 Number of children up to 6 (mean)        1.1        0.7        0.5         0.3        0.1         0.5
 Number of children ages 7-14 (mean)      1          0.7        0.5         0.3        0.1         0.5
 Number of adults ages 15-65 (mean)       3.2        2.9        2.6         2.1        1.7         2.5
 Number of elderly 65 +, (mean)           0.2        0.2        0.2         0.2        0.1         0.2
 Number of employed adults (mean)         1.5        1.6        1.6         1.4        1.3         1.5
 % of respondents residing in Bishkek     9%         16%        23%         29%        31%         22%
 % of respondents - other urban areas     15%        19%        21%         21%        18%         19%
 % residing in rural areas                75%        64%        56%         50%        52%         59%
 % households with male head              61%        61%        62%         61%        61%         61%
 % of married household heads             79%        76%        71%         60%        41%         65%
 % of employed household heads            33%        44%        51%         56%        66%         50%
 % of households with higher degree       15%        25%        34%         39%        46%         28%
 % of households reporting paying taxes   74%        75%        74%         72%        72%         74%


The household characteristics are relevant to the discussion on public services, as household structure may
influence what services are accessed, for example, education for children or pensions for the elderly. Poorer
households differ from their counterparts in a number of ways. Households in the first quintile, the poorest
20% are larger with more children, with a mean household size of 5.6 persons compared to 2.9 in the richest
quintile. They are also more likely to reside in rural areas (75%) compared to Bishkek (9%) or other urban
areas (15%). Household heads in the first quintile on average have fewer years of formal education, and are
less likely to have a higher education degree (15% compared with 46% of the highest quintile) and be
employed. Only 34% of household heads in the first, poorest quintile are employed, compared to 66% of
the fifth, richest quintile.



4.   SUMMARY OF RESULTS

The results of the survey reveal specific weaknesses and entry points for improvements in service
delivery to promote transparency, accountability and integrity. The results of this survey are consistent
with other corruption related surveys, particularly in terms of perceptions of corruption. The survey results
identify key sectors and specific services that are more prone to corruption. In addition, the survey reveals
a correlation between perceptions of corruption in public service delivery and households’ experiences with
corruption. The survey findings are supplemented by qualitative data from the focus groups where
appropriate.




                                                      13
4.1.    PERCEPTIONS OF CORRUPTION IN KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

Overall, corruption remains a significant issue, with 91% of households agreeing that corruption is
a “very serious problem” or a “somewhat serious problem” in Kyrgyz Republic. The percentage is
somewhat lower in Bishkek – 85% of respondents agreed with this view, compared to 92% and 93% in
rural and urban areas respectively. While there is no significant difference in the basic perceptions by
consumption quintile, there is a difference in the perceptions of the severity of the problem. Specifically,
77% of the lowest income quintile rated corruption is a “very serious problem” compared to only 65% of
the highest income quintile. The relationship is reversed in the shares of the neighboring answer option –
“a somewhat serious problem”, which gradually increases from 12% in the lowest quintile to 25% in the
highest quintile. See Figure 4.


Figure 4. Perceptions of Corruption as a Problem by Consumption

 100%

  80%

  60%

  40%

  20%

   0%
           1st Quintile        2nd Quintile        3rd Quintile      4th Quintile       5th Quintile
                          A very serious problem        A somewhat serious problem



This pattern provides indirect evidence of the prevalence of corruption impacting the welfare of
households. If bribes account for a large proportion of the household consumption, then such a direct
consequence is more likely to produce a heightened perception of severity in the poorer quintiles.
Accordingly, while richer households still view corruption as a problem, they may be more likely to
perceive it as a nuisance. A greater percentage of households in the upper quintiles were more likely to state
corruption was a “somewhat serious problem” compared to their poorer counterparts, which may be due to
higher incomes softening the direct negative economic impacts of corruption on consumption.
While the government has been actively strengthening its anti-corruption program, the results show
that respondents question the sincerity of the government’s desire and will to combat corruption.
When asked, 49% of respondents agreed there was “no sincere desire and will on behalf of Government to
combat corruption”. The largest percentage of such respondents resides in Bishkek (58%), while slightly
less than half the households in other urban and rural areas stated the same: 47% and 45% respectively.
Only 26% agreed that the government’s corruption strategies were effective. These results are supporte d
by the focus group participants, who noted that while there was more talk about corruption and increased
visibility and awareness, overall the campaign has been ineffective. Common criticisms were that the



                                                      14
government’s approach was selective and not systematic, was inconsistent and did not target the top levels
of government14.


4.2.        PERCEPTIONS OF COMMONALITY OF INFORMAL PAYMENTS

A significant majority of households stated it was common to make informal payments to “get things
done”. When asked to respond to the statement, “when thinking about government officials, it is common
for citizens to have to pay some irregular “additional payments” to get things done”, 73% of respondents
stated this was “always” or “mostly” the case. Again, the highest percentage of respondents sharing this
perception were in Bishkek City (79%), compared to 72% and 71% in rural and other urban areas
respectively.
Perceptions regarding frequency of informal payments for specific tasks suggest a lower bribe
incidence than implied by the general question on prevalence of bribes. Respondents were asked how
frequently households like theirs find themselves obliged to make unofficial payments to public officials
associated with four activities: to obtain basic public services, to obtain licenses or permits, to update or
revise their tax status and to speed up legal proceedings in the judicial branch.15 Overall, 24% of respondents
indicated that they have to pay “mostly” or “always” in order to obtain public services. For other tasks,
informal payments are less common. See Figure 5.


Figure 5. Perceived Frequency of Bribes for Different Types of Interactions with Government16


                  To obtain basic public services                                                            24%

                    To obtain licenses or permits                                                 19%

     To speed up legal proceedings in the judicial
                                                                                                18%
                       branch

                      To update/revise tax status                                                   20%

                                                     0%        5%       10%          15%         20%         25%


Households in Bishkek and urban areas are more likely to state that informal payments are necessary
to obtain public services. Thirty-eight percent of respondents in Bishkek stated it was mostly or always
necessary to make informal payments to obtain services, compared to 21% in other urban areas and 19%
of rural households. Perceptions in rural areas are more positive: 63% of respondents in rural areas indicated
they “never” find themselves obliged to make unofficial payments to access public services.



14
   Focus group discussions June 2014.
15
   Demographic data is collected on heads of households, while the questions about using certain government services
are asked about all members of the household.
16
   How frequently do households like yours find themselves obliged to make unofficial payment to public official
associated with the following? The chart provides the share of respondents answering “Most times” or “Always”

                                                          15
 Box 1. Causes of Corruption in the Kyrgyz Republic

 Low salaries and economic circumstances of public servants were commonly cited by citizens as
 the primary cause of corruption. When asked about the causes of corruption, focus group participants
 identified a range of contributing factors from economics to cultural norms. Participants voiced that the
 civil servant salaries and salaries of doctors and teachers were low, indeed often too low to support a
 family and so civil servants may ask for bribes to supplement their income.

 Cultural norms also play a role. Several participants noted that citizens contribute to the problem by
 paying bribes. The citizen’s role in perpetuating corruption was also noted in the survey results: 40% of
 respondents indicated that corruption is perpetuated mostly by citizens (see Figure B1 below). Focus
 group participants noted that citizens in Kyrgyz Republic want things done quickly, so they pay bribes
 for more efficient service: “if we want to obtain a certificate from a government service, we prefer to pay
 a bribe and get it quickly rather than wait and go through the procedures”. Others noted that “people are
 used to the system, it is a habit acquired from parents”. This perpetuates the cycle across generations.
 Another participant noted, “children witness corrupt practices and learn the wrong lessons”, they added
 that to beat corruption, “we need to start teaching good lessons to children”.

 Figure B1: Corruption is Perpetuated Mostly by…

  50%
               40%              37%
  40%
  30%
  20%                                            16%
                                                                   7%
  10%
   0%
             citizens       bureaucrats       politicians      enterprises


 Limited voice and lack of legal awareness were also often cited. Participants noted that citizens don’t
 know their rights and therefore are more likely to pay. One stated, “Citizens must know their rights and
 national laws and use existing mechanisms and channels”. While reporting mechanisms exist, citizens
 are not likely to report corruption out of fear of judgment and repercussions. As one noted, the same
 individuals are at the service desk, and without alternative service channels citizens are wary to report
 corrupt activity if only to retain access to the service.

 Source: Focus Group Discussions


However, perceptions of corruption are not supported by actual observation of corrupt acts by
officials. While respondents state informal payments are frequently needed, only 13% indicated they had
observed a corrupt act by a public official in the last two years. However, when asked if anyone in the
household had reported a corrupt act to an appropriate authority in the last two years, only 2% of
respondents indicated yes. This may be a function of lack of awareness of reporting mechanisms: only 22%
of survey respondents said they knew the process to follow to report a corrupt act by a public official.
Without an understanding of formal mechanisms and channels for reporting corruption, there is less
likelihood that citizens will voice their concerns or report behavior.



                                                     16
4.3.    EXPERIENCES WITH CORRUPTION

The survey not only captured data on perceptions of corruption but also households’ direct
experiences with different service providers. Respondents were asked if during the past year, any
member of the household had attempted to obtain one or more of 18 individual public services. (See annex
for a full list of services, and service-level measures). Further, if the household had tried to obtain the
service, whether in those interactions they were asked for a bribe, and if so, how much was paid. From this
data, a graft index17 is calculated that represents the share of interactions with government agencies during
which an informal payment or gift was expected.
The Graft Index across all services shows that corruption took place in approximately one in six
interactions between citizens with service agencies.18 The graft index of the national-level sample 16%
across all services. See Table 3. The graft index based on specific citizen experiences is lower than the
perceived commonality of informal payments to obtain public services discussed above (24%).


Table 3. Graft Index by Strata
                                                          Graft Index
 Kyrgyz Republic National Average                         16%

 By Strata:
 Bishkek City                                             15%
 Urban                                                    18%
 Rural                                                    16%




17
   The graft index is a measure frequently used to assess the incidence of graft based on actual firm or individual
experience. The graft index simply represents the share of interactions with government agencies during which an
informal payment or gift was expected. Accordingly, it is computed by taking the ratio of the interactions in which
gift or payment was expected to the total number of reported interactions.
18
   Don’t know/not sure” answers to the question if a bribe was paid are excluded from this computation.

                                                        17
Figure 6. Graft Index by Service 19

     60%   55%


     40%          36%
                         28%
                                 18%     17%
     20%                                         15%
                                                         11%     10%     8%      7%      7%      5%     4%      2%
     0%




Disaggregated results by service show that interactions with the traffic police have the highest graft
index at 55%. Two types of interactions with police are distinguished: one with traffic police, and other
interactions with police (excluding traffic). This result is similar to other studies such as the 2013 GCB
which also showed interactions with the traffic police as the most prone to corruption2021. Households also
report a high incidence of corruption when dealing with the National Registration Office (28%). The
National Registration office is particularly important as this entity issues passports and drivers’ licenses
among other services.
Health services, electricity and education services were the top services most accessed by the survey
respondents. Respondents in Bishkek accessed these services more frequently than their urban and rural
counterparts (see Annex). While the graft index shows no significant difference across strata, results by
individual service show dramatic differences in certain services including education and electricity.
Examining data on education services, 30% of those in Bishkek City reported accessing the service,
compared to 27% of urban and 23% of rural counterparts. However, 26% of respondents in Bishkek City
reported a bribe was expected or requested, compared to 14% in rural areas and 16% in other urban areas.
A similar discrepancy is seen in electricity where 16% of Bishkek respondents reported a bribe was
expected, compared to 5% in other urban areas and 6% in rural areas. The converse is seen in national
registration office services: while the greatest percentage of those accessing the service reside in other urban



19
   The graph only represents services with greater than 25 interactions. Less than 25 respondents interacted with
judges/courts, company registration, customs, and border control.
20
   These results are similar to those of the 2013 GCB index which showed that 61% of citizens stated they paid a bribe
to the police in the last twelve months.
21
   http://www.transparency.org/gcb2013/country/?country=Kyrgyz Republic

                                                         18
and rural areas (15% each) compared to Bishkek City (9%), rural respondents were more likely to be asked
for a bribe (38%) compared to other urban areas (17%) or Bishkek City (13%).
Although the survey results showed education services and health services ranking at 4th and 5th
respectively, the focus group participants consistently identified these sectors as the most corrupt.
Focus group informants reported payment of bribes at each level of education services, from kindergarten
enrollment, paying for grades and for entry to higher education institutions. In the health sector, focus group
participants admitted paying for services and bribing doctors. A common perception was that some patients
do not receive proper medical attention because they do not have enough money. One participant voiced
that she “could not haggle with doctors” and paid the bribe fearing that she would receive poor quality
service if she did not pay.
When bribes are requested or expected, citizens typically pay the bribe. Respondents report that a
bribe was paid in 64% of those instances when a bribe was requested22. This result is consistent with prior
studies on corruption in Asian countries (Quah, 2011). However, the “pay rate” varies across strata and
consumption quintiles (see next section). It is highest in rural areas (68%), followed by other urban areas
at 62% and is lowest in Bishkek (57%).
The average amount of the informal payment varies significantly across services. While pensions
ranked 7th on the graft index at 11%, pensions had the highest average amount of informal payment at
10,036 KGS. The focus groups corroborated this finding, stating that social services, particularly pensions
were fertile areas for corruption. One anecdote puts this in perspective: in order to get a larger pension, the
citizen was asked for a bribe, and in return additional years would be added to the citizens’ work history
thereby resulting in a larger pension amount. Employment benefits also had a high average informal
payment of 4,696 KGS. In contrast, while traffic police had the highest graft index, it also had the lowest
average informal payment (836KGS or about 5 dollars).


 Box 2. Corruption Mechanisms: Who Initiates the Transaction?

 A key question is how informal payments are solicited: are they offered by the citizen or requested
 by the service provider? According to the survey results, 39% of respondents stated that the government
 agent indicates or asks for the bribe. Nationwide, 33% of respondents stated that the household offers
 the payment on its own accord, while 27% stated that the amount and how to pay is known beforehand,
 so it is not discussed. The patterns change when examining different strata, for example, in Bishkek,
 respondents are more likely to know the “rules of the game” than those in other urban and rural areas.
 Other urban and rural households are more likely to offer bribes on their own accord (See also Box 1).
 This result suggests institutional differences exist between Bishkek and the rest of the country.
 Specifically, that households in Bishkek are more likely to simply follow unwritten rules about how
 much and when to pay suggests that corruption may be institutionalized to a higher degree than in the
 rest of the country.




22
  This variable is computed as the ratio of the number of instances in which the bribe was paid to the number of bribe
requests, computed at the individual household level and averaged.

                                                         19
 Figure      B2.         Who     initiates       an     informal           payment/request         for   bribe?
  50%
             39%                                39%         39%                    40%
  40%                               38%
                                                                  36%                    36%
                   33%
  30%                    27%
                                                                          24%                    24%
                                          22%
  20%

  10%

   0%
             Country-Level            Bishkek City                Urban                  Rural

                   A government agent indicates or asks for a payment
                   The household offers a payment of its own accord
                   It is known beforehand how to pay and how much, so it is not discussed


 There is nothing to indicate that public officials are more or less likely to request payments in
 urban versus rural areas or in Bishkek city. However, examining the results by consumption quintile
 reveals a notable distinction in how the payments are implemented and how different quintiles experience
 the process. Public officials are more likely to request payments when interacting with households from
 the lowest quintile and the likelihood that public official requests a bribe diminishes as income increases.
 Forty fiver percent of respondents in the poorest quintile stated the government agent initiates the
 transaction, while only 31% of the highest quintile said the same. In contrast, 40% of the respondents in
 the highest quintile indicated that they knew how to pay and how much to pay beforehand, so it is not
 discussed, compared with only 18% of the poorest households. This suggests that poorer households lack
 the informal knowledge of how to take advantage of services through corruption or the tacit knowledge
 about how to approach such interactions.



4.4.    WHO IS MOST VULNERABLE TO CORRUPTION?

While the national level results show informal payments are expected in one in six interactions
between households and service providers, these expectations are not evenly distributed across
consumption groups. Examining the results of the graft index by consumption quintile, two primary
groups emerge as somewhat more vulnerable to corruption: the lowest quintile and the highest. The first
quintile, the poorest households, have a marginally higher incidence of corruption than the national average:
20% compared to 16%. The highest quintile, the richest households in the sample, report the highest
proportion if interactions being accompanied with a bribe request (22%). The middle quintiles form a
separate group with a somewhat lower and approximately equal share of transactions accompanied with
bribe requests. See Figure 7.




                                                       20
Figure 7. Percentage of Interactions with Government Agencies in which a Bribe was Requested
(by Consumption Level)

 25%
                                                                          22%
             20%
 20%                                                        18%
                            17%            17%

 15%

 10%

  5%

  0%
         1st Quintile   2nd Quintile    3rd Quintile   4th Quintile   5th Quintile



The shallow U-pattern shown in the figure above is consistent with the proposed hypothesis: both
those in the lowest and the highest quintile are somewhat more likely to pay bribes than those in the
middle. The focus group data support this hypothesis: participants noted that those with low-income
background or less social protections such as single mothers and ethnic minorities are more adversely
affected by corruption. The lack of connections was also noted as a reason why poorer families are more
likely to pay. On the other hand, those of higher status than the civil servants might simply find it expedient
to procure better treatment through bribes.
In other words, the poorest might pay bribes because they have to, while the well-off pay bribes
because they can. Focus group participants also noted this phenomenon, that “well off citizens have
connections that they use to get services”. While connections do not necessarily negate the need, or the
utility of, paying a bribe, they are useful in locating and connecting with the individuals most likely to help.
When examining the “pay rate”, the proportion of instances when a bribe was requested or expected,
the poorest quintile is more likely to pay the bribe than others . Seventy three percent of these
respondents report that the bribe was paid. Other quintiles are just above or below the national average of
64%. Again there is a shallow U- pattern, with the lowest and the higher quintiles more frequently engaged
in corruption in their interactions with officials than the middle three quintiles. This further supports the
hypothesis that the poorest are relatively more victimized in interactions with government agencies. See
Figure 8.




                                                       21
Figure 8. Bribe Pay Rate: Percentage who Paid a Bribe when Requested

     100%

     80%       73%
                              64%                                          65%            64%
                                             60%              60%
     60%

     40%

     20%

      0%
            1st Quintile   2nd Quintile   3rd Quintile   4th Quintile   5th Quintile      Total




One question is whether these groups are more vulnerable because of their frequency of interactions
with public services. Since citizen experience with corruption appears related to socioeconomic status, it
is important to examine utilization of government services and experience with corruption by consumption.
The average number of services that members of households attempted to obtain within the last year is
consistent across quintiles. The lowest quintile attempted to obtain an average of 1.8 services over the last
year, but was expected to pay a bribe 20 percent of the time. Conversely, households in the upper quintile
accessed a marginally higher number of services (2.5) and were also expected to pay 22% of the time. The
number of services sought appears more tightly linked to income rather than on place of residence.
Residents of Bishkek city report the highest number of services sought (2.4), followed by rural residents
(2.2) and other urban areas (2.0 services). In other words, the poorest respondents tend to seek less services
than rural residents in general, even though poverty is more widespread in rural areas.
A second question is whether the particular service accessed by these vulnerable groups are simply
those with higher graft index values. The distribution of service utilization by quintile (including of those
services with the highest graft index such as police, national registrations office, education services) does
not support this argument. The poorest quintiles, in addition to using less services overall, were less likely
to interact with traffic police and the national registration office (two of the services with highest bribe
incidence), as well as with judges/courts, pensions, company registration (three of the services with highest
mean bribes) than their richer counterparts. See Table A2 in the Annex. Out of 18 services included in the
survey, the poorest quintile only accessed border control services 23 more than other quintiles, perhaps
related to the fact that some of the poorest households might be more likely to supplement income through
migrant labor. Interactions with registration/passport offices (the service with the third highest graft index)
are more uniformly distributed across quintiles (e.g. 11% report such interactions in the bottom quintile,
growing to 17% in the top).
The polarization in “vulnerability to bribes” may also be the result of two simultaneous processes:
the greater wealth of the uppermost quintile may facilitate provision of bribes, and the poorest
residents may lack access to service alternatives. It is also possible that poor and/or rural residents may

23
  The number of households indicating they attempted to access this service over the past 12 months was under 25,
therefore it is not included in the discussion of the graft index in the previous section.

                                                         22
be more vulnerable to exploitation due to lack of service delivery even after paying a bribe. Results showed
that 21% of all respondents remained “extremely uncertain” that a service would be provided if a bribe is
offered. In rural areas this percentage is 25%, while in urban areas and Bishkek city it is 12% and 18%
respectively. This shows that even with an informal payment, service delivery is not guaranteed.
There is no major variation in the level of certainty that a service would be provided after a bribe is
paid across quintiles, with one notable exception: while 22% of the respondents in the poorest quintile
reported that they are “completely certain” that a service would be provided, this proportion drops
with every upper quintile and is only 12% in the highest quintile. This appears consistent with the
mechanism of bribe-giving across quintiles. For the lower quintiles it is more likely that the government
agent requests the bribe as a condition to provide the service. In contrast, for the upper quintiles the bribe
is more often initiated by the client.


4.5.    COSTS OF CORRUPTION

As shown above, the poorest quintiles are more vulnerable to corrupt activity and also are most likely
to pay when informal payments are requested. The question remains, what is the cost of petty corruption
for these households? The results of the analysis show that the average reported sums of bribes at the
household level do not show drastic variation across quintiles. In fact, in this case, the 4th quintile paid the
largest sum of 4,026 KGS. However, the poorest quintile reports paying the most per transaction (1441
KGS), while the richest pays the least (1257 KGS). See Table 4. Simply stated, the poor are more vulnerable
in terms of both to bribe incidence and bribe size.


Table 4. Costs of Corruption by Consumption Quintile
                                   1st          2nd          3rd Quintile   4th         5th          Total
                                   Quintile     Quintile                    Quintile    Quintile
 Average sum of bribes paid (in    3,563        3,453        3,798          4,026       3,711        3,683
 KGS); only households
 reporting a non-zero payment

 Average bribe per transaction –   1,441        1,289        1,262          1,317       1,257        1,302
 only households reporting a
 non-zero payment (in KGS)



Similar to the results on the graft index and vulnerability analysis, the discrepancy in cost per
transaction is not accounted for by types of services the poor are more likely to access, nor geographic
location. The poor utilize the least number of services, and they are less likely to access virtually all of the
18 services included in the survey. Examining the cost per transaction across the strata shows that the
average bribes sum reported by rural residents – 1,024 KGS - is significantly lower than those reported by
urban and Bishkek city residents - 1,532 and 1,820 KGS respectively. Taken together, the evidence suggests
that the poor are more likely to pay higher bribes for their socio-economic status rather than simply the
difference in governance contexts between urban and rural areas.


                                                        23
Comparison of the cost of corruption with household consumption shows that the poorest quintile
spends 6.3% of its annual consumption on informal payments. Figure 9 below presents the average
estimated consumption by quintile with sum of bribes paid. The bribes reported are compared with the total
estimated annual household consumption. Assessing the share of bribes of household consumption, the
variance across quintiles is less dramatic, however, the poorest quintile reports paying the highest share of
income as bribes. See Table 5.


Figure 9. Bribes as a Percentage of Annual Household Consumption

 10%


     8%
              6.3%                                           6.2%
                             5.6%           5.7%                           5.8%
     6%


     4%


     2%


     0%
           1st Quintile   2nd Quintile   3rd Quintile   4th Quintile    5th Quintile




Table 5. Consumption Estimates and Bribes as a Share of Consumption24
                                           1st      2nd      3rd      4th      5th
                                           Quintile Quintile Quintile Quintile Quintile
     Annual household consumption
     (KGS)                                    56,491     70,231        77,543     80,335      84,619
     Average bribes as % of annual
     household consumption –
     respondents paying bribes only             6.3%         5.6%       5.7%           6.2%    5.8%
     Average bribes as % of annual
     household consumption – all
     respondents using services                 1.4%         1.0%       1.1%           1.3%    1.5%


The results of the analysis show the broader impact of corruption on household welfare: on average,
six percent of household consumption is lost to informal payments. This amount is approximately twice
the annual percentage of consumption spent on electricity by households in 2012 (3%)25. While this is only



24 Consumption and bribes paid estimates are computed at the level of the individual household, and then
averaged for each quintile. The consumption data applies to all households, while the bribes sum data is derived
from the survey responses of the subset of respondents reporting using government services, being asked to
pay a bribe, or both.
25
   KIHS 2012

                                                        24
attributable to those households making payments, overall, when examining the level for all respondents
accessing services, this percentage is still 1.4% for the lowest quintile.
The perceptions of corruption of the poorest households are supported by the data on their
interactions with public services. Taken together, the data on expected payments, the pay rate, and average
percentage of household income lost to informal payments show that the impact of corruption is highest for
the poorest households. As shown in the previous section, the poorest quintile reported being expected to
pay a bribe in 20% of interactions (above the national average of 16%), and paid it in 73% of cases where
it was expected. This pay rate was the highest of all income groups and exceeds the national average of
64%. The average bribe paid per transaction was also the highest in the lowest quintile.


5. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

The results of the PSIA reveal important differences in how different income groups are vulnerable
to and affected by corruption in the Kyrgyz Republic. Attitudes on corruption do not appear particularly
sensitive to household characteristics and socioeconomic descriptors, but actual experiences with
corruption and the costs of corruption differ across consumption groups. In particular, the analysis showed
that the lowest and highest income groups experienced similar a frequency of corrupt activity, although the
dynamics of bribe paying may be different for the higher and the lower strata.
Consistent with prior studies26, the findings support the hypothesis that the poorest citizens’ are more
vulnerable to rent-extraction than richer strata of society. The analysis showed that the poorest
households experienced a higher than average graft index, had the highest pay rate and faced higher
amounts of informal payments per transaction than other income groups. A greater percentage of this group
(45%) stated that government agents were more likely to request payments, compared to 31% of the highest
quintile.
The results also support the hypothesis that the potential difference in status of the civil servant vis-
a-vis27 that of citizens seeking to obtain services may impact how corruption manifests in public
service delivery. The poorer quintiles were more likely to state that service providers requested bribes.
While the higher quintiles also faced an above average graft index, the cost and mechanisms differed from
their poorer counterparts. The cost per transaction was lower, and the majority of this group (42%) indicated
that the amount to pay and means of payment were known ahead of time, so were not discussed. Therefore,
while bribes were not explicitly requested, they were still accepted. Understanding the “rules of the game”


26
   E.g., Hunt (2007), Justesen and Bornskov (2014), Hunt and Laszlo (2012)
27
   For the purpose of this hypothesis it was assumed that the civil servants citizens typically interact with are most
likely to be somewhere in the middle three quintiles, rather than in the lowest or the highest. While government salaries
in the Kyrgyz republic are very low, it is unlikely that typical civil servants are mostly from the lowest quintile, and it
is also unlikely that an average pubic official is a member of the highest quintile. Studies of Kyrgyz civil servants (e.g.
Liebert, 2014) also support this assumption, by pointing that although government wages are usually low, they are
often supplemented through bribery; further, except for low/entry level positions, appointments to government jobs
are typically based on pre-existing informal connections and social capital and economic influence – including
providing bribes to secure the appointment (Liebert, 2014). The assumption is also theoretically and empirically
supported in other studies (e.g., Grannoveter, 2007), suggesting that bribery is the least likely to occur among those
of equal status.

                                                           25
may be one of the reasons for the overall lower cost per transaction for richer households, though this did
not lead to a higher likelihood that the service will be provided.
The propensity to pay when a bribe is expected and the amounts paid raise questions about the
decision calculus of households. In the abstract, a person providing a bribe to a public official assumes
that the official makes some decision or provides a service or takes an action that improves the “briber’s”
welfare (Husted & y de Estudios, 1999). If one accepts such a formulation, the implication is an efficient
market for corrupt services, where individuals and households independently decide if it is worth it to
provide the bribes.
However, in the context of government services, this cannot be assumed as eventually interaction
with most of them is not optional (e.g. education, health, police, and registration services). In this
context, it is not clear what will determine the “propensity to pay” for corrupt services. Per the results of
this survey, wealth does not appear to be a key determinant, and indeed the results suggest the opposite: if
a bribe was expected, respondents from the lowest quintile were more likely to pay it (73%) than any of the
other quintiles (~60%), and more than the national average (64%). Since the lowest quintile also accesses
the least number of government services, this most likely means that the poorest Kyrgyz citizens to some
extent attempt to limit their interaction with government institutions to non-optional services and this may
explain why they are more likely to pay when a bribe is demanded.

The heterogeneity in bribe incidence between services such as electricity, education, and registration
offices may suggest that bribe-seeking might be partially the result of demand. For example, in
Bishkek, being the most urbanized area in the country, demand for new electrical services might exceed
capacity, resulting in a higher rate of bribe extraction compared to environment where the demand might
be lower, e.g. in rural areas. Conversely, in the case of passport/registration offices, Bishkek residents are
more likely to be already correctly registered, and may not be in need of visa services as often as rural
residents who may be migrant workers.

The widespread use informal payments reveals that citizens are exposed to corruption in their
everyday lives, be it interacting with the traffic police, sending their child to school or seeing a doctor.
More effective mechanisms are needed to reduce the propensity for corruption as well as to reduce the
differential impact on citizens. Steps are needed to enhance the effectiveness of government to provide
quality services in a transparent and accountable way that reduces opportunities and incentives for corrupt
behavior.
Ultimately, the differences in corruption experiences and consequences provide may inform anti-
corruption strategies aiming to minimize impact on the economically most vulnerable part of the
population. However, such strategies cannot be a substitute for comprehensive strategies aiming to enforce
universal rules and codes of conduct protecting both the poorer and the richer households. The current
analysis utilized a quintile distribution of households by per capita consumption, and in this classification
the upper quintile (especially in a developing economy such as the Kyrgyz Republic), can hardly be
conceptualized as a rich and privileged class: while it may experience a marginally better adjustment to
corrupt practices, and a somewhat better ability to absorb the attendant costs, it nevertheless shares the
frustration and the negative attitudes of the rest of the population and thus cannot be neglected in any anti-
corruption efforts.



                                                     26
 Box 3. How to Combat Corruption: Results of the Focus Groups

 The focus groups included a variety of stakeholders from ordinary citizens, students, and
 representatives from women’s groups, other civil society organizations, and media. The focus
 groups were held in the cities of Osh and Bishkek, and focused on topics regarding the prevalence of
 corruption, mechanisms for corruption, and coping mechanisms. Focus group participants offered a
 number of suggestions on how to curb corruption in the Kyrgyz Republic, summarized below.

 Changing cultural norms and fostering demand for good governance: Participants of the focus groups
 (as well as survey respondents) attributed some blame to the citizens themselves, and acknowledged
 that acceptance of corrupt practices is part of the general mentality. Changing this mindset will take
 effort to foster demand for better governance, and CSOs and media can play a prominent role to monitor
 and report on corrupt activities.
 Increase outreach efforts and media coverage on the negative aspects of corruption: The focus groups
 suggested providing more visibility to the negative consequences of corruption to youth through films,
 social media, public service announcements and other outreach campaigns. As one participant stated,
 the youth are learning poor habits by witnessing these transactions and they will have to be the
 generation to change the status quo.
 Increase citizens’ understanding of the law and their rights: Participants noted citizens’ lack of
 awareness of proper government conduct and of their rights. Several options were offered including
 improving outreach to citizens and publishing of information on services such as how to apply and
 standard costs for services (i.e. service standards or citizen service charter). Publicizing this information
 will promote transparency and could reduce potential for corruption.
 Increase independence of anti-corruption agencies and strengthen enforcement of anti-corruption
 laws: participants indicated most people accused of corruption are not punished. Further they noted that
 some efforts against corruption appeared to be politically motivated: used to punish political opponents
 and maintain their hold on power.
 Introducing anonymous reporting systems and whistleblower protections: while the reasons for non-
 reporting vary, one commonly cited was a fear of retribution. This may be more common in rural areas,
 where there is only one or two staff providing services. As noted by the focus group participants, there
 is a social capital cost implied: if the citizen complained everyone would hear about it, resulting in a
 social pressure to comply. Citizens need to know the process to report corrupt behavior to proper
 authorities and be assured of confidentiality.Source: Focus Group Discussions


The graft index data on each service may inform specific sector or institutional reforms that can
translate into an actionable policy agenda. The data show that key sectors such as health, education, and
electricity are the services most accessed by Kyrgyz households. These are also characterized by relatively
high levels of graft. Targeting specific sectors for tailored anti-corruption activities may result in focused
improvements over time. Specific actions may include implementing reforms on school enrollment, piloting
results-based financing for education or health, or implementing citizen feedback mechanisms where
citizens can report corruption anonymously without fear of retribution by teachers, doctors, or
administrative officials. Collecting and monitoring this data can improve the government’s awareness on
corruption issues, and foster their ability to better target interventions.
To achieve the goal outlined in the NSDS, for Kyrgyz Republic to become one of the top 50 least
corrupt countries by 2017, the country needs to accelerate the pace of public sector reforms that focus
on curbing corruption. Administrative and petty corruption can be addressed through preventative

                                                      27
measures. These include greater transparency in service delivery through application of service standards,
outreach campaigns to inform citizens of their rights and methods of recourse, and training civil servants
on customer-centric service provision. Some of these mechanisms are in the current anti-corruption plan.
While the government continues on its reform path, the results of these efforts may be captured by future
iterations of the survey.




                                                   28
REFERENCES

Ashforth, B. E., & Anand, V. (2003). The normalization of corruption in organizations. Research in
Organizational Behavior, 25, 1-52. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0191-3085(03)25001-2
Bardhan, P. (1997). Corruption and Development: A Review of Issues. Journal of Economic Literature,
35(3), 1320-1346. doi: 10.2307/2729979
Breen, M., & Gillanders, R. (2012). Corruption, institutions and regulation. Economics of Governance,
13(3), 263-285. doi: 10.1007/s10101-012-0111-0
Gallagher, M. (1991). Rent-seeking and economic growth in Africa. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Gallup International (2013). Government Corruption Viewed as Pervasive Worldwide. Accessed on August
15th, 2015, http://www.gallup.com/poll/165476/government-corruption-viewed-pervasive-worldwide.aspx
Granovetter, M. (2007). "The Social Construction of Corruption". Pp. 152-172 in Victor Nee and
Richard Swedberg, editors, On Capitalism , Stanford University Press
Hellman, J. S., Jones, G., & Kaufmann, D. (2003). Seize the state, seize the day: state capture and influence
in transition economies. Journal of Comparative Economics, 31(4), 751-773. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jce.2003.09.006
Hunt, J. (2007). "How Corruption Hits People When they are Down." Journal of Development Economics,
84(2): 574-589.
Hunt, J., & Laszlo, S. (2012). Is Bribery Really Regressive? Bribery’s Costs, Benefits, and Mechanisms.
World Development, 40(2), 355-372. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2011.06.001
Husted, B. W., & y de Estudios, I. T. (1999). Wealth, Culture, and Corruption. Journal of International
Business Studies, 30(2), 339-359. doi: 10.2307/155316
Ivlevs, A., & Hinks, T. (2015). Global economic crisis and corruption. Public Choice, 162(3-4), 425-445.
doi: 10.1007/s11127-014-0213-z
Jason, D. (1977). Perks, Pilferage, and the Fiddle: The Historical Structure of Invisible Wages. Theory and
Society, 4(1), 39-71. doi: 10.2307/656951
Justesen, M. K., & Bjørnskov, C. (2014). Exploiting the Poor: Bureaucratic Corruption and Poverty in
Africa. World Development, 58, 106-115. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2014.01.002
Knack, S. (2007). Measuring Corruption: A Critique of Indicators in Eastern Europe and Central Asia.
Journal of Public Policy, 27(03), 255-291. doi: doi:10.1017/S0143814X07000748
Leff, N. H. (1964). Economic Development Through Bureaucratic Corruption. American Behavioral
Scientist, 8(3), 8-14. doi: 10.1177/000276426400800303
Liebert, S. (2014). Challenges of Reforming the Civil Service in the Post-Soviet Era: The Case of
Kyrgyzstan. Review of Public Personnel Administration, 34(4), 403-420. doi: 10.1177/0734371x13500320
Lin, Y.-m. (2001). Between politics and markets : firms, competition, and institutional change in post-
Mao China. Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge University Press.


                                                     29
Lomnitz, L. (1988). Reciprocity of Favors in the Urban Middle Class of Chile.
Quah, J. (2011). Curbing Corruption in Asian Countries: An Impossible Dream? Bingley, UK: Emerald
Group.
Transparency International (2013) Global Corruption Barometer Report accessed on 15 August 2015:
https://www.transparency.org/gcb2013/report
Van Rijckeghem, C., & Weder, B. (2001). Bureaucratic corruption and the rate of temptation: do wages in
the civil service affect corruption, and by how much? Journal of Development Economics, 65(2), 307-331.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3878(01)00139-0




                                                  30
ANNEX

ANNEX 1: SURVEY TO SURVEY IMPUTATION

Traditional estimates of household welfare (approximated as daily per capita consumption) rely on survey
data with a complex consumption module containing large set of detailed questions on prices and quantities
of goods and services consumed. Given its complexity the collection and analysis of that data involves
significant investment of time, money and analytical efforts. On the other hand, the scope of many projects
is rather segmented to specific area or too small to justify collection of detailed consumption and income
data. In this context the most effective alternative is imputation of welfare and consumption data based on
another household survey.
The World Bank’s poverty group has developed a technique that allows imputation of welfare variables
based on the consumption model created using data from another nationally representative household
survey (HBS). The conceptual framework of the survey to survey imputation can be represented in the
following way:
For the purposes of the current study the
consumption model was developed based on the
Kyrgyz Republic’s Integrated Household Survey
(KIHS) data for 2009-12. The model included
variables related to: household demographics
(e.g. age and gender of household members),
household characteristics (education, labor
activity, etc.), household head’s characteristics
(age, gender, labor, education, marital status and
others) and household assets holding (both
livestock and durables). Based on that model the
simulated values of consumption (at household
level) were imputed for the households in the
corruption survey. The sample was then divided into quintiles for analysis of key indicators.

Source: World Bank Staff




                                                    31
ANNEX 2: SERVICE LEVEL MEASURES

Table A1: Graft Index by Type of Service


                                                                            % of
                                                        Number              users       Mean
                                           Number of
                                                        of         Graft    reporting   bribe
                                           reported
                                                        reported   index    bribe       amount
                                           transactions
                                                        bribes              was         (KGS)
                                                                            expected

 Traffic Police                                     158      87       55%       60%        836
 Police excluding traffic                            36      13       36%       38%       2707
 Judges/Court officials                              19       6       32%       32%       9626
 National Registration office/ Passports
                                                    145      40       28%       30%       1386
 office
 Company Registration                                21       5       24%       20%       6480
 Customs                                             21       5       24%       38%        NA
 Public education services                          266      49       18%       17%       4593
 Public health services                             519      88       17%       16%       3761
 Employment benefits                                 65      10       15%       25%       4696
 Pensions                                           133      15       11%       10%      10036
 Social Security/Assistance                          62       6       10%       13%        NA
 Electricity                                        338      28        8%        8%       2699
 Tax Agency                                         193      13        7%        8%       3654
 Water & Sewerage/Utilities                         148      11        7%        8%       1933
 Land allocation agency                              41       2        5%        8%       4931
 Local Councils/municipalities                      111       4        4%        6%        417
 Postal Services                                     65       1        2%        2%        NA
 Border control                                      22       0        0%        3%        NA




                                               32
Table A2. Service utilization by consumption quintile (% respondents reporting they or a member of
their household attempted to obtain service)


  Service utilization by          1st        2nd        3rd        4th        5th        TOTAL
  quintile                        quintile   quintile   quintile   quintile   quintile
  Public health services          46.3       52.5       52.7       49.3       44.1       49
  Public education services       22.4       28.6       28.1       24.6       22.1       25
  National Registration office/   10.9       12.5       13.4       14.8       17.4       14
  Passports office
  Traffic Police                  9.3        15.1       16.6       16.8       17.8       15
  Police excluding traffic        2.3        2.5        3.2        3.6        5.3        3
  Company Registration            0.6        0.8        1.5        2.9        4.5        2
  Customs                         1.2        1.4        1.9        2.5        3.1        2
  Tax Agency                      14.1       19.2       20.1       19.3       18.9       18
  Judges/Court officials          1.7        1.2        1.2        1.2        3.7        2
  Water & Sewerage/Utilities      9.6        12.0       13.9       15.7       19.7       14
  Electricity                     22.4       30.9       33.4       36.7       36.3       32
  Employment benefits             5.3        5.8        5.3        4.8        9.3        6
  Postal Services                 4.3        4.6        5.6        7.0        9.2        6
  Pensions                        10.7       12.4       12.2       12.8       14.5       13
  Social Security/Assistance      5.3        6.4        6.1        6.0        5.4        6
  Local                           10.1       10.9       10.8       9.2        11.4       10
  Councils/municipalities
  Land allocation agency          4.4        3.9        3.2        2.6        5.6        4
  Border control                  5.6        4.4        3.7        2.9        2.1        2




                                                    33
Table A3. Service utilization by strata (% respondents reporting they or a member of their household
attempted to obtain service)


                                 Urban      Rural      Bishkek        total



 Traffic Police                  19.9%      13.8%      14.5%          15%
 Police excluding traffic        4.9%       3.6%       1.4%           3.4%
 Judges/Court officials          4.1%       1.7%       0%             1.8%
 National Registration office/   14.8%      15.3%      8.8%           13.8%
 Passports office
 Company Registration            1.7%       1.6%       3.7%           2%
 Customs                         2.1%       2.5%       0.6%           2%
 Public education services       26.7%      22.8%      30.3%          25.2%
 Public health services          49.3%      43.9%      62.7%          49%
 Employment benefits             3.8%       8.8%       0.8%           6%
 Pensions                        9.7%       10.9%      19%            12.5%
 Social Security/Assistance      3.1%       7.7%       3%             5.8%
 Electricity                     19.7%      28%        53.1%          31.9%
 Tax Agency                      13.1%      20.7%      16%            18.3%
 Water & Sewerage/Utilities      12.4%      13.3%      18%            14%
 Land allocation agency          3.2%       5.5%       0.3%           3.9%
 Local Councils/municipalities   5.1%       15%        2.5%           10.5%
 Postal Services                 8.6%       5.4%       6.2%           6.2%
 Border control                  2.8%       2.6%       0%             2%




                                                34
ANNEX 3: FOCUS GROUP QUESTIONNAIRE

                         KYRGYZ POVERTY AND CORRUPTION PSIA
                           DRAFT CONSULTATION QUESTIONS


CAUSES OF CORRUPTION

  1) In your understanding, what is corruption?
  2) What are the main causes of corruption in the Kyrgyz Republic?


MANIFESTATIONS OF CORRUPTION

  1) In April 2010, Kyrgyz Republic witnessed a popular revolution. The new authorities that came to
     power had promised to curb corruption significantly. How would you compare the level of
     corruption between now and before 2010? (Has there been change in average size of bribes?) What
     explains changes?
  2) Where do community members encounter corruption the most? Where do they encounter
     corruption the least? Why do you think this is the case?
  3) How common is corruption when citizens try to access public services such as national IDs,
     accessing health or education services?
         a. Why are bribes paid – to speed up services, for access, for information, other reasons?
  4) Does corruption affect groups such as the poor or women in different ways? Or are there differences
     in your experiences? What might explain any differences?


COMBATTING CORRUPTION

  5) What coping strategies do citizens use when faced with unfair or improper treatment?
           a. Probe: Can they seek redress from an upper level?
           b. Do family or community network provide support?
  6) How effective are the government’s measures to stem corruption in government agencies/sectors
      which are most affected by corruption?
  7) What work have you been doing with your organization to tackle corruption? Have you found
      strategies that have worked? What has been the impact of this work? Please explain your
      experiences.
  8) What have been the major barriers your organization has faced in the fight against corruption?
      What can be done to overcome these?
  9) What can/should be done to encourage corrupt individuals or organizations to end their corrupt
      practices? What actions/punishments would you advocate to discourage corruption?
  10) Which individuals or organizations do you think should take the lead in fighting corruption? Whose
      responsibility is it?




                                                 35
