                                                                       EMBARGOED
                                       Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                     until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                               Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Benchmarking Public-Private
Partnerships Procurement
2017
Benchmarking PPP Procurement:
Assessing Government Capability to
Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
                                                                    EMBARGOED
                                    Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                  until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                            Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Benchmarking Public-Private
Partnerships Procurement

2017
Assessing Government Capability
to Prepare, Procure, and Manage PPPs




                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




     2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
    ©
     / The World Bank

    1818 H Street NW Washington DC 20433
    Telephone: 202-473-1000
    www.worldbank.org



    The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in
    this report are entirely those of the authors and should not be
    attributed in any manner to the Public-Private Infrastructure
    Advisory Facility (PPIAF) or to The World Bank Group, to its
    affiliated organizations, or to members of its Board of Executive
    Directors or the countries they represent.

    Neither PPIAF nor The World Bank Group guarantees the
    accuracy of the data included in this publication or accepts
    responsibility for any consequence of their use. The boundaries,
    colors, denominations, and other information shown on any
    map in this report do not imply on the part of PPIAF or The
    World Bank Group any judgment on the legal status of any
    territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
    For questions about this publication or information about
    ordering more copies, please refer to the PPP Knowledge Lab.




    Rights and Permissions

    The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because
    The World Bank Group encourages dissemination of its
    knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
    noncommercial purposes, as long as full attribution to this work
    is given. Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary
    rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The
    World Bank Group, 1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433,
    USA; fax: +1-202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
2
                                                                        EMBARGOED
                                        Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                      until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Contents
Foreword	                                                                                       5

Acknowledgments	                                                                               6

Glossary	                                                                                      8

Abbreviations 	                                                                                9

Executive Summary	                                                                             11

About Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017	                                                      14




                                                                                                                            Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
Regulatory Framework and Institutional Arrangements for PPPs	                                 22

Thematic Areas Covered and Scored in Benchmarking PPP Procurement	                            26

Preparation of PPPs	                                                                          26

PPP Procurement	                                                                              32

Unsolicited Proposals	                                                                        38

PPP Contract Management	                                                                      44

Economy Data Tables	                                                                          50

Annex 1: Typology of PPP Regulatory Framework 	                                             139

Annex 2: Scoring Methodology	                                                                141

Contributors	                                                                                153




                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                         EMBARGOED
                                                         Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                       until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                 Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




          4
                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Foreword
Governments, the private sector, and the international development community agree
that quality infrastructure plays a key role in fostering economic growth and supports
efforts to reduce poverty. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) expressly seek to
“Develop quality, reliable, sustainable, and resilient infrastructure, including regional and
transborder infrastructure, to support economic development and human well-being,
with a focus on affordable and equitable access for all.” There is increased recognition
of the key role that the private sector can play in partnering with governments to
support the efficient and timely provision of infrastructure. The SDGs also recognize
the importance of such relationships when emphasizing the need to “encourage and
promote effective public, public-private, and civil society partnerships.”

Public-private partnerships (PPPs)—long-term contractual agreements for the delivery
of infrastructure or provision of services in which the private sector bears a significant
amount of risk and management responsibility—can play an important role in closing
the infrastructure gap. But PPPs can be complex to procure and manage. Governments
need proper frameworks and capacity to identify the projects that are best done as PPPs,
to procure them transparently and efficiently, and to undertake contract management
and regulation so as to achieve the expected value-for-money for government and
consumers and sustain investment.

Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement 2017 assesses important aspects
of government capabilities to prepare, procure, and manage PPPs and informs evidence-
based decision making on the design of PPP procurement policies and regulations.
It is the first attempt to collect systematic data on PPP procurement by providing
comparable data on the regulatory frameworks governing the PPP procurement
processes in 82 economies and to evaluate these data against internationally




                                                                                                                                    Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
recognized good practices.

The methodology was developed with extensive feedback from an expert group
representing PPP experts, academia, and the private sector. It focuses on issues such
as feasibility, value for money, transparency, competition, and provisions for PPP
implementation and covers the main stages of the PPP project cycle (preparation,
procurement, and contract management). It also explores the treatment of unsolicited
proposals (USPs).

As the international development community continues its efforts to assist governments
in delivering quality infrastructure, Benchmarking PPP Procurement aims to support our
clients’ efforts to enhance their regulatory environment to foster PPPs that successfully
support infrastructure provision and contribute to the achievement of the SDGs.




Laurence W. Carter                                                Augusto Lopez Claros
Senior Director                                                   Director
Public-Private Partnerships CCSA                                  Global Indicators Group
                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                                                                  EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                  Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                          Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       Acknowledgments
                                                       Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement 2017 is a joint product of the
                                                       World Bank Public-Private Partnerships Cross-Cutting Solutions Area (PPP CCSA) and
                                                       World Bank Global Indicators Group. It is housed under the Benchmarking Public
                                                       Procurement (BPP) project. It was prepared by a team led by Tania Ghossein under the
                                                       general direction of Federica Saliola and Augusto Lopez Claros. Members of the core
                                                       team included Mikel Tejada Ibañez, Nasser Alreshaid, Khasankhon Khamudkhanov, Zeina
                                                       Traboulsi, and Helene Candice Larroque. Fernanda Ruiz-Nuñez was the task team leader
                                                       for this activity.

                                                       The Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) cofinanced the report. The team
                                                       would like to recognize in particular the active involvement and support of Laurence
                                                       Carter and Clive Harris of the PPP CCSA. The team would also like to thank our many
                                                       other colleagues at the World Bank Group for their valuable guidance: Daniel Alberto
                                                       Benitez, Enzo de Laurentiis, Jeffrey John Delmon, Victoria Hilda Rigby Delmon, Felipe
                                                       Goya, Junglim Hahm, Jay-Hyung Kim, Melissa Marie Johns, Cledan Mandri-Perrott, Rui
                                                       Monteiro, Mark M. Moseley, Michael Opagi, Anand Kumar Srivastava, Shyamala Shukla,
                                                       and Satheesh Kumar Sundararajan.

                                                       The team is indebted to the following individuals for pro bono feedback and guidance
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                       at various stages of the project, in particular during the development of the survey
                                                       instrument: Richard Abadie and Kylee J. Anastasi (Pricewaterhouse Coopers), Walid
                                                       Abdelwahab and Fida Rana (Islamic Development Bank), James Ballingall (Infrastructure
                                                       UK), David Baxter (IP3), Christopher Carrigan (George Washington Trachtenberg School
                                                       of Public Policy and Public Administration), Deborah DeMasi (George Washington
                                                       Law School), Ed Farquharson (European PPP Expertise Centre), John Forrer (George
                                                       Washington Business School and Trachtenberg School of Public Policy and Public
                                                       Administration), Jacques Gansler (University of Maryland School of Public Affairs),
                                                       Stephen Gaull (Millennium Challenge Corporation), José Luis Guasch (former World
                                                       Bank), Jonathan Halpern (Georgetown University), Ian Hawkesworth (Organisation
                                                       for Economic Co-operation and Development), Michael Klein (Johns Hopkins School
                                                       of Advanced International Studies), Andrew J. Kline (American University School of
                                                       Public Administration), Lawrence Martin (University of Central Florida), Andrés Rebollo
                                                       (K-Infrastructure), Marcos Siqueira (Radar PPP), James Stewart (KPMG), and David Van
                                                       Slyke (Maxwell School of Public Administration).




        6
                                                                              EMBARGOED
                                              Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                            until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                      Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




The team is grateful to the Georgetown University Law Center and McCourt School of
Public Policy, the George Washington University Law School, and the American University
Washington College of Law for organizing an externship program for students to
conduct research for the project. The team would like to thank for their invaluable help
and support all the students who assisted in the data collection and research process
throughout the project under the team members’ supervision: Adetoun Latifat Adetona,
Alexander Arbour, Ananthi Bharadwaj, Brian Feetham, Siming Fu, Estrella Garces Dura,
Mengxi Jin, Maria Isabel Laluna, Yarissa Molina, Yusi Sun, Angelica Toro Botero, and
Jingchen Zhou. The team would also like to recognize the support received from Komal
Murli Agarwal from the University of Chicago and Zichao Wei from the PPP CCSA.

The Benchmarking PPP Procurement online database is managed by Vinod Kumar
Vasudevan Thottikkatu, supported by Andres Baquero Franco, Kunal Patel and Hashim Zia.

The report’s media and outreach strategy is managed by Nadine Ghannam. The team
includes Priyanka Ripley and Lai Wei. The outreach strategy plan is implemented in close
coordination with Indira Chand and communications colleagues throughout the World




                                                                                                                                  Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
Bank Group network.

The report was edited and designed by a team at Base Three LLC, led by Dania Kibbi and
Marianne Siblini.

Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017 would have not been possible without the
generous contributions of a network of more than 500 local PPP legal experts, private
sector operators, academics, government officials, and other professionals routinely
administering or advising on PPP procurement processes in the 82 economies surveyed.
The names of those wishing to be acknowledged individually are listed at the end of the
report and are made available on the Benchmarking Public Procurement (BPP) website
at http://bpp.worldbank.org.

Funding for this publication was provided by PPIAF. PPIAF, a multi-donor trust fund housed
in the World Bank Group, provides technical assistance to governments in developing
countries. PPIAF’s main goal is to create enabling environments through high-impact
partnerships that facilitate private investment in infrastructure. For more information,
visit www.ppiaf.org




                                                                                                                              7
                                                                                                                                                    EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                    Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                  until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                            Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       Glossary
                                                       Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
                                                       Any contractual arrangement between a public entity or authority and a private entity
                                                       for providing a public asset or service in which the private party bears significant risk
                                                       and management responsibility. For the purpose of this survey, this definition applies
                                                       irrespective of the terminology used in the particular economy or jurisdiction.

                                                       Procuring authority
                                                       The ministry, department, or agency responsible for ensuring that the relevant assets
                                                       or services are provided. It is the authority in charge of the PPP (that is, the authority
                                                       responsible for identifying, preparing, procuring, awarding, and managing the PPP
                                                       contract).

                                                       PPP unit
                                                       The specialized government entity or team that is responsible for facilitating the PPP
                                                       program.

                                                       Regulatory framework
                                                       A framework encompassing all laws, regulations, policies, binding guidelines or
                                                       instructions, other legal texts of general application, judicial decisions, and administrative
                                                       rulings governing or setting precedent in connection with PPPs. In this context, the
                                                       term policies refers to other government-issued documents that are binding on all
                                                       stakeholders, that are enforced in a manner similar to laws and regulations, and that
                                                       provide detailed instructions for the implementation of PPPs. It should not be confused
                                                       with policy in the sense of a government’s statement of intent to use PPPs as a course of
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                       action to deliver public services. The regulatory framework includes but is not limited to
                                                       those laws, regulations, policies, and other government actions specifically dealing with
                                                       PPPs. (For example, procurement of PPPs may be governed by the general procurement
                                                       framework.)

                                                       Special purpose vehicle (SPV)
                                                       Also special purpose company (SPC) or special purpose entity (SPE), a company specifically
                                                       formed to undertake a specific project (in this case the PPP project).

                                                       Financial model
                                                       An analytical tool that enables the user to assess the financial robustness of a project by
                                                       representing its expected financial performance, including cash flows, returns, and the
                                                       like. A financial model should not be confused with a financial proposal.

                                                       Unsolicited proposal (USP)
                                                       A proposal made by a private party to undertake a PPP project that is submitted at the
                                                       initiative of the private firm rather than in response to a request from the government.2


          8
                                                                               EMBARGOED
                                               Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                             until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                       Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Abbreviations

ABFO	   Access to the Best and Final Offer

BOT	    Build-Operate-Transfer

BPP	    Benchmarking Public Procurement

CMU	    Country Management Unit

CCSA	   Cross-Cutting Solutions Area

EAP	    East Asia and Pacific

ECA	    Europe and Central Asia

ECG	    Expert Consultative Group

ICRC	   Infrastructure Construction Regulatory Commission (Nigeria)

IFLR	   International Financial Law Review

LAC	    Latin America and the Caribbean

MDA	    Ministry, Department, or Agency

MENA	 Middle East and North Africa




                                                                                                                                   Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
OECD	 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

PPIAF	 Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility

PPP	    Public-Private Partnership

SDGs	   Sustainable Development Goals

SPC	    Special Purpose Company

SPE	    Special Purpose Entity

SPV	    Special Purpose Vehicle

SAR	    South Asia (Region)

SNIP	   National Investment System (Peru)

SSA	    Sub-Saharan Africa

USP	    Unsolicited Proposals




                                                                                                                               9
                                                                                         EMBARGOED
                                                         Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                       until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                 Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




10
                                                                                         EMBARGOED
                                                         Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                       until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                 Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Executive Summary
Public-private partnership (PPP) projects are gaining momentum globally as a means
for delivering infrastructure. Government capabilities to prepare, procure, and manage
such projects are important to ensure that the expected efficiency gains are achieved.
No systematic data currently exist to measure those capabilities in governments.
Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017 is the first attempt to collect and present
comparable and actionable data on PPP procurement on a large scale, by providing an
assessment of the regulatory frameworks and recognized practices that govern PPP
procurement across 82 economies.

Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017 presents an analysis of targeted elements
aggregated into four areas that cover the main stages of the PPP project cycle:
preparation, procurement, and contract management of PPPs, and management
of unsolicited proposals (USPs). Using a highway transport project as a case study to
ensure cross-comparability, it analyzes the national regulatory frameworks and presents
a picture of the procurement landscape at the end of March 2016.

The average performance in each area varies across regions and income levels. Figure
ES.1 shows that the higher the income level of the group, the higher the performance in
the four areas. The data also show that the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) high income and Latin American and Caribbean regions perform at
or above average.

Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017 shows that across the four areas measured, most
economies fall short of good practice. In particular, a significant number of economies
have low scores in two areas: project preparation and contract management.
Consequently, there is room for improvement specially in regulating the activities to




                                                                                                                                          Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
be undertaken before launching the PPP procurement process as well as in preparing
for those that will follow after the signature of the PPP contract, as illustrated in the
examples below.

Figure ES.1 Benchmarking PPP Procurement scores by area and income-level
group (score 1–100)
        90
        80
        70
        60
        50
Score




        40
        30
        20
        10
        0
               High income               Upper                     Lower                    Low income
                                     middle income             middle income

             Preparation        Procurement          USPs             Contract management               Average
                                                                                                                                         11
Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017.
Note: PPP = public-private partnership; USP = unsolicited proposal.
                                                                                                                                                  EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                  Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                          Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       The 82 economies reflect a range of regulatory frameworks and institutional
                                                       arrangements for PPPs. All have in place specific frameworks for regulating PPPs, with
                                                       71 percent either having a concession or a specific PPP law (25 percent of which coexist
                                                       with a concession law), 11 percent having PPP guidelines or policies, and the remaining 18
                                                       percent resorting to the general procurement law to govern their PPP contracts. Although
                                                       regulatory frameworks may differ, the fact that an economy uses a general procurement
                                                       law does not prevent it from doing PPP projects. In fact, 13 out the 15 economies that use
                                                       general procurement law had committed investments in PPPs in the past five years. PPP
                                                       units are very common (85 percent of the economies measured have them), but only 16
                                                       percent of them play a leading role during the PPP procurement phase by for example
                                                       conducting the tendering process.

                                                       The findings reveal a mixed picture in terms of approaches to ensuring that PPPs are
                                                       fiscally sustainable and consistent with national investment programs. PPP fiscal
                                                       management and assurance of the consistency of PPP projects with investment priorities
                                                       are two means for ensuring that projects are fiscally sustainable and are selected on the
                                                       basis of their strategic importance and impact rather than because of any expectation
                                                       of savings through off-budget reporting. Nearly three-quarters of the economies require
                                                       the ministry of finance’s approval before launch of a PPP procurement process. Yet only 55
                                                       percent legally require consistency between the prioritizations of PPPs and other public
                                                       investments—and only a quarter have detailed procedures for ensuring that consistency.

                                                       Rigorous assessments are essential for the preparation of sound projects, but many
                                                       economies have not adopted specific appraisal methodologies. One of the main
                                                       challenges that emerging markets face in attracting private sector investments is
                                                       preparing a well-structured PPP project. Approximately two-thirds of the economies
                                                       surveyed require socioeconomic impact, affordability, risk identification, bankability, and
                                                       comparative assessments (PPP versus traditional procurement) of a potential PPP project.
                                                       However, only about one-third of these economies have adopted specific methodologies
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                       for conducting such assessments. In almost half of the economies, a market assessment
                                                       is not required at all, and only about 10 percent have adopted a methodology for such an
                                                       assessment. Thus, many economies are likely taking projects to market without having
                                                       systematically measured market interest.

                                                       In conducting PPP procurement, many economies perform closer to recognized good
                                                       practices. Yet there is still room for improvement in two areas: (a) the minimum time
                                                       granted to potential bidders to submit their bids and (b) the approach to handling sole
                                                       bidders. PPP projects are complex and require onerous efforts—and consequently sufficient
                                                       time—to prepare strong, sensible bids. Nonetheless, 40 percent of the economies surveyed
                                                       either do not specify a minimum period for the preparation of bids or require a period of
                                                       fewer than 30 days. Moreover, only 15 percent of the economies have a detailed process
                                                       to address cases when only one bid is received, hence leaving it to the discretion of the
                                                       procuring authority to set the process.




12
                                                                               EMBARGOED
                                               Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                             until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                       Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




There is considerable scope to improve practices related to the disclosure of information
on PPPs. A transparent, competitive process is essential to achieving better outcomes
for projects and efficiency gains in infrastructure. Having a transparent process requires
making publicly available all the information relevant to ensuring a competitive process.
Most of the economies do so for the tender notice (93 percent) and the PPP award (74
percent), but only 23 percent publish the PPP contract, and very few publish it online.

Furthermore, a transparent information system is essential during the contract
management phase of PPP, yet only 16 percent of the economies require data to be
made publicly available. Although in most of the economies the private partner must
periodically provide performance information and the procuring authority must gather
it (60 percent and 73 percent, respectively), in only 16 percent of economies is this
information required to be made publicly available.

Renegotiation and disputes of contracts may be inevitable in some cases, but one-third
of the economies do not regulate them comprehensively. Renegotiations and disputes
can erode the achievement of the expected benefits of a PPP project—and if frequent,
can trigger opportunistic behavior in future PPP projects. The economies measured
handle renegotiations differently, with 31 percent either not addressing this issue in
the regulatory framework or considering it solely a contractual matter. Although the
regulatory frameworks of most of the economies (85 percent) mention dispute resolution
mechanisms for PPPs, only 27 percent of those economies establish specific mechanisms
to address the disputes.

A significant number of economies do not regulate USPs. Among those that do, very few
have a clear process for evaluating them. The difficulty with USPs lies in getting the right
balance between encouraging private companies to submit innovative project ideas and
maintaining the transparency and efficiency gains of a competitive tender process. Of




                                                                                                                                Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
the economies measured, 32 percent have no provisions that specifically regulate USPs.
Even among economies where such provisions exist, only 21 percent provide a detailed
framework for ensuring consistency with government priorities, and only 13 percent
guarantee a period of more than 90 days for proposal submission—that is, a sensible
length of time to introduce competitive tension, challenging the original proponent in a
competitive tendering process.




                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                  EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                  Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                          Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       About Benchmarking PPP
                                                       Procurement 2017
                                                       The links between infrastructure and economic growth are well established. They
                                                       include the impact of infrastructure on poverty alleviation, growth, and specific
                                                       development outcomes.3 As economies face growing demand for infrastructure, Public-
                                                       Private Partnerships (PPPs) continue to play a crucial role in improving efficiencies in
                                                       delivering public services, one of the key elements to narrowing the infrastructure gap.4,5
                                                       A PPP is defined as a contractual arrangement between a public entity or authority and
                                                       a private entity for providing a public asset or service in which the private party bears
                                                       a significant risk and assumes management responsibilities.6 During the past 25 years,
                                                       more than 5,000 infrastructure projects in 121 low- and middle-income economies were
                                                       delivered through PPPs, representing investment commitments of $1.5 trillion. PPPs have
                                                       supported the development of crucial infrastructure such as roads, bridges, light and
                                                       heavy rail, airports, power plants, and energy and water distribution networks.7

                                                       The United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) recognize both the
                                                       relevance of quality infrastructure and the role of partnerships with the private sector
                                                       in the post-2015 development agenda. In particular, the quality of the procurement
                                                       process is a driver of PPP efficiency. The Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
                                                       International Conference on Financing for Development states the intent to “build
                                                       capacity to enter into public-private partnerships, including with regard to planning,
                                                       contract negotiation, management, accounting, and budgeting for contingent
                                                       liabilities.” Corrupt procurement practices continue to obstruct the delivery of quality
                                                       infrastructure. Moreover, the design of the procurement process itself has an impact on
                                                       the ability of governments to take full advantage of the potential benefits of PPPs for
                                                       delivering infrastructure.8 This includes their ability to identify which projects are best
                                                       done as PPPs and also to manage contracts in a transparent and effective way.
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                       Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement (Benchmarking PPP Procurement)
                                                       was launched in 2015 with the goal of supporting a better policy-making decision process
                                                       by highlighting key aspects of an economy’s regulatory framework for the procurement
                                                       of PPPs. The exercise was inspired by the methodology of the World Bank Group’s
                                                       Doing Business report, which assesses the business climate in 189 economies and has
                                                       a track record of leveraging more than 2,500 reforms to date. By assessing economies’
                                                       laws, regulations, and practices against recognized good practices, Benchmarking
                                                       PPP Procurement offers data to fuel academic research, helps governments assess the
                                                       performance of their procurement systems, and delivers a unique information tool for
                                                       the private sector and civil society. We expect that the Benchmarking PPP Procurement
                                                       exercise will help identify areas for reform to achieve more transparent, competitive,
                                                       and efficient PPP procurement systems and increase private sector participation in
                                                       infrastructure and service delivery.




14
                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




What Does Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017 Measure?
Thematic Coverage
Benchmarking PPP Procurement presents cross-economy analysis of 82 economies on
issues affecting the procurement of PPPs. The standardized survey instrument includes
50 questions organized by areas, which were selected with guidance from a review of
academic literature9 and input from the expert consultative group (ECG).

The areas covered by the survey instrument are as follows:

   >> Regulatory and institutional framework for PPPs: This introductory section aims
      to identify the extent to which the regulatory frameworks in the measured
      economies cover PPPs. It highlights alternative approaches to regulate PPPs
      that different economies have adopted. It also attempts to capture a general
      understanding of the overall institutional arrangement for PPPs, such as
      who the procuring authorities are and whether a specific PPP unit or other
      government agency with similar functions exists.

   >> Preparation of PPPs: This section covers the period and activities that precede and
      inform the decision to launch a PPP procurement process. It explores whether
      the identification of a potential PPP project happens within the broader context
      of public investments and thereby its consistency with government priorities.
      It also examines which assessments are required or conducted to define key
      features of the PPP project and its feasibility. In addition, it considers other
      activities that lead to the procurement of the PPP project (that is, activities
      undertaken before publishing the public tender notice, such as preparing the
      draft contract or obtaining land and permits).

   >> Procurement of PPPs: This section focuses on the process for selecting a private




                                                                                                                                 Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
      partner to undertake the responsibility of developing the PPP project. The range
      of topics in this section reflects recognized good practices in selecting private
      partners and examines whether different regulatory frameworks adhere to
      them. The transparency and fairness of the process, evaluation criteria for bids,
      and specific provisions regarding lack of competition are major themes in this
      section.

   >> Unsolicited proposals for PPPs: This section first defines whether the regulatory
      framework allows for the submission of unsolicited proposals (USPs). When
      applicable, it examines whether a specific procedure is in place to evaluate
      their feasibility and their consistency with other government priorities. In
      addition, it assesses whether a competitive procedure is required to select the
      private partner. It also explores what compensation mechanisms are in place
      for USPs.

   >> PPP contract management: This section considers the existence of a well-
      established and comprehensive contract management framework to facilitate
      smooth implementation of a PPP project. It assesses the monitoring and
      evaluation systems for PPPs, as well as the regulatory provisions regarding PPP
      contract modification and renegotiation, dispute resolution, lender step-in
      rights, and termination.


                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                 EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                 Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                               until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                         Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       Benchmarking PPP Procurement provides de jure and de facto data:

                                                          >> De jure data capture the characteristics of laws and regulations encompassing
                                                             PPP procurement rules, other legal texts of general application, and judicial
                                                             decisions and administrative rulings setting precedents in the procurement of
                                                             PPPs.

                                                          >> De facto data assess actual practice in connection with some of the de jure
                                                             data points covered in the survey. A subset of relevant regulatory questions is
                                                             followed by questions that capture the extent to which the legal requirements
                                                             are respected in practice, according to the survey respondents. A number of
                                                             questions capture contributors’ perceptions of the time required to complete
                                                             relevant stages of the PPP procurement process, based on their significant and
                                                             routine experience in PPP transactions.

                                                       On the basis of the lessons learned from the pilot exercise released in June 2015,
                                                       which covered 10 economies, the Benchmarking PPP Procurement team refined the
                                                       methodology.10 Since its inception, the team has relied on extensive research regarding
                                                       the latest PPP practices, along with frequent consultations with PPP experts. An
                                                       extensive review of the academic literature was conducted to identify internationally
                                                       accepted good practices as well as recognized issues that private operators face
                                                       when entering into PPP transactions. Concurrently, the team consulted with and was
                                                       guided by the project’s ECG,11 which includes renowned PPP specialists, academics,
                                                       and representatives from private organizations. The consultation process, along with
                                                       the academic literature review, enabled the team to refine the survey instrument,
                                                       generating a set of questions that measures the good practices and allows for a valid
                                                       cross-economy analysis.

                                                       PPP procurement is usually carried out by different levels of government within
                                                       each economy and is sometimes carried out along sectoral lines. Because of resource
                                                       considerations, the study has looked at situations in which the procuring authority is
                                                       national or federal (with two exceptions; figure 1) and has used the transport sector
                                                       (highways) where sector-specific considerations are assumed (box 1). In addition,
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                       some economies have separate regimes for concessions (usually defined as user-pays
                                                       projects) and PPPs (defined as government-pays projects). In such cases (Brazil, France,
                                                       Senegal, Togo, and the Russian Federation), both regimes were evaluated.




16
                                                                                                        EMBARGOED
                                                                        Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                      until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Figure 1 Economies covered in Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017

                                                                     Cambodia                     Papua New Guinea
  East Asia                                                          China                        Philippines
  and Paciﬁc                                                         Indonesia                    Singapore
                                                                     Malaysia                     Thailand
                                                                     Mongolia                     Timor-Leste
  12 economies                                                       Myanmar                      Vietnam


                                                                     Albania                                Moldova
  Europe                                                             Armenia                                Romania
                                                                     Bosnia and Herzegovina                 Russian Federation
  and Central Asia                                                   Bulgaria                               Tajikistan
                                                                     Kazakhstan                             Turkey
                                                                     Kyrgyz Republic                        Ukraine
  13      economies                                                  Lithuania



  Latin America                                                      Argentina                    Ecuador                 Nicaragua
                                                                     Brazil                       Guatemala               Panama
  and Caribbean                                                      Colombia                     Honduras                Peru
                                                                     Costa Rica                   Jamaica                 Uruguay
                                                                     Dominican Republic           Mexico
  14 economies

  Middle East                                                        Algeria                      Lebanon
  and North Africa                                                   Egypt, Arab Rep.             Morocco
                                                                     Iraq                         Tunisia
                                                                     Jordan
   7      economies


  OECD                                                               Australia*
                                                                     Canada
                                                                                                  Korea, Rep.
                                                                                                  Poland
  High income                                                        Chile                        Portugal




                                                                                                                                                         Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
                                                                     France                       United Kingdom
                                                                     Italy                        United States **
  10 economies                                                       * State of New South Wales   ** Commonwealth of Virginia



                                                                     Angola                       Ghana                   Senegal
  Sub-Saharan                                                        Benin                        Kenya                   South Africa
                                                                     Cameroon                     Madagascar              Tanzania
  Africa                                                             Congo, Dem. Rep.             Malawi                  Togo
                                                                     Congo, Rep.                  Mauritius               Uganda
                                                                     Côte d'Ivoire                Mozambique              Zambia
  20 economies                                                       Gabon                        Nigeria




  South Asia                                                         Afghanistan                  Nepal
                                                                     Bangladesh                   Pakistan
                                                                     India                        Sri Lanka

   6      economies

Note: Benchmarking PPP Procurement uses the World Bank Group regional and income group classifications, available at
http://data.worldbank.org/about/country-and-lending-groups. Regional averages presented in figures and tables in the
Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017 report include economies from all income groups (low, lower middle, upper middle and
high income), though high income OECD economies are assigned the “regional” classification OECD high income.
PPP = public-private partnership. The scope of the assessment is limited to infrastructure projects developed by procuring
authorities at the national or federal level. However, in the cases of Australia and the United States, the study focuses on
measuring only the State of New South Wales and the Commonwealth of Virginia, respectively.

Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                   EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                   Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                 until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                           Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       Geographic Coverage
                                                       The pilot exercise conducted in 2015 covered 10 economies: Cameroon, Ghana, Kenya,
                                                       Nigeria, South Africa, and Tanzania; the Arab Republic of Egypt and Tunisia; and Colombia
                                                       and Peru. For Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017, the geographic coverage has been
                                                       scaled up to cover 82 economies spanning seven World Bank Group Regions: 12 in East
                                                       Asia and Pacific (EAP), 20 in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), 7 in Middle East and North Africa
                                                       (MENA), 13 in Europe and Central Asia (ECA); 14 in Latin America and the Caribbean
                                                       (LAC), 6 in South Asia (SAR), and 10 in OECD high income (Organisation for Economic Co-
                                                       operation and Development) economies (figure 1).

                                                       The Benchmarking PPP Procurement assessment is based on primary data collected
                                                       using a standard questionnaire, which was administered to approximately 8,400
                                                       contributors in the 82 economies included in this year’s edition. Data collection was
                                                       conducted until the end of April 2016. Consequently, any legal or regulatory reforms that
                                                       have taken place after March 31, 2016, are not taken into account in this year’s report.
                                                       Once the preliminary analysis is completed, a follow-up round is conducted, through
                                                       conference calls and written correspondence, to address and rectify any discrepancies
                                                       in the responses provided by the contributors. The preliminary data are then finalized
                                                       and shared with governments or the World Bank Group’s Country Management Units
                                                       (CMUs) for validation (figure 2).


                                                       Figure 2




                                                                                             September-November
                                                                                              Survey Development



                                                                                                                          December-
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                                       May-June                                            February
                                                                     Report Writing                                         Survey
                                                                                              The cycle of the          Administration
                                                                                             Benchmarking PPP
                                                                                             Procurement 2017
                                                                                                  project




                                                                                   April                     March
                                                                                Data Analysis            Data Veriﬁcation




                                                       Note: PPP = public-private partnership.
                                                       Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017

18
                                                                               EMBARGOED
                                               Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                             until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                       Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




How Are the Data Collected?
Selection of Expert Contributors
The questionnaire was completed by practitioners who have a wealth of knowledge
related to PPP systems. The main contributors were law firms that have extensive
experience advising clients on PPP transactions, laws, and regulations; public officials
involved with PPP transactions; chambers of commerce, consultants, and academics
familiar with PPPs; and private operators and other PPP experts.

Respondents were selected on the basis of their expertise with PPP transactions, as well
as their willingness and availability to contribute. The following sources were used to
identify the expert contributors:

   >> International guides identifying leading providers of legal services, including their
      specialization, in each economy. The guides include Chambers and Partners guides,
      the International Financial Law Review (IFLR), The Legal 500, Martindale-Hubbell,
      HG Lawyers’ Global Directory, Who’s Who Legal Directory, Lexadin, and country-
      specific legal directories.

   >> Large international law and accounting or consulting firms that have extensive
      global networks, whether through offices or local partner groups.

   >> Members of the American Bar Association, country bar associations, chambers of
      commerce, and other membership organizations.

   >> Government entities that undertake PPPs, such as ministries of finance, PPP units,
      and PPP procuring authorities.

   >> Professional service providers identified through embassy websites, business
      chambers, and other sources and recommended by World Bank Group staff.

Lawyers and professional services providers are in an ideal position to complete the




                                                                                                                                Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
survey and provide the most up-to-date information on the basis of their experience
advising clients and working on PPP transactions. Involving PPP experts and practitioners
from different sectors increases the accuracy of the data by normalizing potential biases
held by different stakeholders. Furthermore, reaching out to both the public and the
private sectors helps reveal the views and insights of the various stakeholders involved
in the PPP procurement process.


Standardized Data and Comparability
Standardized and comparable data are indispensable for valid cross-economy analysis;
this is the core principle of Benchmarking PPP Procurement. The set of questions selected
for the questionnaire is sent to all of the economies covered. Furthermore, comparability is
achieved through use of standard case-study assumptions, which provide a hypothetical
scenario that guides local respondents in completing the questionnaire. Use of a
standard case study makes data collection easily replicable and can compensate for deep
structural differences that could jeopardize cross-economy comparisons. In addition, the
case study can easily be applied to a larger set of economies in cost-efficient manner.




                                                                                                                               19
                                                                                                                                                               EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                               Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                             until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                                       Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                        Box 1 Case-study assumptions for Benchmarking PPP Procurement
                                                        •	 The private partner (the project company) is an SPVa established by a consortium of
                                                           privately owned firms, which operate in the surveyed economy.
                                                        •	 The procuring authority is a national or federal authorityb in the economy that is
                                                           planning to procure the design, building, financing, operation, and maintenance
                                                           of, for example, an infrastructure project in the transportation sector (a highway)
                                                           with an estimated investment value of $150 million (or the equivalent in the relevant
                                                           economy’s local currency).
                                                        •	 To this end, the procuring authority initiates a public call for tenders, following
                                                           a competitive PPP procurement procedure. The call for tender attracts six bids,
                                                           including the private partner’s bid. The private partner’s offer is complete and
                                                           includes all required documents. It is unambiguous and provides a price quotation
                                                           free from errors on the part of the private partner.
                                                        •	 For section D on unsolicited proposals (USPs), before initiating any procurement
                                                           activities, the procuring authority receives a USP from the consortium of companies
                                                           to be integrated in the private partner.
                                                            The special purpose vehicle (SPV)—also known as a special purpose company (SPC) or special purpose
                                                         a. 
                                                            entity (SPE), is a company specifically formed to undertake a specific project—in this case, the public-
                                                            private partnership (PPP) project.

                                                            Except for the cases of Australia and United States, where most of the PPPs are done at the
                                                         b. 
                                                            subnational level. There, the study focuses on measuring only the State of New South Wales and the
                                                            Commonwealth of Virginia, respectively.




                                                       Aggregating the Data
                                                       The Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017 data are aggregated by thematic area, with the
                                                       aim of assisting policymakers in evaluating their economies’ PPP frameworks in thematic
                                                       areas: PPP preparation, PPP procurement, USPs, and PPP contract management. The PPP
                                                       practices and regulations that are recognized and considered as good practices are the
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                       only areas that are scored and aggregated at the thematic area level.13 Other data are
                                                       collected and included in the report for contextual purposes. The scoring methodology
                                                       (annex 2) allocates an identical weight to all of the benchmarks addressed in the survey.
                                                       The scores are presented on a range from 0 to 100.

                                                       The economies at the top of the range (score approaching 100) are considered to have
                                                       a PPP regulatory framework that closely aligns with internationally recognized good
                                                       practices. The economies at the bottom of the range (scores closer to 0) have significant
                                                       room for improvement as they do not adhere closely to international good practices and
                                                       principles as measured by Benchmarking PPP Procurement. Each economy’s scores for
                                                       the four thematic areas appear in the “Economy Data Tables” section at the end of this
                                                       report and should be assessed individually. All of the data points used in aggregating
                                                       Benchmarking PPP Procurement are identified and made publicly available, along with
                                                       the other data points, on the project’s website (http://bpp.worldbank.org).




20
                                                                              EMBARGOED
                                              Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                            until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                      Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




A Word of Caution
Understanding the data’s scope of coverage is fundamental to its interpretation. In
fact, when using this report, readers need to keep in mind both its strengths and its
limitations. The project has the major advantage of the comparability of its data across
the world’s economies covered by the assessment, thanks to the use of standardized case
scenarios with well-specified assumptions. By compiling more than 50 data points in a
comparative manner, the report highlights relevant regulatory aspects for governments
and firms engaging in PPP projects and helps governments identify well-defined areas
of action and design reform agendas. The majority of the data points covered are based
on the regulatory framework, which makes them “actionable”—as the law is well within
the sphere of influence of policy makers and thus amenable to change.

Although this method has the advantage of transparency, it has one inevitable
shortcoming: it is not feasible to design a case-study assumption that covers all
possible PPP projects across the world’s economies. Moreover, the data used to conduct
this exercise were gathered during a specific time frame. This method reflects only
the regulatory framework in force and general practice at that point. Data collection
for Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017 closed on March 31, 2016. Consequently, any
regulatory reforms enacted and any practice adopted since that date are not taken into
account in this year’s edition.

Benchmarking PPP Procurement does not cover all the regulatory issues related to PPP
procurement. The report does not measure some aspects of PPP frameworks that matter
to firms, policy makers, and the overall development of the projects. For example, it does
not attempt to capture a number of dimensions, such as macroeconomic stability or the
prevalence and perception of corruption in an economy, despite their importance. It is
complementary to other activities developed by the multilateral development banks (for
example, Infrascope, which provides a broader assessment of the enabling framework
for PPPs).




                                                                                                                               Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
What’s Next?
Improving the methodology is an ongoing process that is highly dependent on
continuous consultations, and the team welcomes feedback on the methodology and
the results shown in this report.

Future expansions of themes covered in the Benchmarking PPP Procurement project may
take place. Consideration could be given to including subnational data and collecting
data from more than one sector, which is the example reflected in the current case-study
assumption.

Subject to resource availability, in the next phase the geographic scope of the project
could be expanded. This expansion would enhance the illustration of more global
experiences from different regions and consequently add value to the dataset and serve
a broader audience.




                                                                                                                              21
                                                                                                                                                 EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                 Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                               until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                         Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       Regulatory Framework and
                                                       Institutional Arrangements
                                                       for PPPs
                                                       Benchmarking PPP Procurement collects information on the different types of regulatory
                                                       frameworks and institutional arrangements for PPPs adopted in each of the 82 economies.
                                                       The diversity of legal traditions and PPP types shows that there is no single best way
                                                       to document and give force to a PPP framework. Rather, the right way to establish a
                                                       PPP depends on the administrative and legal traditions in the jurisdiction and the
                                                       government’s objectives.14 Therefore, Benchmarking PPP Procurement does not assume
                                                       that a regulatory framework is better or worse simply because it takes a particular form.

                                                       This section describes the various approaches taken to establish PPP frameworks and
                                                       institutional arrangements without scoring them. This information is intended to
                                                       provide a better understanding of the assessment of the four thematic areas in which
                                                       data are scored with respect to good practices.



                                                       PPP Regulatory Framework
                                                       The type of legal system (common law versus civil law) weighs heavily on the type of PPP
                                                       regulatory framework that exists in a given economy. Economies with “common law”
                                                       legal systems tend to rely on policy documents and administrative guidance materials,
                                                       whereas economies with “civil law” legal systems are more likely to set up a detailed PPP
                                                       framework in a binding legal document or statute or law, and to spell it out in detailed
                                                       rules and regulations with legal force.
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                       Even among economies with similar legal systems, there is a wide range in how PPPs
                                                       are regulated. In part, this variation arises from the fact that PPPs are seldom regulated
                                                       exclusively by a single legal document but rather by a set of legal instruments, including
                                                       laws, regulations, decrees, enacted policies, and guidelines. Furthermore, other laws and
                                                       regulations, although not exclusively focused on PPPs, might have an impact on them
                                                       when regulating matters such as land ownership or public financial management. The
                                                       regulatory framework for PPPs varies from one economy to another, depending on how
                                                       all these elements are combined.15

                                                       From the analysis conducted, it is possible to devise a sort of typology of regulatory
                                                       frameworks on the basis of how each economy has chosen to regulate PPPs. In addition
                                                       to its illustrative and descriptive purpose, the presentation of this typology also helps
                                                       better describe both the scope and some of the limitations of the analysis in the next
                                                       sections of this report. Annex 1 provides an overview of the typologies of PPP regulatory
                                                       frameworks adopted in the 82 economies analyzed.

                                                       Almost half (49 percent) of the economies measured by Benchmarking PPP Procurement
                                                       have adopted a law or act that specifically regulates PPPs (figure 3). In the sample of
                                                       economies measured, this form is the most common way of establishing a regulatory

22
                                                                              EMBARGOED
                                              Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                            until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                      Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




framework for PPPs. Even within these economies, there is some heterogeneity in
the coverage and name used (for example, the Philippines adopted a Build-Operate-
Transfer [BOT] law rather than a PPP law) and even in the hierarchy of the adopted
legal instrument (for example, Vietnam regulates PPP through an executive decree
rather than a law). In addition, 7 percent of the economies (Cambodia, Chile, Costa Rica,
Mongolia, Nicaragua, and Panama) have enacted only concession laws.


Figure 3 Type of PPP regulatory framework adopted (percentage, N = 82)

Concession
and PPP law
15%
PPP Guidelines,
policies or similar
instruments                                                                       Speciﬁc law or act
11%                                                                                 regulating PPPs
                                                                                                49%
General
Procurement laws
18%
Concession law
or act exclusively
7%
Note: PPP = public-private partnership.
Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017



In 15 percent of the economies surveyed, a PPP law coexists with a concession law. In 7 of




                                                                                                                               Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
those economies, the PPP law and the concession law are complementary. For example,
in Argentina, the PPP law is supplemented by the concession law, which, in turn, is
supplemented by the public procurement law. For those seven economies (Argentina,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Moldova, Poland, Tunisia, and Ukraine), a single
analysis has been conducted attending to the provisions of both legal instruments as
appropriate. In the other five economies (Brazil, France, Senegal, Togo, and the Russian
Federation), however, our contributors expressly distinguished between two regimes,
one for PPPs and one for concessions, according to specific features of the contract.
For example, in Brazil, for PPPs the government remunerates the private partner for
the availability of the infrastructure whereas concessions involve no government
payment.16 In France, the differentiation depends on the risk transferred to the private
sector, with concessions requiring the transfer of a proportion of the risk that involves
real exposure to market fluctuations (but not completely excluding government
payments).17 For these five economies, the analysis conducted for the Benchmarking
PPP Procurement is disaggregated between concessions and PPPs, providing an
understanding of the differences that both regimes entail.18

Instead of adopting a specific PPP or concession law, in 18 percent of the economies PPPs
are governed by the general public procurement laws. In some of these economies, PPPs
or concessions are specifically mentioned in the law or included as a specific type of
contract (for example, the Dominican Republic includes in its public procurement law
                                                                                                                              23
                                                                                                                                                    EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                    Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                  until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                            Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       a specific section on concessions). Finally, 11 percent of the economies mainly regulate
                                                       PPPs through guidelines, policies, or similar instruments (Australia, Canada, China, India,
                                                       Jamaica, Malaysia, Singapore, South Africa, and Sri Lanka).19 Not surprisingly, this is mostly
                                                       the case in common law economies. The distinction between alternative methods for
                                                       regulating PPPs is sometimes blurry. For example, in the United Kingdom, a large number
                                                       of provisions detailing the development of PPPs are contained in guidelines and policy
                                                       documents, but the public procurement law also applies to the procurement procedure.

                                                       Closely related to the regulatory modality chosen to introduce PPPs in the regulatory
                                                       framework, some economies impose restrictions on the sector in which PPPs may be used.
                                                       In some of these cases, as in Chile, there is no formal restriction, but PPPs are not used in
                                                       a number of sectors (electricity and telecommunications) that are operated completely
                                                       by the private sector under the regulatory authority of the government. In other cases,
                                                       private participation in the provision of infrastructure for specific sectors is regulated by
                                                       the sectoral laws and regulations and is excluded from the application of the general
                                                       PPP or concession law. This is the case in Colombia, for example, for telecommunications,
                                                       ports, and public power-generating utilities. Finally, in a few economies, for some
                                                       activities within an area, use of PPPs is restricted. In Uruguay, whereas the infrastructure
                                                       for health and education centers can be delivered through PPPs, health services and
                                                       education services cannot.20
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




24
                                                                               EMBARGOED
                                               Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                             until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                       Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Institutional Arrangements
Just as PPPs are regulated in different ways, the development of PPPs can take place
within different institutional arrangements. A typical consideration when assessing
the PPP institutional framework is whether a PPP unit exists. A PPP unit is defined
as “any organisation set up with full or partial aid of the government to ensure that
necessary capacity to create, support, and evaluate multiple public-private partnerships
agreements [is] made available and reside[s] in the government.”21

Given the complexity of PPPs, establishing a PPP unit may support the development
of PPPs but in itself is not a guarantee of success. Consequently the analysis does not
score an economy on the basis of whether it has not created a PPP unit. Nonetheless,
the analysis found that PPP units are common among the surveyed economies, being
present in 85 percent of them.

The functions and roles of PPP units (figure 4) vary across the economies surveyed. It
is particularly interesting that in 16 percent of the economies, the PPP unit not only
provides advice to the procuring authorities on the stages of the procurement process
but also takes a more active role in the procurement of PPPs. In those cases, a PPP unit can
either be exclusively responsible for PPP procurement (as in Honduras, where Coalianza
is the only public agency that can procure PPPs)22 or conduct it jointly with the procuring
authority (as in the Arab Republic of Egypt).23


Figure 4 Type of PPP institutional arrangement adopted (percentage, N = 82)

                                                                         PPP units with active role
No PPP unit                                                            in the procurement of PPPs
 15%                                                                                              16%




                                                                                                                                Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
 PPP units with
 advising role to
 the procuring authority
69%


Note: PPP = public-private partnership.
Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017




                                                                                                                               25
                                                                                                                                                    EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                    Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                  until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                            Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       Thematic Areas Covered and
                                                       Scored in Benchmarking PPP
                                                       Procurement 2017
                                                       The following sections present the four thematic areas covered in Benchmarking
                                                       PPP Procurement: preparation, procurement, unsolicited proposals, and contract
                                                       management. The survey includes questions to assess each of the thematic areas.
                                                       However, only questions for which there is consensus on good practices are scored. The
                                                       scoring methodology is presented in annex 2.

                                                       The exercise relies on a broad interpretation of the term regulatory framework and includes
                                                       laws, regulations, enacted policies, guidelines, and even case law where appropriate.
                                                       It also accounts for generally followed practices when contributors confirmed those
                                                       practices. In sum, the assessment and scoring of the four thematic areas presented in
                                                       the following sections results from the coverage and soundness of regulations compared
                                                       with recognized good practices.




                                                       Preparation of PPPs
                                                       Before deciding whether to launch a PPP procurement process, procuring authorities need
                                                       to devote time and resources to ensure that such a choice is justified and that the project is
                                                       ready for market. This effort includes the identification and appraisal of projects suitable to
                                                       be developed as PPPs and the structuring and design of a draft PPP contract and approvals.
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                       This process is crucial to attain properly structured PPP projects that are more likely to both
                                                       provide value for money to the government and be commercially viable. However, PPPs
                                                       are often hastily formulated, with little financial means or technical help.24 The dearth of
                                                       well-prepared PPP projects is one of the main challenges faced by emerging markets in
                                                       attracting private sector operators and better leveraging private financing.

                                                       This PPP preparation phase includes several stages, starting with the identification
                                                       of strategic infrastructure projects that could be developed as PPPs. For this purpose,
                                                       projects must be identified and prioritized on the basis of an integrated infrastructure
                                                       plan and rigorous economic cost-benefit analysis. Then feasibility studies should be
                                                       conducted to ensure that a particular project can succeed as a PPP. Further assessments
                                                       should be undertaken to inform the structure of the PPP project, including assessing
                                                       and deciding on the allocation of risks and studying the market’s appetite and capacity
                                                       to accept them.25 Finally, on the basis of the PPP structure resulting from the appraisal
                                                       process, the procuring authorities must formulate the documentation required to launch
                                                       the PPP procurement process, including the draft PPP contract. Within all of this work, it
                                                       is also important to understand the approval process—in particular whether there is a
                                                       role for the ministry of finance or other government agencies or ministries that have a
                                                       cross-cutting mandate. The recognized good practices that emerge during PPP project
                                                       preparation are summarized in box 2.
26
                                                                                          EMBARGOED
                                                          Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                        until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                  Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




  Box 2 Good practices in the preparation of PPPs
  Good practices which help ensure that the decision to procure a PPP is justified and
  that the procuring authority is ready to initiate the procurement process are:

  •	 The Ministry of Finance or central budget authority approves the long term financial
     implications of the project.
  •	 The project is assessed and prioritized along with all other public investment
     projects in the context of the national public investment plans.
  •	 The project is adequately justified, on the basis of:
             >	 Socioeconomic analysis;
             >	 Fiscal affordability assessment;
             >	 Financial viability;
             >	 Risk assessment;
             >	 PPP vs. public procurement comparative assessment;
             >	 Market assessment;
  •	 The procuring authority prepares a draft PPP contract and includes it in the request
     for proposals.
  •	 The procuring authority has standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction
     documents to expedite and guarantee consistency.
Note: PPP = public-private partnership.



Benchmarking PPP Procurement shows regional and income group differences in the
average score for the preparation of PPPs (figure 5). The OECD high income region
stands out from the rest of the regions. ECA and SAR regions score just above average
and interestingly they are the regions with the lowest intraregional variance. When




                                                                                                                                           Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
disaggregating the data by income level, there is a clear pattern showing that the lower
the income group level, the lower the average scores on project preparation.


Figure 5 Preparation of PPPs, score by region and income group (score 1–100)

                                  a. Region                                              b. Income group
        80
        70
        60
        50
Score




        40
        30
        20
        10
        0
             ECA    EAP     LAC    MENA        OECD    SAR      SSA              High     Upper    Lower      Low
                                                high                           income    middle   middle    income
                                              income                                     income   income


Note: EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean;
MENA = Middle East and North Africa; OECD = Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development;
PPP = public-private partnership; SAR = South Asia; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.
Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017                                                                                                 27
                                                                                                                                                     EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                     Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                   until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                             Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       To assess the extent to which PPP regulatory frameworks in different economies cover
                                                       the need to conduct this preparatory work before launching a PPP, the Benchmarking
                                                       PPP Procurement survey inquired about the approval process for PPPs, the process of
                                                       PPP prioritization, and their appraisal in all relevant dimensions (socioeconomic impact,
                                                       affordability, value for money of the PPP alternative, commercial viability including
                                                       bankability, and the like), as well as aspects of the preparation of the PPP draft contract. The
                                                       survey also included a pilot assessment of the responsibility to obtain the land and permits
                                                       required to develop and operate a PPP project. Whereas the data gathered offers a rich set
                                                       of findings across the economies measured, the following subsections briefly detail the
                                                       study’s results related to approvals, prioritization of PPP projects, and their appraisal.



                                                       Approval of PPPs
                                                       The PPP approval process can have an important impact on the quality of project
                                                       preparation. It is generally accepted that to ensure that a PPP project is fiscally
                                                       sustainable, the ministry of finance should have a defined role in the approval of PPPs,
                                                       especially regarding affordability and public commitments.26 The survey did indeed find
                                                       that many economies align with the recognized good practice of mandating a specific
                                                       intervention by the ministry of finance or central budgetary authority for the approval
                                                       of PPP projects prior to the launch of the procurement process. For example, in the Arab
                                                       Republic of Egypt, the minister of finance is a member of the Supreme Committee for PPP
                                                       Affairs that approves all PPPs.27 However, 27 percent of the economies do not require such
                                                       explicit intervention. Furthermore, in 44 percent of the economies, a second approval by
                                                       the same authorities is also required after the procurement process is completed but
                                                       before PPP contract is signed to ensure clearance of the process and its outcome.



                                                       Prioritization of PPP Projects
                                                       A PPP is a method of infrastructure delivery that is an alternative to conventional
                                                       procurement. Regardless of how infrastructure projects are procured, they should be
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                       identified and prioritized in the context of each economy’s public investment planning
                                                       process.28 As a consequence, PPPs should emerge from this broader public investment
                                                       planning and project selection process. This process usually involves a socioeconomic
                                                       analysis and ensures that PPP projects are subject to the same level of scrutiny as any
                                                       other public investment project. Only later in the process should projects be screened for
                                                       their potential for implementation through PPPs and further assessment be carried out
                                                       to determine their viability as PPP projects.

                                                       Benchmarking PPP Procurement finds that, overall, practices within the economies
                                                       surveyed leave considerable room for improvement. For instance, in only 23 percent of
                                                       the economies does the regulatory framework actually detail a procedure for ensuring
                                                       that the identification and prioritization of PPPs is consistent with public investment
                                                       priorities (figure 6). In the Philippines, for example, procuring authorities must (a)
                                                       prepare infrastructure or development programs to identify specific priority projects
                                                       that may be developed as PPPs; (b) ensure that the list of priority projects is consistent
                                                       with the Philippine Development Plan, the Provincial Development Plan, and the Physical
                                                       Framework Plan; and (c) submit the list to the National Economic and Development
                                                       Authority Board or the Investment Coordination Committee for approval.29 Similarly, in
                                                       Kenya, the procuring authorities are required to prepare a pipeline of PPP projects in line
                                                       with their development plans. The PPP pipeline is then submitted for assessment and
28
                                                                               EMBARGOED
                                               Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                             until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                       Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




approval by the PPP Unit, the PPP Committee, and the National Cabinet.30 Peru has an
especially precise mechanism for including PPPs in the context of public investments;
identifying their importance in national, sectoral, regional, and local priorities; and
declaring them to be viable within the scope of the SNIP (National Investment System).31


Figure 6 Consistency between prioritization of PPP projects and public
investment priorities (percentage, N = 82)
                                                                    Detailed procedure to ensure
                                                                        PPPs are consistent with
                                                                     public investment priorities
Prioritization of PPPs
within public investment                                                                          23%
priorities not regulated

38%

                                                                             No detailed procedure
                                                                            (for example prioritization
                                                                              only required as a matter
                                                                                           of principle)

                                                                                                 39%

PPP = public-private partnership.
Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017


In 39 percent of the economies, prioritizing PPPs among other public investment
projects is required as a matter of principle or done in practice, but the provisions do not
detail a specific process to follow, leaving the implementation of this requirement to
the discretion of procuring authorities. For example, in Pakistan, PPP projects are to be




                                                                                                                                Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
screened and evaluated, including by the Planning Commission, “to ensure consistency
with the Government of Pakistan infrastructure policy/strategy.”32 In the remaining 38
percent, the prioritization of PPPs within public investment priorities is not regulated,
and it is not clear how these economies ensure consistency in prioritization between
PPPs and their broader investment program.



Assessments of PPPs
Before deciding to initiate a PPP procurement, the procuring authority needs to answer
a set of key questions related to affordability, risk allocation, commercial viability, and
value for money to ensure that the PPP option is feasible. Also, this assessment process
ensures that all of the critical characteristics of the project are understood by the
procuring authorities, enabling them to properly structure the project and design the
draft PPP contract.33

To capture the extent to which economies follow this practice, Benchmarking
PPP Procurement assesses whether the PPP regulatory framework has included
requirements to (a) assess the socioeconomic impact of the project, (b) appraise its
affordability, (c) identify and allocate the risks, (d) determine bankability, (e) conduct
a comparative assessment with the traditional procurement options, and (f) conduct
market assessment.
                                                                                                                               29
                                                                                                                                                                          84%
                                                                                Affordability                                                                                   EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                      26%                       Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                                                                   is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                                                                                                                        Time (EDT) 77%
                                                                       Risk identiﬁcation
                                                                                                                         29%

                                                               Whereas      in approximately two-thirds of the economies surveyed there
                                                                          Bankability
                                                                                                                                                       83% are legal
                                                               requirements to conduct assessments     21%         of socioeconomic impact, affordability, risk
                                                               identification, and bankability as well as comparative assessments (figure          77%
                                                                                                                                                        7), only about
                                                           Comparative assessment
                                                               one-third
                                                       with traditional     of these economies have adopted
                                                                        procurement                              32% a  specific methodology     for conducting   such
                                                               assessments. Although having a legal requirement is usually a first step necessary to
                                                                                                                              49%
                                                                 Market that
                                                               ensure          these assessments are conducted, establishing
                                                                         assessment                                                      a clear methodology is also
                                                                                               11%
                                                               needed to enable the procuring entity to conduct assessments consistently across projects
                                                               and to enhance the           10
                                                                                      0 quality     20 reliability
                                                                                                   and       30      of the 50
                                                                                                                     40        analysis.            80
                                                                                                                                             70 worst-case
                                                                                                                                     60 In the              90    100
                                                                                                                                                              scenario,
                                                               the lack of a specific    methodology
                                                                                       Legally             might point
                                                                                               required or performed      either to (a)
                                                                                                                     in practice         studies
                                                                                                                                       Enacted   that are carried out
                                                                                                                                               methodology
                                                               to formally comply with the legal requirements without actually providing the critical
                                                               information needed for cognizant decision making or (b) a lack of implementation of the
                                                               legal requirements in place.


                                                               Figure 7 Assessment during PPP preparation phase (percentage; N = 82)

                                                                       100

                                                                           90     88%
                                                                                                     84%                                83%
                                                                           80                                          77%                               77%

                                                                           70

                                                                           60
                                                              Percentage




                                                                           50                                                                                               49%

                                                                           40
                                                                                                                                                                33%
                                                                           30            29%                                 29%
                                                                                                            26%
                                                                                                                                              21%
                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                    11%
                                                                           10

                                                                           0
                                                                                Socioeconomic       Affordability        Risk          Bankability      Comparative           Market
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                                                    impact                           identiﬁcation                       assessment         assessment
                                                                                                                                                       with traditional
                                                                                                                                                        procurement

                                                                                                Legally required or performed in practice           Enacted methodology

                                                               PPP = public-private partnership.
                                                               Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017



                                                               Of the 82 economies analyzed, the Dominican Republic and Lebanon are the only
                                                               economies that do not legally require any assessment to be conducted before a PPP is
                                                               procured. At the other end of the spectrum, Lithuania, the Philippines, South Africa, and
                                                               Vietnam legally require all the mentioned assessments and also have enacted specific
                                                               methodologies to conduct those assessments. In 88 percent of the economies, the
                                                               procuring authorities conduct socioeconomic impact assessments before tendering
                                                               a PPP project. However, only 29 percent of the economies have developed a specific
                                                               methodology for how to perform the socioeconomic impact assessment. Uruguay is a
                                                               good example of an economy with a detailed methodology for a socioeconomic impact
                                                               assessment: the Planning and Budget Office has made available supporting material
                                                               and methodological guidelines, including a guide for the design and evaluation of
                                                               investment projects.34
30
                                                                               EMBARGOED
                                               Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                             until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                       Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




When it comes to affordability assessments, 84 percent of the surveyed economies
conduct them, but only 26 percent of the economies have enacted a specific
methodology for doing so. In some economies, this assessment is conducted directly
by the ministry of finance, as in Cameroon,35 or the PPP unit, as in Argentina,36 or by the
procuring authority under the supervision of the ministry of finance, as in Moldova.37
To ensure that long-term commitments are indeed studied, some economies define a
fixed period of time to analyze: for example, Timor-Leste requires forecasts of future
payments and revenues for the next 25 years.38 In Chile, the Ministry of Finance must
keep track and elaborate a yearly report on the contingent liabilities arising from
concessions,39 and Colombia has developed a manual on contingent liabilities that
contains a methodology for calculating the fiscal impact of PPPs.40

A similar finding applies to risk assessments, which are conducted in 77 percent of the
surveyed economies, but only 29 percent of them have adopted a methodology for
identifying and allocating risks. Whereas in some economies these methodologies
are limited to a list of risks to be assessed, as in the Arab Republic of Egypt,41 others
have prepared a more comprehensive risk matrix. This is the case, for example, in the
Philippines, where the Generic Preferred Risk Allocation matrix indicates the type of
risks to be assessed and also includes definitions, proposed allocations and rationales,
possible risk mitigation efforts, and suggested contract provisions.42

Similarly, 83 percent of the economies mandate assessment of the financial viability
or bankability of the project. Nevertheless, only 21 percent of the economies follow a
specific methodology for assessing the bankability of the PPP project. This is the case,
for example, in Colombia, where the National Planning Department and the Ministry
of Finance have developed several guides for assessing a project’s bankability.43

Of the 82 economies, 77 percent require a comparative assessment to be conducted
between PPP and traditional procurement.However, only 33 percent have enacted a
methodology detailing its preparation. In Brazil, the approval to procure a PPP must be
based on a study showing the convenience of and opportunity for procuring a PPP by




                                                                                                                                Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
identifying the reasons that justify the choice of the form of the PPP.44

Market assessment is the least commonly required appraisal among the surveyed
economies. It is conducted in only half of the economies (including 12 percent that do
so without a legal requirement), and only 11 percent have a specific methodology. In
the Philippines, for example, the PPP Center and the procuring authority must perform
a market-sounding process to determine the interest of private sector operators,
taking into account different scenarios for revenue and economic growth in the short,
medium, and long terms.45




                                                                                                                               31
                                                                                                                                                   EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                   Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                 until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                           Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       PPP Procurement
                                                       Once all the preparation activities are concluded and a decision is made to deliver an
                                                       infrastructure project as a PPP, the procuring authorities need to find the right private
                                                       sector partner to undertake such responsibilities. The selection of the private partner
                                                       is usually carried out through a public tendering process, applying either general public
                                                       procurement rules or procurement rules specially adopted for PPPs. Given the magnitude
                                                       and extent of public resources committed, choosing the right private partner is crucial for
                                                       the success of a PPP. It is ultimately the private partner’s capacity to innovate and attain
                                                       efficiency gains that will make it possible for the government to achieve value for money
                                                       through the PPP. Moreover, the long-term nature of a PPP means that the selection of the
                                                       private partner will have long-lasting impact. Choosing the right private sector partner
                                                       will thus enhance the likelihood of creating a trusting relationship with the procuring
                                                       authority and realizing the promise of a PPP.

                                                       These same features imply that a PPP procurement will usually last longer and be more
                                                       complex than a conventional procurement. For example, PPP projects usually require
                                                       a more thorough evaluation of bidder qualifications and proposals to ensure that they
                                                       will deliver the expected value for money.46 These longer, more complicated tendering
                                                       processes increase transaction costs for both the public and the private sector. The
                                                       procuring authorities should have taken this into account when deciding to use the
                                                       PPP option, but the higher cost of preparing PPP proposals and participating in PPP
                                                       procurement processes may deter competition. In addition to the reduction of transaction
                                                       costs, clarity, fairness, and transparency in the procurement process are basic ingredients
                                                       to ensure a level playing field for all bidders.

                                                       To evaluate how economies are conducting PPP procurement processes, Benchmarking PPP
                                                       Procurement covers a set of relevant items, contrasting each economy’s PPP framework
                                                       with recognized good practices in this area. The PPP Procurement thematic area explores
                                                       a range of elements that spread throughout the procurement process, such as bidders’
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                       access to procurement-related information, the clarity and comprehensiveness of the
                                                       procurement documents, the qualification of bid evaluation committee members, the
                                                       bid selection criteria used, the way governments deal with cases of sole proposals, and
                                                       the restriction on negotiation during the award phase. The recognized good practices
                                                       that could be drawn from the areas covered in the procurement of PPP projects are
                                                       summarized in box 3.

                                                        Box 3 Good practices in the procurement of PPPs

                                                        Good practices which help ensure fair competition and transparency during the PPP
                                                        procurement process are:

                                                        •	 The bid evaluation committee members meet minimum technical qualifications;
                                                        •	 The procuring authority publishes the public procurement notice online;
                                                        •	 The procuring authority grants at least 30 calendars days to potential bidders to
                                                           submit their proposals;
                                                        •	 The tender documents detail all the stages of the procurement process;


32
                                                                                         EMBARGOED
                                                         Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                       until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                 Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




  •	 Potential bidders can submit questions to clarify the public procurement notice and/
     or the request for proposals and the answers are disclosed to all potential bidders;
  •	 Bidders prepare and present a financial model with their proposal;
  •	 The procuring authority evaluates the proposals strictly and solely in accordance
     with the evaluation criteria stated in the tender documents;
  •	 The procuring authority follows a specific procedure in the case that only one
     proposal is submitted to guarantee value for money;
  •	 The procuring authority publishes the award notice online;
  •	 The procuring authority provides all bidders with the results of the PPP procurement
     process including the grounds for the selection of the winning bid;
  •	 Any negotiations between the selected bidder and the procuring authority after the
     award and before the signature of the PPP contract are restricted and regulated to
     ensure transparency;
  •	 The procuring authority publishes the signed PPP contract online.

Note: PPP = public-private partnership.



Benchmarking PPP Procurement shows regional and income group differences in the
average score for the procurement of PPPs (figure 8). The OECD high income region
precedes the rest of the regions, followed by ECA and LAC. The EAP region not only has
one of the lowest average scores but it displays the greatest intraregional variance.
When the data are disaggregated by income level, there is a clear pattern showing that
the lower the income group level, the lower the average scores on PPP procurement.


Figure 8 PPP procurement, score by region and income group (score 1–100)




                                                                                                                                          Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
                                  a. Region                                             b. Income group
        90
        80
        70
        60
        50
Score




        40
        30
        20
        10
        0
             ECA   EAP      LAC     MENA       OECD    SAR     SSA              High     Upper     Lower      Low
                                                high                          income    middle    middle    income
                                              income                                    income    income



Note: EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean;
MENA = Middle East and North Africa; OECD = Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development;
PPP = public-private partnership; SAR = South Asia; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.
Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017




                                                                                                                                         33
                                                                                                                                                  EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                  Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                          Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       The following paragraphs briefly present the survey findings for a few relevant issues
                                                       such as the legal period of time granted to potential bidders to submit their bids,
                                                       handling of sole bidders, access to information throughout the PPP procurement process
                                                       (publication of the procurement and award notice as well as the PPP contract), and
                                                       interaction with bidders (box 4).



                                                       Period of Time Granted to Bidders to Submit Bids
                                                       Given the complexity of PPP contracts, bidders need to be granted enough time to prepare
                                                       their proposals once the call for tenders is made public. Short periods for bid preparation
                                                       may deter potential bidders from participating in the PPP procurement process if it is
                                                       unlikely that they will be able to carry out the due diligence necessary to prepare high-
                                                       quality proposals.47 The time granted to present proposals is usually defined on the
                                                       tender notice or other tender documentation. Regulatory provisions setting a minimum
                                                       period of time in which to present the proposals ensure that the procuring authorities
                                                       do not have absolute discretion on the matter, creating a fairer system for all bidders.
                                                       Under no regulatory constraints, procuring authorities could legally reduce the time
                                                       granted to prepare proposals in such a way that competition would be discouraged or
                                                       even intentionally driven out of the PPP procurement process.

                                                       In 93 percent of the surveyed economies,48 there is either a regulatory provision or a
                                                       generally followed practice that grant bidders a minimum period of time to prepare and
                                                       submit their bids (figure 9). That being said, the mere enactment of a legal provision
                                                       that guarantees a minimum period of time is not enough. In fact, in 23 percent of the
                                                       economies, the procuring authority still has the discretion to decide how long the period
                                                       should be, which leads to a lack of predictability for bidders.


                                                       Figure 9 Time granted to potential bidders to submit their bids (percentage; N = 82)

                                                        At least                                                                  No legal requirement
                                                        60 calendar days
                                                                                                                                                       7%
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                       16%
                                                                                                                                       No speciﬁc time
                                                                                                                                     established in the
                                                                                                                                 regulatory framework

                                                                                                                                                     23%
                                                        Between 30 and 60
                                                        calendar days
                                                                                                                                              Less than
                                                       44%                                                                             30 calendar days

                                                                                                                                                     10%

                                                       Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017


                                                       When such a period is set in the law, it can range from less than 30 calendar days, as in
                                                       Argentina, Honduras, India, and Lebanon, to 90 days or more, as in Chile, the Republic of
                                                       Korea, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, Uruguay, and Vietnam.


34
                                                                               EMBARGOED
                                               Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                             until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                       Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Lack of Competition: Sole-Bidder Scenario
Competition is crucial to obtain good value for money from the PPP procurement
process. Ultimately, on top of all the assessments conducted during the preparation of a
PPP, the potential for success of the project is subject to a final “market test” during the
procurement process. As a consequence, receiving only one bid can raise concerns about
whether the project is actually suitable as a PPP and whether such a bid will provide the
best value for money. As a general rule, “even when only one bid is submitted, the bidding
process may be considered valid, if the bid was satisfactorily advertised, the qualification
criteria were not unduly restrictive, and prices are reasonable in comparison with market
value.”49 However, in theory, depending on the reason for receiving only one bid, there
are generally two additional options: (a) retendering, which is recommended when the
low turnout is caused by a deficiency in the procurement process itself, or (b) conducting
thorough due diligence to ensure that the bidder is in full compliance with the all of the
requirements.50 Whatever the approach, receiving a single bid may be problematic and
thus merit attention through the PPP regulatory framework.

Despite the relevance of this aspect and its potential impact on the result of the PPP
procurement process, in half of the economies measured, the PPP regulatory framework
does not address this issue at all. For example, in Kenya, Peru, and Senegal, when the
procuring authorities receive a sole proposal, they are not required to follow any specific
procedure before awarding a PPP contract. Among the economies that address the issue,
the Kyrgyz Republic, Madagascar, Tajikistan, Tanzania, and Tunisia do not allow the award
of a PPP project when only one proposal is presented, instead automatically requiring
retendering. In the majority of the remaining economies, provisions in the PPP legal
framework simply state that sole bidders are acceptable as long as all the terms and
conditions are met, without specifying further details regulating the matter (figure 10).51


Figure 10 Approach to addressing cases when only one bid is received
(percentage; N = 82)




                                                                                                                                Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
                                                                                Regulation provides
                                                                                  a detailed process
                                                                                                   15%

                                                                                Regulation does not
                                                                                  provide a detailed
Not regulated                                                                    process (for example
51%                                                                            only requires terms and
                                                                                 conditions to be met)

                                                                                                  29%

                                                                            Retendering is required

Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017                                                           5%

Only in 15 percent of the economies is the issue of sole bidders regulated with greater
detail.52 In those economies, the law mandates a special procedure that needs to be
followed before awarding the PPP project. This is the case, for example, in the Arab
Republic of Egypt, where the regulatory framework specifies the conditions and
process for accepting sole bids. A single bid may be accepted through a decision by the
                                                                                                                               35
                                                                                                                                                             EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                             Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                           until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                                     Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       competent authority based on the recommendation of the bid evaluation committee,
                                                       after the approval of the Supreme Committee for PPP Affairs, if the public interest does
                                                       not allow for retendering procedures, or if retendering would be futile, and if the sole bid
                                                       is technically acceptable and meets the specifications of the tender.53 Similarly, in Nigeria,
                                                       although the regulatory framework allows for direct negotiation with a sole bidder,54
                                                       it requires the procuring authority to ensure that the bid is technically and financially
                                                       advantageous compared with market prices and to include, in the record of procurement
                                                       proceedings, a statement of the grounds for its decision and the circumstances justifying
                                                       the single-source procurement.55



                                                       Transparency and Disclosure of PPP Information: Publication of the Award
                                                       Notice and PPP Contract by the Procuring Authority
                                                       Transparency in the PPP process may help achieve better value for money by
                                                       strengthening governance and improving the management of fiscal cost, by producing
                                                       more sustainable contracts, by reducing the risks of renegotiation, and by resulting in
                                                       a better understanding of the impact on service delivery.56 It is therefore advisable to
                                                       establish procedures that ensure the dissemination of the tender notice, disclosure of
                                                       the outcome of the procurement process, and publication of contract information. Wide
                                                       publicity about the key decisions of the PPP procurement process ensures openness and
                                                       fairness and enhances competition. Furthermore, PPP contracts often include provisions
                                                       that have a direct impact on parties other than the procuring authority and the selected
                                                       bidder, who have a legitimate interest in being informed about the essential elements
                                                       of the contract.

                                                       There is a clear move toward publishing information about PPP tenders and award
                                                       notices (figure 11), with widespread use of online means of publication. Of the economies
                                                       that do publish tender notices, only 11 percent do not publish them online. For award
                                                       notices, 79 percent of the economies make them available online. Ecuador, Lebanon,
                                                       Mongolia, and a few other economies remain the exception to the rule, as publication
                                                       of the award notice is neither mandated by law nor a regularly followed practice, which
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                       makes the final step of the private partner selection less transparent.


                                                       Figure 11 Access to information during PPP procurement (percentage, N = 82)
                                                                                                                                                                   1%


                                                        a. PPP tender notice                                         93%                                       6%



                                                        b. PPP award                                      74%                                    17%           9%



                                                        c. PPP contract            23%             9%                              68%


                                                                               0            20                40              60                 80               100
                                                             Legal requirement to publish        Published in practice (no legal requirement)         No publication

                                                       Note: PPP = public-private partnership.
                                                       Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017

36
                                                                                         EMBARGOED
                                                         Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                       until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                 Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




The situation is different when it comes to publication of the PPP contract, which occurs
in only 24 percent of the economies. Some, such as Colombia and Portugal, publish
the signed PPP contract online in its entirety. However, other economies opt to publish
summaries of PPP contracts that present their complex provisions in plain language,
making the contracts easier for the public and third parties to read.57,58


Box 4 Interactions with bidders throughout the PPP procurement process
After a call for tenders is issued, bidders will prepare proposals that are based on the
requirements detailed in the tender documents. During this process, the procuring
authorities need to define how and to what extent they will interact with bidders as
they prepare their proposals. Rules governing the process and permissible topics for
interaction with bidders are usually set in the tender documents, thus safeguarding
the transparency and fairness of the procurement process. Interactions between
bidders and the procuring authority can range from a mere exchange of information
to an interactive dialogue and in-person meetings and conferences.

Except in Algeria, the Republic of Congo, Indonesia, Madagascar, Papua New Guinea,
Thailand, and Togo, all the economies measured allow interested suppliers to request
clarifications about the tender documents (public procurement notices, requests for
proposals, and the like). Although the majority of the economies make communication
outcomes publicly available, doing so is not required in economies such as Cameroon,
the Democratic Republic of Congo, Gabon, Iraq, Mongolia, Ukraine, and Zambia.

In some economies, procuring authorities can also use a “competitive dialogue”
procedure, which involves more extensive engagements with two or more bidders as
they prepare their proposals. In this procedure, bidders submit technical proposals,
which are then subject to feedback and discussion with the procuring authority. These
discussions allow them to align their proposals with the authority’s needs before
they submit a final proposal.a In 45 percent of the surveyed economies, competitive




                                                                                                                                          Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
dialogue either is allowed by law or takes place in practice. The latter case can be
seen in Bangladesh, Canada, Jamaica, Myanmar, and the United States. Even where
competitive dialogue is possible, its content and results are not always disclosed to
all potential bidders, as in Armenia, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, and the Arab Republic of
Egypt, where there are no requirements for such disclosure of information.

Interaction with bidders should also be regulated during the period after the award
of the contract and before its signature. Negotiations should be broadly restricted
and regulated according to international good practices to prevent undermining the
competitive tendering process and distorting the criteria by which the proposals were
evaluated. In 43 percent of the surveyed economies, the regulatory framework does not
restrict or regulate negotiations with the selected bidder in any way during the period
between the award and the signature of the PPP contract. In contrast, economies such
as Bosnia and Herzegovina forbid such negotiations outright. Between these two
approaches some economies expressly regulate negotiations in an effort to ensure
fairness for all bidders. In Australia, for example, a negotiation parameters schedule is
developed prior to any negotiations. This schedule explains any departures from the
commercial principles underpinning the tender documentation.b
a. World Bank 2014, section 3.5.4.

b. Australia, section 4.4.1, New South Wales PPP Guidelines of 2012.


                                                                                                                                         37
                                                                                                                                                   EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                   Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                 until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                           Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       Unsolicited Proposals
                                                       USPs are an alternative to government-initiated projects. In a USP, a private sector
                                                       entity approaches the government with a proposal to develop a specific infrastructure
                                                       project without the government first having identified and assessed the suitability of
                                                       the project. Private sector companies—generally developers, suppliers, or financiers—
                                                       fund studies to establish the basic project specifications and then approach the relevant
                                                       procuring authority to receive approval. There are merits in establishing provisions for
                                                       considering unsolicited project proposals. Often, such proposals are based on innovative
                                                       project ideas. By allowing USPs, governments can benefit from the knowledge and ideas
                                                       of the private sector and can promote innovation. However, in some cases, economies
                                                       promote the submission and use of USPs precisely because of a lack of experience and
                                                       capacity in preparing infrastructure projects. As a consequence, the use of USPs does
                                                       not come without challenges.59 The difficulty rests in getting the right balance between
                                                       encouraging private companies to submit innovative project ideas without losing the
                                                       transparency and efficiency gains of a competitive tender process. Key implications to
                                                       consider are ensuring the consistency of USPs with other government priorities and
                                                       ensuring competition so that USPs will deliver economically beneficial infrastructure
                                                       with the greatest possible value for money.

                                                       Determining how to respond to unsolicited bids so as to both protect transparency
                                                       in the procurement process and recognize the initiative of the proponent is typically
                                                       difficult. Economies have approached the challenge of USPs differently. In 32 percent of
                                                       the economies measured, there are no specific provisions regulating USPs. In theory, this
                                                       implies that if the private sector had an idea not already contemplated by the public
                                                       sector, a procuring authority would have to incorporate that idea into its investment
                                                       pipeline and follow all the procedures required for any other infrastructure project. The
                                                       lack of regulations may be a consequence of an express desire on the part of the public
                                                       sector not to use USPs as a source of infrastructure project proposals (this is usually the
                                                       case in more mature PPP markets such as Canada). In other economies, however, the lack
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                       of regulations merely indicates that the subject has not been considered yet because
                                                       the PPP regulatory framework is still nascent. That being said, even in economies that
                                                       do expressly regulate USPs, public authorities may not encourage their use (as is the
                                                       case in South Africa). The following analysis is thus limited to the 56 economies that do
                                                       explicitly regulate USPs.

                                                       To assess whether the PPP framework provides for sound practices regarding USPs,
                                                       this section evaluates a set of relevant issues. In particular, it looks at whether USPs are
                                                       subject to proper evaluation by the public sector before being approved and whether,
                                                       once approved, a competitive procedure is required to select the private sector partner
                                                       that will develop the infrastructure. Governments should evaluate USPs to ensure that
                                                       they are consistent with existing economic priorities. Also, procuring authorities that do
                                                       not use transparent and competitive procedures to select the final private sector partner
                                                       when developing a USP run the risk of not achieving the best value for money.60 The
                                                       recognized good practices in managing USPs are summarized in box 5.




38
                                                                                         EMBARGOED
                                                         Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                       until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                 Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




  Box 5 Good practices in unsolicited proposals of PPPs
  Good practices to ensure transparency and competition during the procurement of
  projects originated as USP are:

  •	 The procuring authority assesses the merits of the USP and ensures that it is aligned
     with the government investment priorities.
  •	 If the USP is justified, the procuring authority initiates a competitive procurement
     procedure to select the private partner.
  •	 The procuring authority grants at least 90 days to all potential bidders (besides the
     proponent) to submit their proposals.

Note: PPP = public-private partnership; USP = unsolicited proposal.



Benchmarking PPP Procurement shows regional and income group differences in the
average score for USPs (figure 12). The OECD high income and LAC regions stand out from
the rest of the regions. SSA region presents the lowest average score with large score
variation among economies within the region, ranging from 17 to 92 points. When the
data are disaggregated by income level, there is a clear pattern showing that the lower
the income group level, the lower the average scores on USPs.


Figure 12 USPs, score by region and income group (score 1–100)

                                  a. Region                                             b. Income group
    100
        90
        80




                                                                                                                                          Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
        70
        60
        50
Score




        40
        30
        20
        10
        0
             ECA   EAP      LAC     MENA       OECD    SAR     SSA              High     Upper     Lower      Low
                                                high                          income    middle    middle    income
                                              income                                    income    income


Note: EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA
= Middle East and North Africa; OECD = Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; SAR =
South Asia; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa; USP = unsolicited proposal.

Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017



The following analysis focuses on the assessment to evaluate USPs and whether there
is a competitive procedure when dealing with USPs. In addition, it provides preliminary
findings on the use of mechanisms to compensate the original proponent of a USP.


                                                                                                                                         39
                                                                                                                                                     EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                     Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                   until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                             Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       Evaluation of Unsolicited Proposals
                                                       Because USPs do not originate as part of a government planning process, it is not always
                                                       sufficiently clear whether a USP is in line with an economy’s investment priorities.
                                                       Moreover, an intense use of USPs could create a situation in which governments, rather
                                                       than using a planned approach to dealing with infrastructure needs, rely on the private
                                                       sector to identify those needs.61 Furthermore, most USPs also require government
                                                       financial support. Consequently, when approving USPs, governments may be in a position
                                                       in which they are accepting contingent, or even direct, liabilities associated with the
                                                       project. This is even more problematic in situations in which the private sector may not be
                                                       sufficiently diligent when assessing the risks that would be borne by the government. If
                                                       a government fails to adequately evaluate a USP project and the associated risks, it could
                                                       be left in a precarious position. Proper evaluation of USPs is thus essential to ensure both
                                                       that they are aligned with the investment needs of an economy and that, if they require
                                                       public support, they constitute a good use of public resources.

                                                       All but one of the 56 economies that regulate the submission of USPs conduct an evaluation
                                                       of such proposals. The exception is Cameroon, where the regulatory framework does
                                                       not explicitly require the procuring authorities to evaluate USPs. However, provisions
                                                       regulating the evaluation of USPs do not always address the need to ensure that the
                                                       project is consistent with government priorities. This is the case of 32 percent of the
                                                       economies, including Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kazakhstan, Malawi, Pakistan, and Papua
                                                       New Guinea. Although 66 percent of the economies do require USPs to be consistent
                                                       with existing priorities, only 21 percent of them have established detailed procedures for
                                                       evaluating USPs. Figure 13 shows the prevalence of different approaches to evaluating
                                                       USPs among the 56 economies that regulate them.



                                                       Figure 13 Approaches to evaluation of USPs (percentage, N = 56)

                                                       Evaluation not required
                                                                                                      Consistency evaluated          Consistency required
                                                       2%
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                                                                                 in practice         with a detailed framework
                                                                                                                      22%            21%
                                                       Evaluation
                                                       conducted
                                                       in practice

                                                       32%                          Evaluation
                                                                                      of USP
                                                       Evaluation conducted,
                                                       including assessment
                                                       of consistency with                                                         57%
                                                       government priorities                                                      Consistency required
                                                                                                                                  as a principle
                                                       66%

                                                       Note: USP = unsolicited proposal.
                                                       Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017



                                                       Given the merits that USPs often have and recognizing the risks associated with them,
                                                       some governments have developed systems for their evaluation. In Nigeria, for example,
                                                       there are detailed provisions related to the evaluation of a USP and its alignment with
40
                                                                              EMBARGOED
                                              Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                            until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                      Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




government priorities. The USP is submitted to and reviewed by the relevant ministry,
department or agency, which is required to review the proposal to ensure that it meets
criteria, such as whether the project serves the public interest. Following its review, it
forwards the proposal to the Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission (ICRC)
for review and issuance of a finding of “no objection” to evaluating whether the proposal
is satisfactory.62 Similarly, in Uganda, the contracting authority is required to evaluate
USPs in terms of “the unique innovative, researched, or meritorious methods, approaches,
or concepts demonstrated in the unsolicited proposal, overall scientific, technical, or
socioeconomic merit of the unsolicited proposal.” Furthermore, the procuring authority
also examines the potential contribution of the USP to the strategic objectives in the
government’s development plan. In short, this obliges the contracting authority in
Uganda to identify whether the proposal fits these strategic objectives.63



Competitive Bidding and Minimum Time Limits
Having a competitive procedure increases the likelihood of obtaining better value
for money from a USP project. In addition, having a clear competitive mechanism in
place when dealing with USPs enhances the transparency of the process and helps
governments mitigate pressures from the private sector and special interests to accept
a USP. In fact, much of the controversy about USPs stems from governments granting
exclusive development rights to private proponents without a transparent tendering
process. The lack of a transparent, competitive process could lead to corruption and,
thus, the development of projects of questionable quality. Moreover, it could lead to
complaints if other parties feel that a private company is unfairly benefiting from a PPP,
which will in turn lead to a loss of future trust and support for PPPs in an economy.64

In addition to being given access to a competitive procedure, other potential bidders
should be provided an adequate amount of time to prepare and submit their proposals.
A short time limit for submitting proposals could deter other private sector parties from




                                                                                                                               Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
submitting bids. The original proponent of the USP would have an advantage in such a
case, because it had enough time to conduct proper due diligence when preparing the
USP. A tight deadline therefore deters other parties from participating, hence distorting
competition and, thus, potentially reducing the obtained value for money.

Of the economies that regulate the use of USPs, only 2 do not require a competitive
procedure for procuring them: Kenya and Vietnam (figure 14). 56 percent guarantee a
minimum legal period of time for the submission of proposals. However, the duration of
this period of time varies widely, from a mere 15 days in China to 180 in Colombia. There
is no clear consensus as to what constitutes a reasonable period of time to allocate to
additional bidders. However, the literature and procurement experts argue that a period
of 60 days or less is unlikely to provide additional proponents with enough time to
conduct the necessary due diligence and come up with a high-quality proposal.65




                                                                                                                              41
                                                                                                                                                     EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                     Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                   until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                             Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       Figure 14 Time granted to additional bidders in competitive procurements
                                                       triggered by USPs (percentage, N = 56)

                                                        Competitive procurement
                                                                                        4%
                                                                    not required

                                                       No minimum time granted                                                                   34%

                                                          Minimum time granted               7%
                                                               but not speciﬁed

                                                               Less than 30 days             7%


                                                                   30 to 59 days                                                      29%


                                                                   60 to 89 days             7%


                                                                 At least 90 days                       13%

                                                                                    0   5          10    15   20          25         30          35         40

                                                       Note: USP = unsolicited proposal.
                                                       Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017


                                                       Some economies have rules specifically governing the competitive tendering of a USP,
                                                       while others prescribe that once a USP is approved, the procuring authority must follow
                                                       the regular open competitive procedure. In Peru, for example, once a USP is accepted, the
                                                       procuring authority provides potential new bidders with a period of 90 calendar days to
                                                       submit expressions of interest in developing the project. After the 90-day period elapses,
                                                       if other parties are interested in bidding for the project, the procuring authority initiates
                                                       a competitive PPP procurement procedure; otherwise, it carries out direct negotiations
                                                       with the original proponent.66 Similarly, in Jamaica, potential additional bidders are
                                                       given 90 days to submit bids after a USP has been accepted,67 In contrast, in Albania, the
                                                       minimum time provided to bidders interested in USPs or government-initiated projects
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                       is the same, because USPs approved by the procuring authorities are governed by the
                                                       same competitive procedure as government-initiated projects. Thus, regardless of the
                                                       origin, when concessions for public works are tendered, the deadline for submission of
                                                       offers is not less than 30 days from the date of publication of the procurement notice.68



                                                       Mechanisms for Compensating the Original Proponent
                                                       The most effective way to deal with USPs is to use an open and transparent competitive
                                                       process.69 However, because the original proponent incurs costs in the preparation of
                                                       a USP, the lack of an appropriate compensation mechanism may deter the submission
                                                       of USPs should a competitive solicitation be required. Having such compensatory
                                                       mechanisms in place encourages the private sector to approach the government with
                                                       proposals that are not advertised.70 For instance, if proponents know that they will be
                                                       reimbursed for developing the proposal, which can be costly, they are more likely to
                                                       come forward with a proposal. Yet if the reimbursement fees are overly generous, firms
                                                       could potentially come up with frivolous proposals. As for USPs in general, currently
                                                       there is no clear consensus as to whether compensation mechanisms should be used at
                                                       all. Consequently, the data collected by the Benchmarking PPP Procurement project are
                                                       used merely for contextual purposes, to advance the understanding of the use of these
42                                                     instruments worldwide.
                                                                                   EMBARGOED
                                                   Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                 until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                           Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Currently, four main mechanisms are used to compensate USP developers: (a) access
to the best and final offer (ABFO)71 in 7 percent of the economies, (b) developer’s fee72
in 36 percent of the economies, (c) bid bonus73 in 29 percent of the economies, and (d)
Swiss challenge74 in 21 percent of the economies. The developer’s fee remains the most
commonly employed mechanism, followed by the bid bonus system and the Swiss
challenge system (figure 15).



Figure 15 Use of mechanisms to compensate USP original proponent
(percentage, N = 56)

Access to the best
                                 7%
   and ﬁnal offer

   Developer’s fee                                                                                 36%


        Bid bonus                                                                29%


  Swiss challenge                                             21%

No compensation                                                                          32%
    mechanisms

                     0     5          10    15          20           25          30          35          40

Note: USP = unsolicited proposal.
Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017




                                                                                                                                    Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs




                                                                                                                                   43
                                                                                                                                                  EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                  Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                          Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       PPP Contract Management
                                                       There can be a tendency to consider that once the PPP contract is signed and the financial
                                                       close reached, the main task is completed. In reality, however, the signature of the PPP
                                                       contract and financial close mark the beginning of the implementation of the project.
                                                       It is in fact the success of this implementation that will determine whether the project
                                                       delivers the expected value for money. As a consequence, it is absolutely key to establish
                                                       a sound PPP contract management system to oversee the implementation of the PPP
                                                       contract.

                                                       Given the long-term nature of PPPs, adequate preparation and procurement alone do
                                                       not guarantee success. Well-established contract management systems are necessary
                                                       to provide for a sustained, smooth implementation process. In this sense, PPP contracts
                                                       should be designed to anticipate and regulate as many as possible of the circumstances
                                                       that could arise during the life of the project. Moreover, the PPP contract should also put
                                                       in place contract management tools to address unexpected circumstances.75 A sound
                                                       PPP contract management system not only supports a smoother implementation of the
                                                       project but also embodies the legitimate expectations of the parties and helps ensure
                                                       that they are met.

                                                       To assess whether enough attention is devoted to the PPP contract management stage,
                                                       this section considers the extent to which regulatory frameworks and generally followed
                                                       practices establish adequate oversight mechanisms and ensure that the PPP contract is
                                                       as comprehensive as possible. With that goal, it measures aspects such as monitoring
                                                       and evaluation mechanisms for PPPs, changes to the structure of the private operator
                                                       and renegotiation of the PPP contract, and dispute resolution mechanisms, as well as
                                                       contract features such as lenders’ step-in rights and termination and its consequences.
                                                       Recognized good practices applicable during the PPP contract management are
                                                       summarized in box 6.
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                        Box 6 Good practices in PPP contract management

                                                        Good practices to ensure a successful implementation and delivery of the PPP project
                                                        are:
                                                        •	 The procuring authority establishes a system to manage the implementation of the
                                                           PPP contract including establishing a PPP contract management team, involving
                                                           some of its members in the project since the procurement stage, offering the
                                                           possibility to consult PPP procurement experts and adopting PPP implementation
                                                           manuals;
                                                        •	 Monitoring and evaluation systems of the PPP contract are established with risk
                                                           mitigation mechanisms and performance information is made publicly available;
                                                        •	 Potential changes in the structure of the private partner are expressly regulated
                                                           requiring the replacing entity to be at least as qualified as the original private
                                                           partner;
                                                        •	 Modification and renegotiation of the contract are expressly regulated to reduce
                                                           incentives to use it strategically by either the private partner or the procuring
                                                           authority;
44
                                                                                          EMBARGOED
                                                          Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                        until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                  Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




 •	 Specific circumstances (force majeure, material adverse government action, change
    in the law, refinancing) that may arise during the life of the contract are expressly
    regulated;
 •	 Dispute resolution mechanisms are in place allowing the parties to resolve
    discrepancies in an efficient and satisfactory manner;
 •	 Lenders are given step-in rights in cases when the private partner is in risk of default
    or if the PPP contract is under threat of termination for failure to meet service
    obligations.
 •	 Grounds for termination of the PPP contract and its associated consequences are
    well defined.

Note: PPP = public-private partnership.


Benchmarking PPP Procurement findings show regional and income group differences
in the average score for PPP contract management (figure 16). The OECD high income
region leads in this area, followed by the LAC region. Contract management scores
vary from 0 to 88 points over all 82 economies with EAP region presenting the largest
intraregional variation. When the data are disaggregated by income level, there is a clear
pattern showing that, when it comes to contract management, the lower the income
group level is, the lower the average scores are.


Figure 16 PPP contract management, score by region and income group

                                   a. Region                                              b. Income group
        80
        70
        60




                                                                                                                                           Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
        50
Score




        40
        30
        20
        10
        0
             ECA    EAP      LAC    MENA        OECD    SAR      SSA              High     Upper     Lower      Low
                                                 high                           income    middle    middle    income
                                               income                                     income    income


Note: EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean;
MENA = Middle East and North Africa; OECD = Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development;
PPP = public-private partnership; SAR = South Asia; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.

Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017



The following summary of the findings focuses on monitoring and evaluation tools,
renegotiation of PPPs, dispute resolution mechanisms for PPPs, and lenders’ step-in rights
(box 7).




                                                                                                                                          45
                                                                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       Monitoring and Evaluation Systems
                                                       Given the prolonged engagement typical of PPP projects, the government’s ability to
                                                       monitor the project during the construction and operation phase is critical. The procuring
                                                       or regulatory authority needs to ensure, by regularly monitoring outputs and service
                                                       standards, that the private party meets its obligations under the PPP contract. This means
                                                       monitoring actual performance against the performance indicators established in the
                                                       contract.76 Doing so enables better delivery of services and ensures that the government
                                                       is obtaining the best value for money through the contract.

                                                       93 percent of the surveyed economies address the need to monitor the PPP contract
                                                       during implementation.77 In a number of them, the regulatory framework calls for
                                                       the establishment of teams to monitor PPP contract performance. In Colombia,
                                                       implementation of the PPP contract is supervised by two authorities: an auditor (which
                                                       is a third party in charge of overseeing the contract’s development directly) and a
                                                       contract management team (which acts as a supervisor of the contract within the
                                                       procuring authority).78 In other economies, such as Costa Rica and Ecuador,79 although
                                                       the need for monitoring and evaluation of PPPs is acknowledged, no explicit institutional
                                                       arrangement is established for conducting the monitoring and evaluation.80

                                                       Regarding the specific monitoring and evaluation mechanisms in place, as shown in
                                                       figure 17, in 73 percent of the 82 economies, the procuring authority must periodically
                                                       gather information about the performance of the PPP. To further promote transparency
                                                       in the PPP contract execution and to increase the accountability of both parties for the
                                                       contract, operational and financial data as well as performance information should be
                                                       made available to the public. Brazil, Mexico, and the Republic of Korea are among a small
                                                       sample of economies (16 percent) that mandate such publication.


                                                       Figure 17 Legal requirements for specific monitoring and evaluation mechanisms
                                                       (percentage; N = 82)

                                                              The private partner must provide
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                                                                                                                60%
                                                         periodic operational and ﬁnancial data


                                                       The procuring authority must periodically
                                                                      gather information on the                                                             73%
                                                                performance of the PPP contract



                                                                                Risk mitigation
                                                                              mechanism exists
                                                                                                              17%



                                                                       Performance information
                                                                                                              16%
                                                                        is available to the public

                                                                                                     0   10   20    30    40       50        60       70        80


                                                       Note: PPP = public-private partnership.
                                                       Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017



                                                       Another tool for monitoring the performance of the contract is the establishment of
                                                       risk mitigation mechanisms.81 Like the publication of information, the use of such a
                                                       mechanism remains isolated. In only 17 percent of the economies does the regulatory

46
                                                                                    EMBARGOED
                                                    Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                  until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                            Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




framework address the need to establish a risk mitigation mechanism. This is the case,
for example in Australia (in New South Wales), where the law clearly states that “as
risk is a dynamic concept, contract management must evolve with the delivery of the
contracted services throughout the project lifecycle.”82



Renegotiation or Modification of the PPP Contract
Given the long-term nature of PPP contracts, changes in circumstances underlying their
execution are not uncommon. Although adjustment provisions provide the flexibility
that a PPP contract may require as a result of unforeseen changes in circumstances,
sometimes renegotiation may be the only avenue available to avoid a major disruption
in contract execution. The term renegotiation refers to changes in the contractual
provisions other than through an adjustment mechanism provided for in the contract.83
Renegotiation may have a positive impact when it addresses the intrinsically imperfect
nature of PPP contracts.84 Nonetheless, to the extent possible, the use of renegotiation
should be minimized, since it may become an opportunistic tool, leading to negative
consequences.85 Finally, renegotiations may affect the contract in a way to render it
materially different in character. In such cases, renegotiation should be precluded.

The economies measured have handled the issue of renegotiating PPP contracts differently
(figure 18). Of the 82 economies, more than three quarters regulate, to some extent, the
renegotiation or modification of PPP contracts. Despite the potential impact of this matter,
regulatory frameworks in economies such as Algeria, Lebanon, Malawi, and Myanmar
remain silent on it.86 Among the economies that address the renegotiation of PPP
contracts in their regulatory framework, 10 percent consider it a contractual issue, leaving
the parties to further regulate it in the contract. Such is the case, for example, in Benin,
Turkey, and Zambia. In the remaining economies, some provisions are in place regarding
PPP renegotiation. Among these particular provisions, there are requirements for specific
approvals beyond the procuring authorities (27 percent of the economies), restrictions on




                                                                                                                                     Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
changing the scope of the PPP contract (33 percent of the economies), and restrictions on
changing the risk allocations of the PPP contract (21 percent of the economies).


Figure 18 Approach to address renegotiation of contracts (percentage, N = 82)

     Approvals required beyond
       the procuring authority
                                                                                     27%


  Restrictions on scope changes                                                                   33%

                 Restrictions on
                                                                        21%
        risk allocation changes

      Regulated in PPP contract                  10%


        No regulatory provision                                         21%

                                   0   5    10          15         20         25         30         35


Note: PPP = public-private partnership.
Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017



                                                                                                                                    47
                                                                                                                                                  EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                  Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                          Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       Among the economies that require specific approvals by authorities other than the
                                                       procuring authorities, such authorities range from general governmental entities,
                                                       such as ministries of finance,87 treasury boards,88 and the cabinet,89 to specialized PPP
                                                       agencies, such as the PPP technical committee in Tanzania and the National Committee
                                                       for PPPs in Senegal.

                                                       When it comes to what amendments to the contract are allowed, Australia, Brazil,
                                                       Bulgaria, Canada, France, the United Kingdom, and 11 other economies limit changes
                                                       that affect the risk allocation of the PPP contract as well as other amendments that
                                                       may be considered a “substantial” change.90 In the United Kingdom, for example, the
                                                       regulatory framework specifies the conditions in which a change to the contract is
                                                       deemed “substantial.” The general rule is that if substantial modifications are made, a
                                                       new procurement process may be required. However, in cases where the modification
                                                       results from circumstances that the procuring authority could not have foreseen, does
                                                       not change the overall nature of the contract, and increases the price by no more than
                                                       50 percent of the original contract value, then the modification is not deemed to require
                                                       a new procurement procedure. The South African regulations also stipulate that the
                                                       Treasury will approve a material amendment only if it is satisfied that the PPP agreement,
                                                       if so amended, will continue to provide substantial technical, operational, and financial
                                                       risk transfer to the private party.91



                                                       Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
                                                       The provisions discussing dispute resolution mechanisms are intended to prevent the
                                                       need for renegotiation by allowing changes to be made and problems to be resolved
                                                       within the framework provided by the contract. Given that the stakes are high in PPP
                                                       projects, investors, contractors, and lenders will be more encouraged to participate in
                                                       projects in economies where they have confidence that any disputes arising out of
                                                       PPP contractual obligations will be resolved fairly and efficiently.92 Similarly, effective
                                                       procedures for avoiding disputes or settling them expeditiously will facilitate the
                                                       exercise of the contracting authority’s monitoring functions and reduce the contracting
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                       authority’s overall administrative cost.93

                                                       As shown in figure 19, 15 percent of the economies do not make any reference to dispute
                                                       settlement mechanisms in their PPP regulatory frameworks.94 Among the economies
                                                       that explicitly address dispute resolution mechanisms, the majority (58 percent) make
                                                       only a general reference to the need to establish a dispute resolution system in the
                                                       contract without further specification, whereas others either offer the parties the choice
                                                       of having recourse to arbitration or impose a specific dispute resolution mechanism that
                                                       applies to all PPP contracts.




48
                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Figure 19 Dispute resolution mechanisms for PPPs (percentage; N = 82)

Regulatory framework
does NOT address dispute                                      Recourse          Speciﬁc dispute
resolution for PPPs                                      to arbitration         resolution mechanism

15%                                                              15%            27%




Regulatory framework
addresses dispute
resolution for PPPs                                                        58%
                                                                           Dispute resolution mechanism
85%                                                                        to be regulated in the contract

Note: PPP = public-private partnership.
Source: Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017



Chile is an example of the general approach: the regulatory framework identifies
a technical panel for reviewing disputes, yet resort to this panel requires the parties’
mutual consent.95 In Guatemala, the law stipulates the creation of an ad hoc commission
for the resolution of disputes arising from the execution of PPP contracts.96

In Uruguay, regulations explicitly establish that for the settlement of disputes arising
in connection with the application, interpretation, execution, performance, and
termination of PPP contracts, the parties shall have recourse to arbitration.97 The same
is true in Pakistan, where the law requires parties to have recourse to arbitration, while
leaving the details of the dispute resolution mechanism to the discretion of the parties.




                                                                                                                                 Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
 Box 7 Lenders’ step-in rights
 Lenders’ step-in rights allow the lenders to select, with the consent of the procuring
 authority, a new concessionaire to perform an ongoing PPP project in cases when
 the initial private partner is at risk of default. This instrument provides lenders with
 additional security against default by the private partner, and it improves their capacity
 to act as external guarantors of performance on the PPP project. At the same time, it
 provides the procuring authority with an opportunity to avoid the disruption entailed
 by terminating the project agreement, thus maintaining continuity of service.

 Despite its potential relevance, lender’s step-in rights are rarely addressed by PPP
 regulatory frameworks. More than half of the surveyed economies (42) do not have
 any provision in this respect. In only 13 economies (Brazil, Chile, Colombia, India,
 Italy, Mongolia, Morocco, the Philippines, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Uruguay, Vietnam and
 Zambia), does the PPP regulatory framework establish the lender’s step-in right in the
 legislation. In the remaining economies, the regulatory framework either defers to
 the contract to regulate that matter or refers to the need to reach a direct agreement
 with the lenders.




                                                                                                                                49
                                                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                       Economy Data Tables
                                                       Only practices and regulations that are recognized good practices are scored and
                                                       aggregated by thematic areas.98 Therefore, not all of the data collected by the
                                                       Benchmarking PPP Procurement team is scored; other data are included in the report
                                                       as well as published on the project’s website for contextual purposes. The scoring
                                                       methodology allocates an identical weight to all of the benchmarks addressed in the
                                                       assessment.

                                                       The scores are presented on a range from 0 to 100. The economies at the top of the range
                                                       (score approaching 100) are considered to have a PPP regulatory framework that closely
                                                       aligns with internationally recognized good practices. At the other end, the economies
                                                       at the bottom of the range (scores closer to 0) have significant room for improvement
                                                       because they do not adhere as closely to the international good practices and principles
                                                       measured by Benchmarking PPP Procurement.

                                                       Table 1 lists the areas measured. The economy data tables present each economy’s scores
                                                       for all four thematic areas covered: preparation of PPPs, procurement of PPPs, USPs, and
                                                       contract management. All of the data points employed in aggregating the Benchmarking
                                                       PPP Procurement thematic areas are publicly available, along with all the other data
                                                       points, on the project’s website (http://bpp.worldbank.org).
Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




50
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Table 1 Areas assessed by Benchmarking PPP Procurement 2017

                                                                                                       Contract management
 Preparation of PPPs              Procurement of PPPs               USPs
                                                                                                       and termination of PPPs
 Approval by the ministry         Composition of the PPP            Evaluation of USPs                 PPP contract management
 of finance or central            evaluation committee                                                 system
 budgetary authority

 Integration of PPP within        Publication of the PPP            Consistency of USPs                PPP contract monitoring
 the broader context of           procurement notice                with other government              and evaluation system
 public investment                                                  priorities

 Assessment of PPP                Legal minimum period of           Requirement for                    Change in the structure of
 feasibility: Socioeconomic       time granted to prepare           competitive procedure to           the SPV
 impact                           PPP bids                          award USPs

 Assessment of PPP                Detail of the PPP                 Legal minimum period of            Modification or
 feasibility: Affordability       procurement process               time granted to prepare            renegotiation of PPPs
                                  stages in the tender              alternative proposals
                                  documents

 Assessment of PPP                Inclusion in the                                                     Regulation of force
 feasibility: Risk                tender documents                                                     majeure, material adverse
 identification                   of prequalification                                                  government change,
                                  criteria (when there is                                              change in the law,
                                  )prequalification                                                    refinancing

 Assessment of PPP                Questions, clarifications,                                           Establishment of a
 feasibility: Bankability         and disclosure of answers                                            specific dispute resolution
                                                                                                       mechanism

 Assessment of PPP                Inclusion of financial                                               Lender’s step-in rights
 feasibility: Comparative         model in the proposals
 assessment (PPP versus




                                                                                                                                                                 Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
 )traditional procurement

 Assessment of PPP                Evaluation according to                                              Grounds for and
 feasibility: Market              evaluation criteria stated                                           consequences of PPP
 assessment                       in tender documents                                                  contract termination

 Inclusion of draft PPP           Treatment of sole
 contract in the request for      proposals
 proposal

 Standardization of PPP           Publication of the PPP
 contracts                        award notice

                                  Notification to all bidders
                                  of the results of the PPP
                                  procurement process

                                  Regulation or restriction of
                                  negotiations between the
                                  award and the signature of
                                  the PPP contract

                                  Publication of the PPP
                                  contract

Note: PPP = public-private partnership; SPV = special purpose vehicle; USP = unsolicited proposal.                                                              51
                                                                                                                     EMBARGOED
                                                                                     Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                   until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                             Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                            South Asia

                                                                                                                                 GNI per Capita (in USD)
          Afghanistan                                                                                                                   $630

     21   Preparation of PPPs
          Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
          PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
          Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Risk identification                                                                           No
          Financial viability assessment                                                                No
          PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
          Market assessment                                                                             No
          Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
          Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



     63   Procurement of PPPs
          Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                              regulated
          Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days
          Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
          Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
          Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
          Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
          Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
          Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
          Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
          Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
          Publication of contract                                                                       No



     33   Unsolicited Proposals
          Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                              regulated
          Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



     26   PPP Contract Management
          System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       No
          Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info
          Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
          partner
          Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object
                                                                                                              of the contract; Limitation to change the
                                                                                                              investment plan or duration of the contract
          Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
          Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 No
          Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
52        Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination not expressly
                                                                                                              regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Albania                                                                                                                     $4,290

67   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



78   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
     Regulation of Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing     No
     Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online



75   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                         evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days



55   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
     partner                                                                                             replacing entity
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change in risk allocation
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Change in the law
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
                                                                                                         regulated                                              53
                                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                       MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

                                                                                                                                           GNI per Capita (in USD)
                     Algeria                                                                                                                     $4,870

         21          Preparation of PPPs
                     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
                     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
                     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



        18           Procurement of PPPs
                     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                                         regulated
                     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Not available online
                     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
                     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 No
                     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               No
                     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
                     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
                     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Not available online
                     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     No
                     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
                     Publication of contract                                                                       No

          USP
     NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



        27           PPP Contract Management
                     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       No
                     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info
                     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes
                     partner
                     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    No
                     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                No
                     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism
                                                                                                                         established
                     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
                     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No

54
                                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                  Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                                       GNI per Capita (in USD)
                Angola                                                                                                                      $4,180

   50           Preparation of PPPs
                Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
                PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
                Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



  58            Procurement of PPPs
                Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
                Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   20 calendar days
                Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
                Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
                Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
                Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
                Publication of contract                                                                       No


     USP
NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



  48            PPP Contract Management
                System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Consultation with
                                                                                                                    PPP procurement experts
                Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info;
                                                                                                                    The procuring authority gathers info; PPP
                                                                                                                    performance info available online
                Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes
                partner
                Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object
                                                                                                                    of the contract; Limitation to change the
                                                                                                                    investment plan or duration of the contract
                Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Refinancing
                Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
                Lenders step-in right                                                                         No                                                           55
                Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No
                                                                                                                     EMBARGOED
                                                                                     Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                   until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                             Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                            LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN

                                                                                                                                 GNI per Capita (in USD)
          Argentina                                                                                                                   $14,510

     17   Preparation of PPPs
          Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
          PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
          Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Risk identification                                                                           No
          Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
          PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
          Market assessment                                                                             No
          Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
          Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



     73   Procurement of PPPs
          Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No

          Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   20 calendar days
          Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
          Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
          Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
          Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
          Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
          Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
          Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
          Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
          Publication of contract                                                                       No



     58   Unsolicited Proposals
          Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                              evaluated
          Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   20 calendar days



     58   PPP Contract Management
          System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team
          Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes
          Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
          partner                                                                                             replacing entity
          Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object
                                                                                                              of the contract; Limitation to change the
                                                                                                              investment plan or duration of the contract
          Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                              action
          Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
          Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
56
          Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                  EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

                                                                                                                                       GNI per Capita (in USD)
                Armenia                                                                                                                     $3,880

   38           Preparation of PPPs
                Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
                PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
                Economic analysis assessment                                                                  No
                Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               No
                Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No Specific methodology developed
                Market assessment                                                                             No
                Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



   75           Procurement of PPPs
                Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
                Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   40 calendar days
                Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
                Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
                Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
                Publication of contract                                                                       No

     USP
NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



    0           PPP Contract Management
                System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       No
                Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              No
                Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
                partner
                Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    No
                Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                No
                Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 No
                Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
                Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No



                                                                                                                                                                           57
                                                                                                                     EMBARGOED
                                                                                     Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                   until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                             Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                            OECD HIGH INCOME

                                                                                                                                  GNI per Capita (in USD)
          Australia                                                                                                                    $60,070

     79   Preparation of PPPs
          Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
          PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
          Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
          Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
          Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
          PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
          Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
          Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes


     90   Procurement of PPPs
          Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not regulated

          Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
          Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
          Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
          Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
          Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
          Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
          Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
          Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
          Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
          Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online


     75   Unsolicited Proposals
          Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities evaluated
          Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated


     80   PPP Contract Management
          System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Participation of contract
                                                                                                              management team on PPP procurement process;
                                                                                                              Consultation with PPP procurement experts
          Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                              procuring authority gathers info; risk mitigation
                                                                                                              mechanisms
          Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Limitation to change the structure of the private
          partner                                                                                             partner during an initial period of time; Same
                                                                                                              qualifications legally required for the replacing entity
          Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object of the
                                                                                                              contract; Limitation to change in risk allocation; Limitation
                                                                                                              to change the investment plan or duration of the contract
          Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                              action; Change in the law; Refinancing
          Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism established

58        Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Direct agreement to be signed

          Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       South Asia

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Bangladesh                                                                                                                   $1,190

63   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   Specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



40   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 No
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     No
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



75   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                         evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated



34   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
     partner
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes

     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                No
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism
                                                                                                         established
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No
                                                                                                                                                                59
                                                                                                                     EMBARGOED
                                                                                     Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                   until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                             Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                            Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                                 GNI per Capita (in USD)
          Benin                                                                                                                         $860

     31   Preparation of PPPs
          Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
          PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
          Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
          PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Market assessment                                                                             No
          Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
          Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



     63   Procurement of PPPs
          Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                              regulated
          Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days
          Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
          Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
          Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
          Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
          Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
          Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
          Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
          Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
          Publication of contract                                                                       No



     58   Unsolicited Proposals
          Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                              evaluated
          Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days



     41   PPP Contract Management
          System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Consultation with
                                                                                                              PPP procurement experts
          Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                              procuring authority gathers info
          Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
          partner
          Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes
          Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                              action
          Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes
          Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
60
          Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination not expressly
                                                                                                              regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Bosnia AND Herzegovina                                                                                                      $4,680

58   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           No
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             No
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



85   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



50   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days



41   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
     partner                                                                                             replacing entity
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    No
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism
                                                                                                         established
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination not expressly
                                                                                                         regulated                                              61
                                                                                                                     EMBARGOED
                                                                                     Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                   until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                             Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                            LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN

                                                                                                                                 GNI per Capita (in USD)
          Brazil (ConcessionS)                                                                                                        $9,850

     27   Preparation of PPPs
          Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
          PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
          Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               No
          Risk identification                                                                           No
          Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
          PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
          Market assessment                                                                             No
          Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
          Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No


     85   Procurement of PPPs
          Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                              regulated
          Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days
          Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
          Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
          Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
          Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
          Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
          Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
          Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
          Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
          Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online


     75   Unsolicited Proposals
          Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities evaluated
          Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days



     77   PPP Contract Management
          System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
          Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                              procuring authority gathers info
          Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
          partner                                                                                             replacing entity
          Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object
                                                                                                              of the contract; Limitation to change in risk
                                                                                                              allocation; Limitation to change the investment
                                                                                                              plan or duration of the contract
          Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                              action; Change in the law
          Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract

62        Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Expressly regulated
          Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Brazil (PPP)                                                                                                                $9,850

52   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             No
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No


85   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online


75   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days


88   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   PPP implementation manual
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info; PPP performance
                                                                                                         info available online
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
     partner                                                                                             replacing entity
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object
                                                                                                         of the contract; Limitation to change in risk
                                                                                                         allocation; Limitation to change the investment
                                                                                                         plan or duration of the contract
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                         action; Change in the law; Refinancing
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Expressly regulated                                    63
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                     EMBARGOED
                                                                                     Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                   until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                             Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                            EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

                                                                                                                                 GNI per Capita (in USD)
          Bulgaria                                                                                                                    $7,220

     46   Preparation of PPPs
          Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
          PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
          Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
          PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Market assessment                                                                             No
          Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
          Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



     93   Procurement of PPPs
          Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications regulated
          Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   52 calendar days
          Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
          Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
          Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
          Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
          Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
          Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
          Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
          Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
          Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online



     50   Unsolicited Proposals
          Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not regulated

          Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   52 calendar days



     68   PPP Contract Management
          System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Consultation with
                                                                                                              PPP procurement experts
          Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info; PPP
                                                                                                              performance info available online
          Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
          partner                                                                                             replacing entity
          Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object
                                                                                                              of the contract; Limitation to change in risk
                                                                                                              allocation; Limitation to change the investment
                                                                                                              plan or duration of the contract
          Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Change in the law
          Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes

64        Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
          Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                  EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC

                                                                                                                                       GNI per Capita (in USD)
                Cambodia                                                                                                                    $1,070

     8          Preparation of PPPs
                Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
                PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
                Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               No
                Risk identification                                                                           No
                Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
                Market assessment                                                                             No
                Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
                Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



   20           Procurement of PPPs
                Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
                Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         No

                Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 No
                Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
                Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                Publication of award notice                                                                   No

                Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
                Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
                Publication of contract                                                                       No


     USP
NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



   69           PPP Contract Management
                System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team
                Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                                    procuring authority gathers info
                Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes
                partner
                Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the investment plan or
                                                                                                                    duration of the contract
                Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                                    action; Change in the law
                Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
                Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Direct agreement to be signed
                Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly                  65
                                                                                                                    regulated
                                                                                                                     EMBARGOED
                                                                                     Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                   until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                             Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                            Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                                 GNI per Capita (in USD)
          Cameroon                                                                                                                     $1,330

     46   Preparation of PPPs
          Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
          PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
          Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
          PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
          Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



     45   Procurement of PPPs
          Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                              regulated
          Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         No
          Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
          Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Disclosure of answers not regulated
          Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
          Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
          Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
          Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Not available online
          Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
          Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
          Publication of contract                                                                       No



     17   Unsolicited Proposals
          Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  No

          Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



     52   PPP Contract Management
          System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team
          Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                              procuring authority gathers info
          Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes
          partner
          Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes

          Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                No

          Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
          Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
          Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
66                                                                                                            regulated
                                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                  OECD HIGH INCOME

                                                                                                                                       GNI per Capita (in USD)
                Canada                                                                                                                      $47,500

   92           Preparation of PPPs
                Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
                PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
                Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
                Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
                Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
                Market assessment                                                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
                Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes


    93          Procurement of PPPs
                Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not regulated

                Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
                Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
                Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure established
                Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
                Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
                Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online

     USP
NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals

                Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)


    63          PPP Contract Management
                System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Participation of
                                                                                                                    contract management team on PPP procurement
                                                                                                                    process; Consultation with PPP procurement
                                                                                                                    experts; PPP implementation manual
                Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                                    procuring authority gathers info; risk mitigation
                                                                                                                    mechanisms
                Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private partner Yes
                Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object of
                                                                                                                    the contract; Limitation to change in risk allocation;
                                                                                                                    Limitation to change the investment plan or
                                                                                                                    duration of the contract
                Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                No
                Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism established

                Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes
                                                                                                                                                                              67
                Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                     EMBARGOED
                                                                                     Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                   until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                             Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                            OECD HIGH INCOME

                                                                                                                                 GNI per Capita (in USD)
          Chile                                                                                                                      $14,060

     69   Preparation of PPPs
          Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
          PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
          Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
          Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
          Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   Specific methodology developed
          PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
          Market assessment                                                                             No
          Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
          Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



     83   Procurement of PPPs
          Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications regulated

          Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   90 calendar days
          Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
          Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
          Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
          Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
          Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
          Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
          Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
          Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
          Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online



     83   Unsolicited Proposals
          Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities evaluated
          Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   60 calendar days



     87   PPP Contract Management
          System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team

          Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                              procuring authority gathers info
          Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Limitation to change the structure of the private
          partner                                                                                             partner during an initial period of time; Same
                                                                                                              qualifications legally required for the replacing
                                                                                                              entity
          Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object of the
                                                                                                              contract; Limitation to change the investment plan
                                                                                                              or duration of the contract
          Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government action

          Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism established

          Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Expressly regulated
68
          Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     China                                                                                                                       $7,820

54   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             No
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



80   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   20 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure established
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online



75   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                         evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   15 calendar days



58   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info; risk mitigation
                                                                                                         mechanisms; PPP performance info available
                                                                                                         online
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private partner No
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                         action; Change in the law
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
                                                                                                                                                                69
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                     EMBARGOED
                                                                                     Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                   until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                             Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                            LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN

                                                                                                                                 GNI per Capita (in USD)
          Colombia                                                                                                                     $7,130

     88   Preparation of PPPs
          Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
          PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
          Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
          Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
          Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
          Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   Specific methodology developed
          PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
          Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
          Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



     75   Procurement of PPPs
          Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
          Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
          Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
          Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
          Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
          Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
          Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
          Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
          Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
          Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
          Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online



     92   Unsolicited Proposals
          Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                              evaluated
          Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   180 calendar days



     66   PPP Contract Management
          System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team

          Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                              procuring authority gathers info
          Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
          partner                                                                                             replacing entity

          Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object of the
                                                                                                              contract; Limitation to change the investment plan
                                                                                                              or duration of the contract
          Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government action

          Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 No
          Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Expressly regulated

70        Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                  Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                                       GNI per Capita (in USD)
                Congo, DEM. REP                                                                                                               $410

    15          Preparation of PPPs
                Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
                PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               No
                Risk identification                                                                           No
                Financial viability assessment                                                                No
                PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
                Market assessment                                                                             No
                Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
                Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



   28           Procurement of PPPs
                Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
                Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days
                Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 No
                Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Disclosure of answers not regulated
                Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
                Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
                Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Not available online
                Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     No
                Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
                Publication of contract                                                                       No


     USP
NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



    13          PPP Contract Management
                System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
                Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              No
                Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
                partner
                Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    No
                Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                No
                Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes
                Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
                Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No


                                                                                                                                                                           71
                                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                       Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                                           GNI per Capita (in USD)
                     Congo, Rep.                                                                                                                 $2,540

        21           Preparation of PPPs
                     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
                     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
                     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  No
                     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes    No specific methodology developed
                     Risk identification                                                                           No
                     Financial viability assessment                                                                No
                     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
                     Market assessment                                                                             No
                     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
                     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



        45           Procurement of PPPs
                     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                                         regulated
                     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Not available online
                     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days
                     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               No
                     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
                     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
                     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Not available online
                     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
                     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
                     Publication of contract                                                                       No

          USP
     NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



        17           PPP Contract Management
                     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       No
                     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info
                     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
                     partner
                     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    No
                     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
                     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes
                     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
                     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No

72
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Costa Rica                                                                                                                    $10,210

54   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No


68   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online


83   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                         evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days


71   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Limitation to change the structure of the private
     partner                                                                                             partner during an initial period of time; Same
                                                                                                         qualifications legally required for the replacing
                                                                                                         entity
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object of
                                                                                                         the contract; Limitation to change the investment
                                                                                                         plan or duration of the contract
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                         action; Refinancing
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Recourse to arbitration
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
                                                                                                                                                                73
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                     EMBARGOED
                                                                                     Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                   until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                             Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                            Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                                 GNI per Capita (in USD)
          Côte D’Ivoire                                                                                                                $1,410

     54   Preparation of PPPs
          Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
          PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
          Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Risk identification                                                                           No
          Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   Specific methodology developed
          PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
          Market assessment                                                                             No
          Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
          Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No


     78   Procurement of PPPs
          Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                              regulated
          Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days
          Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
          Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
          Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
          Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
          Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
          Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
          Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
          Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
          Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Not available online


     33   Unsolicited Proposals
          Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                              regulated
          Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No


     49   PPP Contract Management
          System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Participation of contract management team on
                                                                                                              PPP procurement process; Consultation with
                                                                                                              PPP procurement experts
          Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info
          Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
          partner
          Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the investment plan or
                                                                                                              duration of the contract
          Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Change in the law
          Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
          Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
74        Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
                                                                                                              regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Dominican Republic                                                                                                          $6,130

21   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  No
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               No
     Risk identification                                                                           No
     Financial viability assessment                                                                No
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
     Market assessment                                                                             No
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



90   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   60 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online



58   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   60 calendar days



43   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info; risk
                                                                                                         mitigation mechanisms
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private partner No
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object of
                                                                                                         the contract
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                         action
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination not expressly              75
                                                                                                         regulated
                                                                                                                     EMBARGOED
                                                                                     Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                   until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                             Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                            LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN

                                                                                                                                GNI per Capita (in USD)
          Ecuador                                                                                                                     $6,010

     33   Preparation of PPPs
          Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
          PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
          Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
          PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Market assessment                                                                             No
          Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
          Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



     20   Procurement of PPPs
          Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
          Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Not available online
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
          Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
          Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
          Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
          Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
          Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
          Publication of award notice                                                                   No

          Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
          Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
          Publication of contract                                                                       No



     75   Unsolicited Proposals
          Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                              evaluated
          Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated



     36   PPP Contract Management
          System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
          Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes
          Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
          partner
          Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    No
          Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                              action; Change in the law
          Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism
                                                                                                              established
          Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
          Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination not expressly
76                                                                                                            regulated
                                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                  MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

                                                                                                                                       GNI per Capita (in USD)
                EGYPT, ARAB REP.                                                                                                            $3,340

   71           Preparation of PPPs
                Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
                PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
                Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
                Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
                Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



   73           Procurement of PPPs
                Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                                    regulated
                Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
                Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
                Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure established
                Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
                Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
                Publication of contract                                                                       No

     USP
NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



   58           PPP Contract Management
                System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team
                Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                                    procuring authority gathers info
                Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Limitation to change the structure of the private
                partner                                                                                             partner during an initial period of time
                Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes

                Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                                    action; Change in the law; Refinancing
                Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
                Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Direct agreement to be signed
                Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination not expressly
                                                                                                                                                                           77
                                                                                                                    regulated
                                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                       OECD HIGH INCOME

                                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
                     France (ConcessionS)                                                                                                       $40,580

        25           Preparation of PPPs
                     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
                     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
                     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               No
                     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     Financial viability assessment                                                                No
                     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     Market assessment                                                                             No
                     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



        80           Procurement of PPPs
                     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                                         regulated
                     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days
                     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
                     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
                     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
                     Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Not available online

          USP
     NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



         61          PPP Contract Management
                     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       No
                     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info; risk mitigation
                                                                                                                         mechanisms; PPP performance info available online
                     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
                     partner                                                                                             replacing entity

                     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object of the
                                                                                                                         contract; Limitation to change in risk allocation
                     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                                         action; Change in the law
                     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract

                     Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes
78
                     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                  OECD HIGH INCOME

                                                                                                                                       GNI per Capita (in USD)
                France (PPP)                                                                                                               $40,580

   65           Preparation of PPPs
                Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
                PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
                Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
                Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
                Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
                Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
                Market assessment                                                                             No
                Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes


   80           Procurement of PPPs
                Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                                    regulated
                Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days
                Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
                Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
                Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
                Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Not available online

     USP
NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



  68            PPP Contract Management
                System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
                Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                                    procuring authority gathers info; risk mitigation
                                                                                                                    mechanisms
                Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
                partner                                                                                             replacing entity
                Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object
                                                                                                                    of the contract; Limitation to change in risk
                                                                                                                    allocation
                Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                                    action; Change in the law; Refinancing
                Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
                Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes
                                                                                                                                                                           79
                Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                     EMBARGOED
                                                                                     Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                   until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                             Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                            Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                                GNI per Capita (in USD)
          Gabon                                                                                                                       $9,210

     17   Preparation of PPPs
          Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
          PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
          Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               No
          Risk identification                                                                           No
          Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
          PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
          Market assessment                                                                             No
          Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
          Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



     25   Procurement of PPPs
          Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
          Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Not available online
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         No
          Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
          Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Disclosure of answers not regulated
          Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
          Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      No
          Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
          Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Not available online
          Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
          Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
          Publication of contract                                                                       No



     33   Unsolicited Proposals
          Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                              regulated
          Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



     52   PPP Contract Management
          System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       No
          Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                              procuring authority gathers info
          Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
          partner                                                                                             replacing entity
          Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    No

          Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                              action
          Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
          Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Direct agreement to be signed
          Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
80
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Ghana                                                                                                                       $1,480

46   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



63   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   43 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



58   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                         evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



22   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
     partner
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                No
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 No
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No
                                                                                                                                                                81
                                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                       LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN

                                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
                     Guatemala                                                                                                                   $3,590

        46           Preparation of PPPs
                     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
                     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
                     Market assessment                                                                             No
                     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



         75          Procurement of PPPs
                     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                                         regulated
                     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   60 calendar days
                     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
                     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
                     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
                     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
                     Publication of contract                                                                       No

          USP
     NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



        48           PPP Contract Management
                     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
                     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info; PPP performance
                                                                                                                         info available online
                     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
                     partner
                     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    No
                     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Change in the law
                     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism
                                                                                                                         established
                     Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   To be regulated by the contract
82                   Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination not expressly
                                                                                                                         regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Honduras                                                                                                                    $2,270

58   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             No
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



65   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   17 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
     Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online



75   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                         evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days



46   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info;
                                                                                                         The procuring authority gathers info; PPP
                                                                                                         performance info available online
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
     partner                                                                                             replacing entity

     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    No
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Recourse to arbitration
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No                                                           83
                                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                       South Asia

                                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
                     India                                                                                                                        $1,590

        73           Preparation of PPPs
                     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
                     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
                     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
                     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
                     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   Specific methodology developed
                     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
                     Market assessment                                                                             No
                     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes


        80           Procurement of PPPs
                     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                                         regulated
                     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   28 calendar days
                     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
                     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure established
                     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
                     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
                     Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online

          USP
     NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)


         73          PPP Contract Management
                     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; PPP implementation
                                                                                                                         manual
                     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info
                     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Limitation to change the structure of the private
                     partner                                                                                             partner during an initial period of time; Same
                                                                                                                         qualifications legally required for the replacing
                                                                                                                         entity
                     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    No
                     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                                         action; Change in the law
                     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism established

                     Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Expressly regulated
84
                     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Indonesia                                                                                                                   $3,440

50   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



70   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               No
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure established
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



58   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                         evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



61   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Participation of
                                                                                                         contract management team on PPP procurement
                                                                                                         process
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes
     partner
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   To be regulated by the contract
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated        85
                                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                       MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

                                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
                     Iraq                                                                                                                         $5,550

          4          Preparation of PPPs
                     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
                     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
                     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  No
                     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     Risk identification                                                                           No
                     Financial viability assessment                                                                No
                     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
                     Market assessment                                                                             No
                     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
                     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



        48           Procurement of PPPs
                     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                                         regulated
                     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Not available online
                     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
                     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Disclosure of answers not regulated
                     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
                     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
                     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
                     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
                     Publication of contract                                                                       No

          USP
     NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



        40           PPP Contract Management
                     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       No
                     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              No
                     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
                     partner                                                                                             replacing entity
                     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the investment plan or
                                                                                                                         duration of the contract
                     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Material adverse government action
                     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
                     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
                     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
                                                                                                                         regulated
86
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       OECD HIGH INCOME

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Italy                                                                                                                      $32,790

71   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   Specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             No
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



75   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   52 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



83   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   52 calendar days



77   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   PPP implementation manual
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Limitation to change the structure of the private
     partner                                                                                             partner during an initial period of time
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object of
                                                                                                         the contract; Limitation to change the investment
                                                                                                         plan or duration of the contract
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                         action; Change in the law
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism established

     Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Expressly regulated
                                                                                                                                                                87
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                      EMBARGOED
                                                                                      Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                    until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                              Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                             LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN

                                                                                                                                  GNI per Capita (in USD)
           Jamaica                                                                                                                     $5,010

     67    Preparation of PPPs
           Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
           PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
           Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   Specific methodology developed
           PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Market assessment                                                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
           Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



     55    Procurement of PPPs
           Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                               regulated
           Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
           Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
           Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
           Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
           Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
           Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
           Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
           Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
           Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
           Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Not available online



     100   Unsolicited Proposals
           Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities evaluated
           Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   90 calendar days



     27    PPP Contract Management
           System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Participation
                                                                                                               of contract management team on PPP
                                                                                                               procurement process; Consultation with PPP
                                                                                                               procurement experts
           Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info; risk
                                                                                                               mitigation mechanisms; PPP performance info
                                                                                                               available online
           Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private partner No
           Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes
           Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                No
           Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 No

88         Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
           Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Jordan                                                                                                                      $4,680

29   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



78   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



58   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



43   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; PPP
                                                                                                         implementation manual
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private partner No
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change in risk allocation;
                                                                                                         Limitation to change the investment plan or
                                                                                                         duration of the contract
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                         action; Change in the law
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
                                                                                                                                                                89
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No
                                                                                                                          EMBARGOED
                                                                                          Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                        until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                  Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                            EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

                                                                                                                                      GNI per Capita (in USD)
          Kazakhstan                                                                                                                       $11,580

     56   Preparation of PPPs
          Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                             Yes   Only before tendering
          PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                              Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
          Economic analysis assessment                                                                       Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Fiscal affordability assessment                                                                    Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Risk identification                                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Financial viability assessment                                                                     Yes   No specific methodology developed
          PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Market assessment                                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                           Yes
          Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                      Yes



     63   Procurement of PPPs
          Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                              No
          Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                                 Yes   Available online
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                              Yes   No specific period of time regulated
          Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                      Yes
          Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals                    Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
          Financial model submitted with proposal                                                            No
          Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria           Yes
          Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                       Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
          Publication of award notice                                                                        Yes   Available online
          Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                          No
          Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                        Yes
          Publication of contract                                                                            No



     33   Unsolicited Proposals
          Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                       Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                                   regulated
          Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                      Yes
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                              No



     58   PPP Contract Management
          System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                            Yes
          Monitoring and evaluation system                                                                   Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                                   procuring authority gathers info
          Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private partner      Yes
          Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)         Yes   Limitation to change the investment plan or
                                                                                                                   duration of the contract
          Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                     Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                                   action
          Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                      Yes   To be regulated by the contract
          Lenders step-in right                                                                              Yes   Direct agreement to be signed
          Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                          Yes   Consequences of termination not expressly
90                                                                                                                 regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Kenya                                                                                                                        $1,340

67   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



65   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



25   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                         evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 No
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



52   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes
     partner
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes

     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Change in the law
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   To be regulated by the contract
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No
                                                                                                                                                                91
                                                                                                                     EMBARGOED
                                                                                     Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                   until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                             Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                            OECD HIGH INCOME

                                                                                                                                 GNI per Capita (in USD)
          Korea, REP.                                                                                                                $27,440

     83   Preparation of PPPs
          Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
          PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
          Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
          Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
          Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
          Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   Specific methodology developed
          PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
          Market assessment                                                                             No
          Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
          Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes


     78   Procurement of PPPs
          Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                              regulated
          Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   90 calendar days
          Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
          Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
          Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
          Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
          Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
          Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Not available online
          Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
          Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
          Publication of contract                                                                       No


     92   Unsolicited Proposals
          Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities evaluated
          Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   90 calendar days



     71   PPP Contract Management
          System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Consultation with PPP procurement experts; PPP
                                                                                                              implementation manual
          Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                              procuring authority gathers info; PPP performance
                                                                                                              info available online
          Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes
          partner
          Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the investment plan or
                                                                                                              duration of the contract
          Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                              action; Refinancing
          Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism established

          Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
92
          Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Kyrgyz REPUBLIC                                                                                                              $1,170

50   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                No
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             No
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



63   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Disclosure of answers not regulated
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



50   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days



58   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes
     partner
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes

     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Change in the law
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
                                                                                                         regulated                                              93
                                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                       MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

                                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
                     Lebanon                                                                                                                     $7,930

          0          Preparation of PPPs
                     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
                     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
                     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  No
                     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               No
                     Risk identification                                                                           No
                     Financial viability assessment                                                                No
                     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
                     Market assessment                                                                             No
                     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
                     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



        30           Procurement of PPPs
                     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
                     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Not available online
                     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   15 calendar days
                     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 No
                     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
                     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure established
                     Publication of award notice                                                                   No
                     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     No
                     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
                     Publication of contract                                                                       No

          USP
     NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



         17          PPP Contract Management
                     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       No
                     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              No
                     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
                     partner
                     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    No
                     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                                         action; Change in the law
                     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 No
                     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
                     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
                                                                                                                         regulated
94
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Lithuania                                                                                                                  $15,000

96   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   Specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes


85   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   52 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       No


75   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   52 calendar days


74   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Participation of
                                                                                                         contract management team on PPP procurement
                                                                                                         process; PPP implementation manual
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info; risk mitigation
                                                                                                         mechanisms
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private partner Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
                                                                                                         replacing entity
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object of
                                                                                                         the contract
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Change in the law; Refinancing
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Direct agreement to be signed
                                                                                                                                                                95
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                     EMBARGOED
                                                                                     Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                   until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                             Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                            Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                                GNI per Capita (in USD)
          Madagascar                                                                                                                    $420

     25   Preparation of PPPs
          Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before contract signature
          PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
          Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
          Risk identification                                                                           No
          Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
          PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
          Market assessment                                                                             No
          Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
          Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



     30   Procurement of PPPs
          Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
          Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Not available online
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
          Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 No
          Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               No
          Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
          Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
          Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
          Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Not available online
          Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     No
          Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
          Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Not available online



     33   Unsolicited Proposals
          Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                              regulated
          Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
          Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



     47   PPP Contract Management
          System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       No
          Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info
          Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
          partner
          Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes
          Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
          Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
          Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Direct agreement to be signed
          Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
                                                                                                              regulated
96
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Malawi                                                                                                                        $350

65   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   Specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



35   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Not available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



33   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



26   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
     partner
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    No

     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Refinancing
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No
                                                                                                                                                                97
                                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                       EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC

                                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
                     Malaysia                                                                                                                   $10,570

        46           Preparation of PPPs
                     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
                     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
                     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



        43           Procurement of PPPs
                     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                                         regulated
                     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
                     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
                     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
                     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     No
                     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
                     Publication of contract                                                                       No

          USP
     NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



        24           PPP Contract Management
                     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team
                     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info
                     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Limitation to change the structure of the private
                     partner                                                                                             partner during an initial period of time
                     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    No
                     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                No
                     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 No
                     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
                     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No


98
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Mauritius                                                                                                                   $9,610

77   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



68   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



42   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                         evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



52   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info; risk
                                                                                                         mitigation mechanisms
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
     partner
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Change in the law
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism
                                                                                                         established
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly                  99
                                                                                                         regulated
                                                                                                                      EMBARGOED
                                                                                      Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                    until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                              Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                             LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN

                                                                                                                                  GNI per Capita (in USD)
           Mexico                                                                                                                       $9,710

      75   Preparation of PPPs
           Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
           PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
           Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   Specific methodology developed
           PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Market assessment                                                                             No
           Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
           Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No


      87   Procurement of PPPs
           Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
           Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days
           Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
           Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
           Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
           Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
           Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
           Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
           Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
           Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
           Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online



      75   Unsolicited Proposals
           Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities evaluated
           Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days



      87   PPP Contract Management
           System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
           Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                               procuring authority gathers info; PPP performance
                                                                                                               info available online
           Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
           partner                                                                                             replacing entity
           Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object
                                                                                                               of the contract; Limitation to change in risk
                                                                                                               allocation; Limitation to change the investment
                                                                                                               plan or duration of the contract
           Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                               action; Change in the law; Refinancing
           Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism established
100        Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   To be regulated by the contract
           Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                  EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

                                                                                                                                       GNI per Capita (in USD)
                Moldova                                                                                                                     $2,220

   63           Preparation of PPPs
                Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
                PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
                Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Market assessment                                                                             No
                Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



   78           Procurement of PPPs
                Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                                    regulated
                Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   60 calendar days
                Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
                Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
                Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
                Publication of contract                                                                       No

     USP
NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



   52           PPP Contract Management
                System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Consultation with PPP procurement experts
                Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                                    procuring authority gathers info
                Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
                partner
                Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change in risk allocation
                Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                                    action; Change in the law
                Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
                Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
                Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                                                                           101
                                                                                                                      EMBARGOED
                                                                                      Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                    until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                              Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                             EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC

                                                                                                                                  GNI per Capita (in USD)
           Mongolia                                                                                                                    $3,830

      27   Preparation of PPPs
           Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
           PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
           Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Risk identification                                                                           No
           Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
           PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
           Market assessment                                                                             No
           Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
           Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



      58   Procurement of PPPs
           Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                               regulated
           Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   60 calendar days
           Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
           Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Disclosure of answers not regulated
           Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
           Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
           Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
           Publication of award notice                                                                   No
           Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     No
           Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
           Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online



      75   Unsolicited Proposals
           Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                               evaluated
           Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   60 calendar days



      69   PPP Contract Management
           System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       No
           Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info
           Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
           partner                                                                                             replacing entity
           Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the investment plan or
                                                                                                               duration of the contract
           Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                               action; Change in the law
           Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
           Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Expressly regulated
102        Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
                                                                                                               regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Morocco                                                                                                                     $3,040

44   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



75   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   40 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
     Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online



58   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                         evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   40 calendar days



66   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes
     partner
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change in risk allocation
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Expressly regulated
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
                                                                                                         regulated                                              103
                                                                                                                      EMBARGOED
                                                                                      Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                    until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                              Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                             Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                                  GNI per Capita (in USD)
           Mozambique                                                                                                                    $580

      50   Preparation of PPPs
           Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
           PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
           Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               No
           Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
           PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
           Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
           Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



      73   Procurement of PPPs
           Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                               regulated
           Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   21 calendar days
           Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
           Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
           Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
           Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
           Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
           Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
           Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
           Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
           Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online



      33   Unsolicited Proposals
           Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                               regulated
           Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



      60   PPP Contract Management
           System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Consultation with PPP procurement experts
           Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info; risk
                                                                                                               mitigation mechanisms
           Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
           partner                                                                                             replacing entity
           Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the investment plan or
                                                                                                               duration of the contract
           Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                               action; Change in the law
           Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
           Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
104
           Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                  EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC

                                                                                                                                       GNI per Capita (in USD)
                Myanmar                                                                                                                      $1,293

     2          Preparation of PPPs
                Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
                PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
                Economic analysis assessment                                                                  No
                Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Risk identification                                                                           No
                Financial viability assessment                                                                No
                PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
                Market assessment                                                                             No
                Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
                Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



  40            Procurement of PPPs
                Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                                    regulated
                Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days
                Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 No
                Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
                Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
                Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
                Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
                Publication of contract                                                                       No

     USP
NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



   25           PPP Contract Management
                System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       No
                Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info
                Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes
                partner
                Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    No
                Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Material adverse government action
                Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
                Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
                Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No


                                                                                                                                                                           105
                                                                                                                                 EMBARGOED
                                                                                                 Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                               until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                         Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                        South Asia

                                                                                                                                             GNI per Capita (in USD)
                      Nepal                                                                                                                         $730

         46           Preparation of PPPs
                      Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
                      PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                      Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                      Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



          75          Procurement of PPPs
                      Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                                          regulated
                      Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                      Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days
                      Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                      Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                      Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
                      Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                      Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                      Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                      Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
                      Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
                      Publication of contract                                                                       No

           USP
      NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                      Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                      Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                      Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



         59           PPP Contract Management
                      System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Participation of
                                                                                                                          contract management team on PPP procurement
                                                                                                                          process; Consultation with PPP procurement
                                                                                                                          experts; PPP implementation manual
                      Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info
                      Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private partner No
                      Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object
                                                                                                                          of the contract; Limitation to change the
                                                                                                                          investment plan or duration of the contract
                      Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
                      Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism established

106                   Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes
                      Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                  LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN

                                                                                                                                       GNI per Capita (in USD)
                Nicaragua                                                                                                                   $1,940

    8           Preparation of PPPs
                Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
                PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
                Economic analysis assessment                                                                  No
                Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               No
                Risk identification                                                                           No
                Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
                Market assessment                                                                             No
                Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



  80            Procurement of PPPs
                Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                                    regulated
                Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days
                Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
                Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
                Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
                Publication of contract                                                                       No

     USP
NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



  20            PPP Contract Management
                System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team
                Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              No

                Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
                partner
                Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    No

                Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                No

                Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 No

                Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
                Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                                                                           107
                                                                                                                      EMBARGOED
                                                                                      Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                    until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                              Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                             Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                                  GNI per Capita (in USD)
           Nigeria                                                                                                                     $2,820

      46   Preparation of PPPs
           Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
           PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
           Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
           PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
           Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



      75   Procurement of PPPs
           Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                               regulated
           Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   42 calendar days
           Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
           Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
           Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
           Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
           Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure established
           Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
           Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
           Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
           Publication of contract                                                                       No



      83   Unsolicited Proposals
           Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                               evaluated
           Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days



      40   PPP Contract Management
           System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team
           Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info
           Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
           partner
           Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes
           Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                No
           Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Recourse to arbitration
           Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Direct agreement to be signed
           Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No
108
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       South Asia

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Pakistan                                                                                                                    $1,440

67   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



55   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     No

     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



25   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



25   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Consultation with
                                                                                                         PPP procurement experts
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
     partner
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    No

     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                No

     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Recourse to arbitration
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No                                                           109
                                                                                                                                 EMBARGOED
                                                                                                 Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                               until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                         Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                        LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN

                                                                                                                                             GNI per Capita (in USD)
                      Panama                                                                                                                     $12,050

          17          Preparation of PPPs
                      Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
                      PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
                      Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               No
                      Risk identification                                                                           No
                      Financial viability assessment                                                                No
                      PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
                      Market assessment                                                                             No
                      Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                      Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



         68           Procurement of PPPs
                      Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                                          regulated
                      Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                      Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   40 calendar days
                      Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                      Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                      Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
                      Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                      Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                      Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                      Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     No
                      Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
                      Publication of contract                                                                       No

           USP
      NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                      Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                      Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                      Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



         47           PPP Contract Management
                      System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       No
                      Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info
                      Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
                      partner                                                                                             replacing entity
                      Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes
                      Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
                      Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 No
                      Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes
                      Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
                                                                                                                          regulated
110
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC

                                                                                                                           GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Papua New Guinea                                                                                                             $2,112

38   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               No
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                No
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



0    Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            No
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         No
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 No
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               No
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      No
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
     Publication of award notice                                                                   No
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     No
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



33   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



0    PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       No
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              No
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
     partner
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    No
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                No
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 No
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No


                                                                                                                                                                111
                                                                                                                       EMBARGOED
                                                                                       Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                     until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                               Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                              LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN

                                                                                                                                   GNI per Capita (in USD)
            Peru                                                                                                                        $6,200

      83    Preparation of PPPs
            Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
            PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
            Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
            Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
            Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
            Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
            PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
            Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
            Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
            Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No


      70    Procurement of PPPs
            Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                                regulated
            Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
            Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
            Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
            Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
            Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
            Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
            Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
            Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
            Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
            Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
            Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online


      100   Unsolicited Proposals
            Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities evaluated
            Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
            Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   150 calendar days


      76    PPP Contract Management
            System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team
            Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes
            Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
            partner                                                                                             replacing entity
            Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object
                                                                                                                of the contract; Limitation to change in risk
                                                                                                                allocation; Limitation to change the investment
                                                                                                                plan or duration of the contract
            Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                                action; Change in the law
            Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism established
            Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   To be regulated by the contract
112         Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination not expressly
                                                                                                                regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Philippines                                                                                                                  $3,540

96   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   Specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes


85   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   90 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure established
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       No


67   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   60 calendar days


84   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Consultation with
                                                                                                         PPP procurement experts
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info; risk mitigation
                                                                                                         mechanisms
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Limitation to change the structure of the private
     partner                                                                                             partner during an initial period of time; Same
                                                                                                         qualifications legally required for the replacing entity
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object
                                                                                                         of the contract; Limitation to change in risk
                                                                                                         allocation; Limitation to change the investment
                                                                                                         plan or duration of the contract
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                         action; Change in the law
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Expressly regulated
                                                                                                                                                                    113

     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                                 EMBARGOED
                                                                                                 Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                               until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                         Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                        OECD HIGH INCOME

                                                                                                                                             GNI per Capita (in USD)
                      Poland                                                                                                                      $13,370

         52           Preparation of PPPs
                      Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
                      PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                      Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
                      Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
                      Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                      Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



         80           Procurement of PPPs
                      Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                                          regulated
                      Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                      Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   47 calendar days
                      Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                      Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                      Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
                      Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                      Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                      Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                      Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
                      Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
                      Publication of contract                                                                       No

           USP
      NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                      Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                      Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                      Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



         43           PPP Contract Management
                      System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
                      Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes

                      Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
                      partner
                      Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object of
                                                                                                                          the contract
                      Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                No

                      Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
                      Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
                      Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
114                                                                                                                       regulated
                                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                  OECD HIGH INCOME

                                                                                                                                       GNI per Capita (in USD)
                Portugal                                                                                                                   $20,530

   54           Preparation of PPPs
                Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
                PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No


   83           Procurement of PPPs
                Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                                    regulated
                Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   47 calendar days
                Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
                Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
                Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
                Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
                Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online


                Unsolicited Proposals
     USP
NOT REGULATED

                Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)


   69           PPP Contract Management
                System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Consultation with PPP
                                                                                                                    procurement experts; PPP implementation manual
                Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info;
                                                                                                                    The procuring authority gathers info; PPP
                                                                                                                    performance info available online
                Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes
                partner
                Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object
                                                                                                                    of the contract; Limitation to change in risk
                                                                                                                    allocation
                Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government action
                Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 No

                Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   To be regulated by the contract                        115
                Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                                 EMBARGOED
                                                                                                 Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                               until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                         Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                        EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

                                                                                                                                             GNI per Capita (in USD)
                      Romania                                                                                                                     $9,500

          35          Preparation of PPPs
                      Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
                      PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
                      Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Market assessment                                                                             No
                      Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
                      Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



         80           Procurement of PPPs
                      Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                                          regulated
                      Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                      Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   52 calendar days
                      Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                      Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                      Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
                      Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                      Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                      Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                      Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
                      Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
                      Publication of contract                                                                       No

           USP
      NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                      Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                      Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                      Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



          51          PPP Contract Management
                      System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   PPP implementation manual
                      Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info; risk
                                                                                                                          mitigation mechanisms
                      Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes
                      partner
                      Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change in risk allocation
                      Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
                      Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes
                      Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
                      Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
                                                                                                                          regulated
116
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     RussiaN FEDERATION (ConcessionS)                                                                                           $11,400

10   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               No
     Risk identification                                                                           No
     Financial viability assessment                                                                No
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
     Market assessment                                                                             No
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



73   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



75   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                         evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days



63   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   PPP performance info available online
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
     partner
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes

     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                         action; Change in the law
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Recourse to arbitration
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Direct agreement to be signed
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                                                                117
                                                                                                                      EMBARGOED
                                                                                      Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                    until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                              Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                             EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

                                                                                                                                  GNI per Capita (in USD)
           RussiaN FEDERATION (PPP)                                                                                                   $11,400

      46   Preparation of PPPs
           Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
           PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
           Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Financial viability assessment                                                                No
           PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Market assessment                                                                             No
           Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
           Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



      75   Procurement of PPPs
           Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
           Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days
           Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
           Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
           Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
           Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
           Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
           Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
           Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
           Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
           Publication of contract                                                                       No



      75   Unsolicited Proposals
           Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                               evaluated
           Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days



      41   PPP Contract Management
           System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
           Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info; PPP
                                                                                                               performance info available online
           Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
           partner
           Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the investment plan or
                                                                                                               duration of the contract
           Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                               action; Change in the law
           Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 No
           Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
118        Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
                                                                                                               regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Senegal (Concessions)                                                                                                       $1,000

25   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           No
     Financial viability assessment                                                                No
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
     Market assessment                                                                             No
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No


50   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               No
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Not available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



33   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No


45   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       No
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
     partner
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object
                                                                                                         of the contract; Limitation to change the
                                                                                                         investment plan or duration of the contract
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                No
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism
                                                                                                         established
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No                                                           119
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                      EMBARGOED
                                                                                      Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                    until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                              Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                             Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                                  GNI per Capita (in USD)
           Senegal (PPP)                                                                                                               $1,000

      50   Preparation of PPPs
           Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
           PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
           Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               No
           Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Financial viability assessment                                                                No
           PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Market assessment                                                                             No
           Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
           Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



      58   Procurement of PPPs
           Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                               regulated
           Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days
           Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
           Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
           Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
           Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
           Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
           Publication of award notice                                                                   No
           Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
           Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
           Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Not available online



      58   Unsolicited Proposals
           Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                               evaluated
           Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



      54   PPP Contract Management
           System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       No
           Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info
           Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes
           partner
           Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object
                                                                                                               of the contract; Limitation to change the
                                                                                                               investment plan or duration of the contract
           Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
           Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes
           Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   To be regulated by the contract
120        Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
                                                                                                               regulated
                                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                  EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC

                                                                                                                                       GNI per Capita (in USD)
                Singapore                                                                                                                  $52,090

   58           Preparation of PPPs
                Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
                PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Market assessment                                                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
                Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No


   75           Procurement of PPPs
                Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                                    regulated
                Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   40 calendar days
                Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
                Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
                Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
                Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
                Publication of contract                                                                       No

     USP
NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)


  64            PPP Contract Management
                System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Participation
                                                                                                                    of contract management team on PPP
                                                                                                                    procurement process; Consultation with PPP
                                                                                                                    procurement experts
                Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                                    procuring authority gathers info; risk mitigation
                                                                                                                    mechanisms
                Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Limitation to change the structure of the private
                partner                                                                                             partner during an initial period of time
                Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes

                Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
                Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
                Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   To be regulated by the contract                        121
                Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                      EMBARGOED
                                                                                      Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                    until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                              Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                             Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                                  GNI per Capita (in USD)
           South Africa                                                                                                                $6,050

      96   Preparation of PPPs
           Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
           PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
           Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   Specific methodology developed
           PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Market assessment                                                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
           Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes


      80   Procurement of PPPs
           Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                               regulated
           Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   21 calendar days
           Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
           Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
           Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
           Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
           Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure established
           Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
           Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
           Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
           Publication of contract                                                                       No


      75   Unsolicited Proposals
           Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities evaluated
           Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   21 calendar days


      79   PPP Contract Management
           System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Participation of
                                                                                                               contract management team on PPP procurement
                                                                                                               process; Consultation with PPP procurement
                                                                                                               experts; PPP implementation manual
           Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                               procuring authority gathers info; risk mitigation
                                                                                                               mechanisms
           Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Limitation to change the structure of the private
           partner                                                                                             partner during an initial period of time
           Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change in risk allocation
           Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                               action; Change in the law; Refinancing
           Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract

122        Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Direct agreement to be signed
           Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       South Asia

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Sri Lanka                                                                                                                   $3,800

33   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               No
     Risk identification                                                                           No
     Financial viability assessment                                                                No
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
     Market assessment                                                                             No
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes


78   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   90 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
     Publication of contract                                                                       No


92   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   90 calendar days



40   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Participation of
                                                                                                         contract management team on PPP procurement
                                                                                                         process; Consultation with PPP procurement
                                                                                                         experts; PPP implementation manual
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
     partner
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object of
                                                                                                         the contract
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Recourse to arbitration
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No                                                           123
                                                                                                                      EMBARGOED
                                                                                      Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                    until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                              Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                             EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

                                                                                                                                  GNI per Capita (in USD)
           Tajikistan                                                                                                                  $1,240

      38   Preparation of PPPs
           Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
           PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
           Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
           PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
           Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



      75   Procurement of PPPs
           Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                               regulated
           Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days
           Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
           Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
           Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
           Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
           Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure established
           Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
           Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
           Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
           Publication of contract                                                                       No



      50   Unsolicited Proposals
           Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                               regulated
           Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   20 calendar days



      66   PPP Contract Management
           System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
           Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info
           Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes
           partner
           Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the investment plan or
                                                                                                               duration of the contract
           Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Material adverse government action; Change
                                                                                                               in the law
           Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
           Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Expressly regulated
124        Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
                                                                                                               regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Tanzania                                                                                                                      $910

50   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             No
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



80   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   90 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



92   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                         evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   90 calendar days



44   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
     partner
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes

     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes

     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly                  125
                                                                                                         regulated
                                                                                                                                 EMBARGOED
                                                                                                 Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                               until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                         Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                        EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC

                                                                                                                                             GNI per Capita (in USD)
                      Thailand                                                                                                                    $5,620

         54           Preparation of PPPs
                      Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
                      PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
                      Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
                      Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                      Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No


         63           Procurement of PPPs
                      Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                                          regulated
                      Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                      Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   60 calendar days
                      Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                      Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               No
                      Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
                      Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                      Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                      Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                      Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
                      Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
                      Publication of contract                                                                       No

           USP
      NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                      Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                      Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                      Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



          57          PPP Contract Management
                      System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Consultation with
                                                                                                                          PPP procurement experts; PPP implementation
                                                                                                                          manual
                      Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                                          procuring authority gathers info
                      Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private partner Yes
                      Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object
                                                                                                                          of the contract; Limitation to change the
                                                                                                                          investment plan or duration of the contract
                      Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
                      Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes
                      Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
126
                      Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Timor-Leste                                                                                                                 $1,920

33   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



70   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



33   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



43   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Participation
                                                                                                         of contract management team on PPP
                                                                                                         procurement process; Consultation with PPP
                                                                                                         procurement experts
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
     partner                                                                                             replacing entity
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No                                                           127
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No
                                                                                                                                 EMBARGOED
                                                                                                 Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                               until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                         Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                        Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                                             GNI per Capita (in USD)
                      Togo (ConcessionS)                                                                                                            $540

          17          Preparation of PPPs
                      Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
                      PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                      Economic analysis assessment                                                                  No
                      Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               No
                      Risk identification                                                                           No
                      Financial viability assessment                                                                No
                      PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             No
                      Market assessment                                                                             No
                      Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
                      Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



         60           Procurement of PPPs
                      Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
                      Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                      Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days
                      Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                      Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                      Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
                      Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                      Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
                      Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                      Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
                      Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
                      Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online


           USP
      NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                      Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                      Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                      Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



         58           PPP Contract Management
                      System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Participation
                                                                                                                          of contract management team on PPP
                                                                                                                          procurement process
                      Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                                          procuring authority gathers info
                      Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
                      partner
                      Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes
                      Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
                      Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
                      Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   To be regulated by the contract
                      Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
128                                                                                                                       regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                           GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Togo (PPP)                                                                                                                    $540

4    Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  No
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               No
     Risk identification                                                                           No
     Financial viability assessment                                                                No
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             No
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



18   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Not available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         No
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               No
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
     Publication of award notice                                                                   No
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     No
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



33   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



46   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                         procuring authority gathers info
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
     partner
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                No
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   To be regulated by the contract
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     No
                                                                                                                                                                129
                                                                                                                      EMBARGOED
                                                                                      Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                    until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                              Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                             MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

                                                                                                                                  GNI per Capita (in USD)
           Tunisia                                                                                                                     $3,970

      33   Preparation of PPPs
           Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
           PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
           Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Risk identification                                                                           No
           Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
           PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Market assessment                                                                             No
           Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
           Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



      63   Procurement of PPPs
           Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                               regulated
           Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days
           Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 No
           Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
           Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
           Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
           Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
           Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
           Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
           Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
           Publication of contract                                                                       No



      50   Unsolicited Proposals
           Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities evaluated
           Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



      65   PPP Contract Management
           System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Consultation with PPP procurement experts
           Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info;
                                                                                                               The procuring authority gathers info; PPP
                                                                                                               performance info available online
           Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes
           partner
           Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the investment plan or
                                                                                                               duration of the contract
           Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                               action
           Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract

130        Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Expressly regulated
           Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination not expressly
                                                                                                               regulated
                                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                  EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

                                                                                                                                       GNI per Capita (in USD)
                Turkey                                                                                                                      $9,950

   46           Preparation of PPPs
                Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
                PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
                Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
                PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                Market assessment                                                                             No
                Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      No
                Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



   63           Procurement of PPPs
                Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                                    regulated
                Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days
                Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
                Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
                Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
                Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
                Publication of contract                                                                       No

     USP
NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



  49            PPP Contract Management
                System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
                Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The procuring authority gathers info
                Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
                partner                                                                                             replacing entity
                Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes
                Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure
                Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Recourse to arbitration
                Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes
                Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination not expressly
                                                                                                                    regulated
                                                                                                                                                                           131
                                                                                                                      EMBARGOED
                                                                                      Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                    until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                              Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                             Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                                  GNI per Capita (in USD)
           Uganda                                                                                                                        $670

      46   Preparation of PPPs
           Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
           PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
           Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
           PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
           Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



      43   Procurement of PPPs
           Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications not
                                                                                                               regulated
           Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         No
           Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
           Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
           Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
           Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
           Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
           Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Not available online
           Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Inclusion of grounds for selection not regulated
           Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
           Publication of contract                                                                       No



      58   Unsolicited Proposals
           Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                               evaluated
           Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         No



      68   PPP Contract Management
           System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Participation
                                                                                                               of contract management team on PPP
                                                                                                               procurement process
           Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                               procuring authority gathers info
           Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes
           partner
           Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change in risk allocation
           Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Refinancing
           Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract

132        Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   To be regulated by the contract
           Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Ukraine                                                                                                                     $2,620

67   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Only before tendering
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   Specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             No
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes



80   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Disclosure of answers not regulated
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       No
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   No
     Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online



50   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                         regulated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   30 calendar days



39   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       No
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
     partner
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes

     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Material adverse government action; Change
                                                                                                         in the law
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Recourse to arbitration
     Lenders step-in right                                                                         No
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
                                                                                                                                                                133
                                                                                                         regulated
                                                                                                                                 EMBARGOED
                                                                                                 Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                               until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                         Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                        OECD HIGH INCOME

                                                                                                                                             GNI per Capita (in USD)
                      United Kingdom                                                                                                             $43,340

         96           Preparation of PPPs
                      Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
                      PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
                      Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
                      Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
                      Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
                      Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   Specific methodology developed
                      PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
                      Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
                      Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
                      Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 Yes


         85           Procurement of PPPs
                      Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
                      Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
                      Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   35 calendar days
                      Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
                      Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
                      Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
                      Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
                      Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure established
                      Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
                      Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
                      Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
                      Publication of contract                                                                       No

           USP
      NOT REGULATED   Unsolicited Proposals
                      Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals
                      Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP
                      Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)


         82           PPP Contract Management
                      System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Participation
                                                                                                                          of contract management team on PPP
                                                                                                                          procurement process; Consultation with PPP
                                                                                                                          procurement experts
                      Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                                          procuring authority gathers info
                      Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Limitation to change the structure of the private
                      partner                                                                                             partner during an initial period of time; Same
                                                                                                                          qualifications legally required for the replacing entity
                      Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object of the
                                                                                                                          contract; Limitation to change in risk allocation
                      Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                                          action; Change in the law; Refinancing
                      Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism established
134                   Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Direct agreement to be signed
                      Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                 EMBARGOED
                                                                                 Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                               until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                         Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                        OECD HIGH INCOME

                                                                                                                             GNI per Capita (in USD)
      United States                                                                                                             $54,960

71    Preparation of PPPs
      Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
      PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
      Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
      Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
      Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
      Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   Specific methodology developed
      PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
      Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
      Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
      Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No


83    Procurement of PPPs
      Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         No
      Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
      Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   60 calendar days
      Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
      Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
      Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
      Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
      Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure established
      Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
      Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
      Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
      Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Available online


100   Unsolicited Proposals
      Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                          evaluated
      Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
      Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   120 calendar days



43    PPP Contract Management
      System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Participation of
                                                                                                          contract management team on PPP procurement
                                                                                                          process; Consultation with PPP procurement
                                                                                                          experts; PPP implementation manual
      Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                          procuring authority gathers info; risk mitigation
                                                                                                          mechanisms
      Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
      partner
      Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes

      Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                No

      Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes
      Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes
                                                                                                                                                                 135
      Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                      EMBARGOED
                                                                                      Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                    until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                              Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                             LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN

                                                                                                                                  GNI per Capita (in USD)
           Uruguay                                                                                                                     $15,720

      69   Preparation of PPPs
           Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
           PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
           Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
           PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
           Market assessment                                                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
           Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No


      74   Procurement of PPPs
           Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                               regulated
           Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   90 calendar days
           Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
           Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
           Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
           Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
           Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
           Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
           Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
           Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
           Publication of contract                                                                       No


      58   Unsolicited Proposals
           Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities evaluated
           Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   45 calendar days



      74   PPP Contract Management
           System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Consultation with
                                                                                                               PPP procurement experts
           Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   The private partner provides periodic info; The
                                                                                                               procuring authority gathers info
           Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes   Same qualifications legally required for the
           partner                                                                                             replacing entity
           Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes   Limitation to change the scope and/or object of
                                                                                                               the contract
           Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Material adverse government
                                                                                                               action
           Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Recourse to arbitration
           Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Expressly regulated
136        Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly regulated
                                                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                       EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC

                                                                                                                            GNI per Capita (in USD)
     Vietnam                                                                                                                     $1,980

75   Preparation of PPPs
     Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        No
     PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         Yes   Detailed procedure established
     Economic analysis assessment                                                                  Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Risk identification                                                                           Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   Specific methodology developed
     PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Market assessment                                                                             Yes   Specific methodology developed
     Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
     Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



85   Procurement of PPPs
     Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                         regulated
     Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Available online
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   90 calendar days
     Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 Yes
     Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Answers are publicly disclosed
     Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
     Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
     Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  Yes   Detailed procedure not regulated
     Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Available online
     Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     Yes   Includes grounds for selection
     Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
     Publication of contract                                                                       No



42   Unsolicited Proposals
     Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities
                                                                                                         evaluated
     Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 No
     Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)



58   PPP Contract Management
     System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes   Contract management team; Consultation with
                                                                                                         PPP procurement experts
     Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes   PPP performance info available online
     Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         No
     partner
     Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes
     Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure ; Change in the law
     Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   Specific dispute resolution mechanism established

     Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Expressly regulated
     Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination not expressly
                                                                                                         regulated                                              137
                                                                                                                      EMBARGOED
                                                                                      Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                    until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                              Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                             Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                                                 GNI per Capita (in USD)
           Zambia                                                                                                                      $1,490

      40   Preparation of PPPs
           Central Budgetary Authority's approval                                                        Yes   Both before tendering and contract signature
           PPP’s prioritization consistent with public investment prioritization                         No
           Economic analysis assessment                                                                  No
           Fiscal affordability assessment                                                               Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Risk identification                                                                           Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Financial viability assessment                                                                Yes   No specific methodology developed
           PPP vs. Public Procurement comparative assessment                                             Yes   No specific methodology developed
           Market assessment                                                                             No
           Draft PPP contract included in the request for proposals                                      Yes
           Standardized PPP model contracts and/or transaction documents                                 No



      50   Procurement of PPPs
           Evaluation committee members required to meet specific qualifications                         Yes   Detailed membership and/or qualifications
                                                                                                               regulated
           Public procurement notice of the PPP issued by procuring authority                            Yes   Not available online
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=30 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated
           Tender documents detail the stages of the procurement process                                 No
           Clarification questions for procurement notice and/or the request for proposals               Yes   Disclosure of answers not regulated
           Financial model submitted with proposal                                                       Yes
           Proposals strictly and solely evaluated in accordance with published evaluation criteria      Yes
           Procedure when only one proposal is received                                                  No
           Publication of award notice                                                                   Yes   Not available online
           Notification of the result of the PPP procurement process                                     No
           Regulation of negotiations with the selected bidder before contract signing                   Yes
           Publication of contract                                                                       Yes   Not available online



      50   Unsolicited Proposals
           Assessment to evaluate unsolicited proposals                                                  Yes   Consistency with government priorities not
                                                                                                               regulated
           Competitive PPP procurement procedure for USP                                                 Yes
           Minimum period of time to submit the bids (>=90 days)                                         Yes   No specific period of time regulated



      63   PPP Contract Management
           System to manage the implementation of the PPP contract                                       Yes
           Monitoring and evaluation system                                                              Yes

           Regulation of a change in the structure (i.e. stakeholder composition) of the private         Yes
           partner
           Regulation of modification/renegotiation of the PPP contract (once the contract is signed)    Yes

           Regulation of circumstances that may occur during the life of the PPP contract                Yes   Force majeure; Change in the law
           Dispute resolution mechanisms                                                                 Yes   To be regulated by the contract
           Lenders step-in right                                                                         Yes   Expressly regulated
           Grounds for termination of a PPP contract                                                     Yes   Consequences of termination expressly
138                                                                                                            regulated
                                                                                             EMBARGOED
                                                             Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                           until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                     Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Annex 1 Typology of PPP Regulatory Framework

Economy                     Typology of PPP regulatory frameworka
Afghanistan                 Public procurement law (with specific provisions)
Albania                     PPP law
Algeria                     Public procurement law (with specific provisions)
Angola                      PPP law
Argentina                   PPP and concession law
Armenia                     PPP law
Australia                   PPP guidelines
Bangladesh                  PPP law
Benin                       Public procurement law
Bosnia and Herzegovina      PPP and concession law
Brazil                      PPP and concession law (two regimes)
Bulgaria                    PPP and concession law
Cambodia                    Concession law
Cameroon                    PPP law
Canada                      PPP guidelines
Chile                       Concession law (other concession laws for specific sectors)
China                       PPP guidelines
Colombia                    PPP law
Congo, Dem. Rep.            Public procurement law (plus law with tax incentives for PPPs)
Congo, Rep.                 Public procurement law
Costa Rica                  Concession law (other concession laws for specific sectors)
Côte d’Ivoire               PPP law (by decree)
Dominican Republic          Public procurement law (with specific provisions)




                                                                                                                                              Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
Ecuador                     PPP law
Egypt, Arab Rep.            PPP law (concession laws for specific sectors)
France                      PPP and concession law (two regimes)
Gabon                       PPP law
Ghana                       Public procurement law
Guatemala                   PPP law
Honduras                    PPP law
India                       PPP guidelines
Indonesia                   PPP law (by regulation)
Iraq                        Public procurement law
Italy                       Public procurement law
Jamaica                     PPP guidelines
Jordan                      PPP law
Kazakhstan                  PPP law
Kenya                       PPP law
Korea, Rep.                 PPP law
Kyrgyz Republic             PPP law
Lebanon                     Public procurement law
Lithuania                   Public procurement law (concession law not applicable to the case study)
                                                                                                                                             139
                                                                                                                                                                  EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                                  Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                                until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                                          Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                         Economy                                   Typology of PPP regulatory frameworka
                                                         Madagascar                                PPP law
                                                         Malawi                                    PPP law
                                                         Malaysia                                  PPP guidelines
                                                         Mauritius                                 PPP law
                                                         Mexico                                    PPP law (concession laws for specific sectors)
                                                         Moldova                                   PPP and concession law
                                                         Mongolia                                  Concession law
                                                         Morocco                                   PPP law
                                                         Mozambique                                PPP law
                                                         Myanmar                                   Public procurement law
                                                         Nepal                                     PPP law
                                                         Nicaragua                                 Concession law
                                                         Nigeria                                   PPP law (plus PPP guidelines)
                                                         Pakistan                                  Public procurement law
                                                         Panama                                    Concession law
                                                         Papua New Guinea                          PPP law
                                                         Peru                                      PPP law
                                                         Philippines                               PPP law (BOT law)
                                                         Poland                                    PPP and concession law
                                                         Portugal                                  PPP law
                                                         Romania                                   Public procurement law (PPP law for institutional joint ventures)
                                                         Russian Federation                        PPP and concession law (two regimes)
                                                         Senegal                                   PPP and concession law (two regimes)
                                                         Singapore                                 PPP guidelines
                                                         South Africa                              PPP guidelines
 Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                         Sri Lanka                                 PPP guidelines
                                                         Tajikistan                                PPP law
                                                         Tanzania                                  PPP law
                                                         Thailand                                  PPP law
                                                         Timor-Leste                               PPP law
                                                         Togo                                      PPP and concession law (two regimes)
                                                         Tunisia                                   PPP and concession law
                                                         Turkey                                    PPP law (different BOT laws for different sectors)
                                                         Uganda                                    PPP law
                                                         Ukraine                                   PPP and concession law
                                                         United Kingdom                            Public procurement law (plus PPP guidelines)
                                                         United States                             PPP law
                                                         Uruguay                                   PPP law
                                                         Vietnam                                   PPP law (by decree)
                                                         Zambia                                    PPP law
                                                        Note: BOT = build-operate-transfer; PPP = public-private partnership.
                                                           Typology of PPP regulatory framework refers to the most specific legal or policy instruments regulating the development of a
                                                        a. 
140                                                        PPP as defined by the case study. However, other relevant laws and regulations might also apply. The complete description of the
                                                           regulatory framework assessed for each economy is available on the project’s website (http://bpp.worldbank.org).
                                                                                                          EMBARGOED
                                                                          Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                        until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                  Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Annex 2 Scoring Methodology

Thematic Area   What is measured                                 How it is scored
Preparation     The Ministry of Finance or Central               A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                Budgetary Authority approves the PPP
of PPPs         project before launching the procurement
                                                                 A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                process.

                A second approval by the Ministry of             A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                Finance or Central Budgetary Authority is
                                                                 A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                required before signing the PPP contract.

                Prioritization of PPP projects with all other    A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                public investment projects (e.g. in the
                                                                 A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                context of a national public investment
                system).

                Procedure to ensure consistency of PPPs          A score of 1 if specific procedures are detailed in the
                with other public investment priorities.         regulatory framework.
                                                                 A score of 0.5 if consistency is required only as a general
                                                                 principle.
                Socio-economic analysis (cost-benefit            A score of 1 if required and a specific methodology
                analysis of the socio-economic impact of         developed.
                the project).
                                                                 A score of 0.5 if required but no specific methodology
                                                                 developed.
                                                                 A score of 0.25 if conducted according to a recognized
                                                                 practice but without a specific methodology enacted.
                Affordability assessment, including the          A score of 1 if required and a specific methodology developed
                identification of the required long term
                                                                 A score of 0.5 if required but no specific methodology
                public commitments (explicit and implicit).
                                                                 developed.
                                                                 A score of 0.25 if conducted according to a recognized
                                                                 practice but without a specific methodology enacted.

                Risk identification, allocation and              A score of 1 if required and a specific methodology
                assessment (risk matrix).                        developed.
                                                                 A score of 0.5 if required but no specific methodology




                                                                                                                                                           Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
                                                                 developed.
                                                                 A score of 0.25 if conducted according to a recognized
                                                                 practice but without a specific methodology enacted.
                Financial viability or bankability assessment.   A score of 1 if required and a specific methodology
                                                                 developed.
                                                                 A score of 0.5 if required but no specific methodology
                                                                 developed.
                                                                 A score of 0.25 if conducted according to a recognized
                                                                 practice but without a specific methodology enacted.
                Comparative assessment to evaluate               A score of 1 if required and a specific methodology
                whether PPP is the best option as compared       developed.
                with other procurement strategies.               A score of 0.5 if required but no specific methodology
                                                                 developed.
                                                                 A score of 0.25 if conducted according to a recognized
                                                                 practice but without a specific methodology enacted.

                Market assessment (showing evidence              A score of 1 if required and a specific methodology
                of enough interest on the market for the         developed.
                project).
                                                                 A score of 0.5 if required but no specific methodology
                                                                 developed.
                                                                 A score of 0.25 if conducted according to a recognized
                                                                 practice but without a specific methodology enacted.
                Draft PPP contract included in the request       A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                for proposals.
                                                                 A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                Standardized PPP model contracts and/or          A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                transaction documents developed.
                                                                 A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.                                    141
                                                                                                                                                         EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                         Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                       until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                                 Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                        Thematic Area   What is measured                                How it is scored
                                                        Procurement     Bid evaluation committee members are            A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                                                                        required to meet specific qualifications.
                                                        of PPPs                                                         A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.

                                                                        The procuring authority issues a public         A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                                                                        procurement notice of the PPP.
                                                                                                                        A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                                                                        PPP public procurement notice is published      A score of 0.5 if yes.
                                                                        online.
                                                                        The procuring authority grants potential        A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                                                                        bidders a minimum period of time to
                                                                                                                        A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                                                                        submit their bids.
                                                                        Legally required minimum period of time in      A score of 1 if the legally required minimum period of time is
                                                                        calendar days.                                  at least 60 calendar days.
                                                                                                                        A score of 0.5 if the legally required minimum period of time
                                                                                                                        is at least 30 calendar days.
                                                                        The tender documents detail the stages of       A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                                                                        the procurement process.
                                                                                                                        A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                                                                        If there is a pre-qualification stage,          A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                                                                        the tender documents specify the
                                                                                                                        A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                                                                        prequalification criteria in order to make
                                                                        them available to all of the bidders.
                                                                        Interested parties/potential bidders can        A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                                                                        submit questions to clarify the public
                                                                                                                        A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                                                                        procurement notice and/or the request for
                                                                        proposals.
                                                                        The procuring authority discloses those         A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                                                                        questions and clarifications to all of the
                                                                                                                        A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                                                                        potential bidders.
                                                                        The procuring authority requires the bidders    A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                                                                        to prepare and present a financial model
                                                                                                                        A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                                                                        with their proposals.
                                                                        The procuring authority evaluates the           A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                                                                        proposals strictly and solely in accordance
                                                                                                                        A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                                                                        with the evaluation criteria stated in the
 Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                                        tender documents.
                                                                        When only one proposal is submitted (sole       A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                                                                        proposals), the procuring authority follows
                                                                                                                        A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                                                                        a special procedure before awarding the PPP.
                                                                        Special procedure before awarding the PPP       A score of 1 if specific procedures are detailed in the
                                                                        in the case of sole proposals.                  regulatory framework.
                                                                                                                        A score of 0.5 if sole proposals are considered valid as long as
                                                                                                                        they meet the conditions outlined in the tender documents.

                                                                        The procuring authority publishes the           A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                                                                        award notice
                                                                                                                        A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.

                                                                        The public procurement award notice is          A score of 1 if yes.
                                                                        published online.
                                                                        The procuring authority provides all            A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                                                                        the bidders with the result of the PPP
                                                                                                                        A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                                                                        procurement process.
                                                                        The notification of the result of the PPP       A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                                                                        procurement process includes the grounds
                                                                                                                        A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                                                                        for the selection of the winning bid.
                                                                        The regulatory framework either restricts       A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                                                                        or regulates negotiations with the selected
                                                                                                                        A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                                                                        bidder between the award and the
                                                                        signature of the PPP contract.
142
                                                                                                         EMBARGOED
                                                                         Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                       until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                 Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Thematic Area    What is measured                              How it is scored
Procurement of   The procuring authority publishes the PPP     A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                 contract.
PPPs (cont’d)                                                  A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.



                 The PPP contract is published online.         A score of 1 if yes.



                 The procuring authority conducts an           A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                 assessment to evaluate unsolicited
                                                               A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                 proposals.


                 The evaluation assessment ensures that the    A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                 unsolicited proposal is consistent with the
                                                               A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                 existing government priorities.


                 Evaluation of unsolicited proposals against   A score of 1 if specific procedures are detailed in the
                 existing government priorities                regulatory framework.
                                                               A score of 0.5 if the regulatory framework sets a goal
                                                               without establishing specific procedures to achieve it.
                 The procuring authority initiates a           A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                 competitive PPP procurement procedure
                                                               A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                 when proceeding with the unsolicited
                 proposal.

                 The procuring authority grants a minimum      A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                 period of time to additional prospective
                                                               A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                 bidders (besides the proponent) to prepare
                 their proposals.

                 Legally required minimum period of time in    A score of 1 if the legally required minimum period of time is
                 calendar days.                                at least 90 calendar days.
                                                               A score of 0.5 if the legally required minimum period of time




                                                                                                                                                          Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
                                                               is at least 60 calendar days.




                                                                                                                                                         143
                                                                                                                                                       EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                       Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                     until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                               Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                        Thematic Area   What is measured                              How it is scored
                                                        PPP Contract    The procuring or contract management          A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                                                                        authority establishes a system to manage
                                                        Management      the implementation of the PPP contract.
                                                                                                                      A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.



                                                                        PPP management tools.                         A score of 0.25 if a regulatory provision includes the
                                                                                                                      establishment of a PPP contract team.
                                                                                                                      A score of 0.125 if the establishment of a PPP contract team
                                                                                                                      occurs as a recognized practice.
                                                                                                                      A score of 0.25 if a regulatory provision includes the
                                                                                                                      participation of the members of the PPP contract
                                                                                                                      management team in the PPP procurement process.
                                                                                                                      A score of 0.125 if that participation occurs as a recognized
                                                                                                                      practice.
                                                                                                                      A score of 0.25 if a regulatory provision includes the
                                                                                                                      possibility to consult with PPP procurement experts when
                                                                                                                      managing the PPP contract.
                                                                                                                      A score of 0.125 if that consultation occurs as a recognized
                                                                                                                      practice.
                                                                                                                      A score of 0.25 if a regulatory provision includes the
                                                                                                                      elaboration of a PPP implementation manual or an
                                                                                                                      equivalent document.
                                                                                                                      A score of 0.125 if that a manual or equivalent document is
                                                                                                                      elaborated as a recognized practice.
                                                                        The procuring or contract management          A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                                                                        authority establishes a system to manage
                                                                                                                      A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                                                                        the implementation of the PPP contract.
                                                                        Mechanisms included in the PPP contract’s     A score of 0.25 if a regulatory provision mandates the private
                                                                        monitoring and evaluation system.             partner to provide periodic operational and financial data.
                                                                                                                      A score of 0.125 if provision of such data occurs as a
                                                                                                                      recognized practice.
                                                                                                                      A score of 0.25 if a regulatory provision mandates the
                                                                                                                      procuring or contract management authority to periodically
                                                                                                                      gather information on the performance of the PPP contract.
                                                                                                                      A score of 0.125 if the periodical gathering of information
                                                                                                                      occurs as a recognized practice.
 Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                                                                                      A score of 0.25 if a regulatory provision mandates the
                                                                                                                      procuring or contract management authority to establish a
                                                                                                                      risk mitigation mechanism.
                                                                                                                      A score of 0.125 if the establishment of the risk mitigation
                                                                                                                      mechanism occurs as a recognized practice.
                                                                                                                      A score of 0.25 if a regulatory provision mandates the
                                                                                                                      availability of the PPP contract performance information to
                                                                                                                      the public.
                                                                                                                      A score of 0.125 if the PPP contract performance information
                                                                                                                      is available to the public as a recognized practice.


                                                                        The PPP contract performance information      A score of 1 if yes.
                                                                        is publicly available online on a specific
                                                                        website.

                                                                        The regulatory framework expressly            A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                                                                        regulates a change in the structure (i.e.
                                                                                                                      A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                                                                        stakeholder composition) of the private
                                                                        partner.
                                                                        The circumstances that are specifically       A score of 0.5 if any change in the private partner during
                                                                        regulated.                                    an initial period is regulated (e.g. construction and first five
                                                                                                                      years of operation).
                                                                                                                      A score of 0.5 if a change affecting the controlling interest
                                                                                                                      requires the replacing entity to meet the same technical
                                                                                                                      qualifications as the original operator.
144
                                                                                                        EMBARGOED
                                                                        Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                      until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Thematic Area   What is measured                               How it is scored
PPP Contract    The regulatory framework expressly             A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                regulates the modification or renegotiation
Management      of the PPP contract (once the contract is
                                                               A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
(cont’d)        signed).

                The circumstances that are specifically        A score of 0.33 if a change in the scope and/or object of the
                regulated.                                     contract is regulated.
                                                               A score of 0.33 if a change in the risk allocation of the
                                                               contract is regulated.
                                                               A score of 0.33 if a change in the investment plan or duration
                                                               of the contract is regulated.


                The regulatory framework expressly             A score of 0.25 if force majeure is regulated.
                regulates one (or more) circumstances
                                                               A score of 0.25 if material adverse government action is
                that may occur during the life of the PPP
                                                               regulated.
                contract.
                                                               A score of 0.25 if change in the law is regulated.
                                                               A score of 0.25 if refinancing is regulated.

                The regulatory framework establishes a         A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                specific dispute resolution mechanism for
                                                               A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                PPPs.



                The dispute resolution mechanism for PPPs.     A score of 1 if a regulatory provision details specific dispute
                                                               resolution mechanisms.
                                                               A score of 0.5 if a dispute resolution mechanism is required
                                                               to be regulated in the contract.
                                                               A score of 0.5 if arbitration is the only recourse available


                The regulatory framework allows the            A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                lenders to take control of the PPP project
                                                               A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                (lender step-in right) if either the private




                                                                                                                                                         Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
                partner defaults or if the PPP contract is
                under threat of termination for failure to
                meet service obligations.
                Lender’s step-in rights.                       A score of 1 if they are expressly regulated by the regulatory
                                                               framework.
                                                               A score of 0.5 if they are required to be regulated in the
                                                               contract.
                                                               A score of 0.5 if a direct agreement is required to be signed
                                                               with the lenders.


                The regulatory framework expressly             A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                establishes the grounds for termination of a
                                                               A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                PPP contract.
                The regulatory framework also establishes      A score of 1 if yes based on a regulatory provision.
                the consequences for the termination of the
                                                               A score of 0.5 if yes based on a recognized practice.
                PPP contract.




                                                                                                                                                        145
                                                                                                                                                    EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                    Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                  until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                            Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                        References
                                                        Calderón, César, and Luis Servén. 2004. “The Effects of Infrastructure Development on
                                                               Growth and Income Distribution.” Policy Research Working Paper 3400, World
                                                               Bank, Washington, DC.

                                                        ———. 2008. “Infrastructure and Economic Development in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Policy
                                                             Research Working Paper 4712, World Bank, Washington, DC.

                                                        ———. 2010. “Infrastructure in Latin America.” Policy Research Working Paper 5317,
                                                             World Bank, Washington, DC.

                                                        Delmon, Jeffrey. 2011. Public-Private Partnership Projects in Infrastructure: An Essential
                                                              Guide for Policy Makers. Cambridge, U.K., and New York: Cambridge University
                                                              Press.

                                                        Estache, Antonio, and Stéphane Saussier. 2014. “Public-Private Partnerships and
                                                               Efficiency: A Short Assessment.” DICE Report 12 (3): 8–13.

                                                        EPEC (European PPP Expertise Centre). 2011. The Guide to Guidance: How to Prepare,
                                                               Procure, and Deliver PPP Projects. Luxembourg: EPEC.

                                                        Farquharson, Edward, Clemencia Torres de Mästle, and E. R. Yescombe, with Javier
                                                               Encinas. 2011. How to Engage with the Private Sector in Public-Private
                                                               Partnerships in Emerging Markets. Washington, DC: World Bank.

                                                        Guasch, J. Luis. 2004. Granting and Renegotiating Infrastructure Concessions: Doing It
                                                               Right. Washington, DC: World Bank.

                                                        Hodges, John T., and Georgina Dellacha. 2007. “Unsolicited Infrastructure Proposals:
                                                               How Some Countries Introduce Competition and Transparency.” Working Paper
                                                               1, Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility, Washington, DC.
 Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                        ICC (Investment Coordination Committee). 2014. “Note on the Generic Preferred Risk
                                                                Allocation Matrix (GPRAM).” National Economic and Development Authority,
                                                                Manila. http://www.neda.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Generic-
                                                                Preferred-Risk-Allocation-Matrix.pdf.

                                                        OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2010.“Dedicated
                                                               Public-Private Partnership Units: A Survey of Institutional and Governance
                                                               Structures. Paris: OECD.

                                                        ———. 2012. “Recommendation of the Council on Principles for Public Governance
                                                             of Public-Private Partnerships.” Public Governance Committee,
                                                             Paris. http://acts.oecd.org/Instruments/ShowInstrumentView.
                                                             aspx?InstrumentID=275&Lang=en&Book=False.

                                                        OPP (Office of Planning and Budget). 2014. “Guía para la formulación y evaluación de
                                                               proyectos de inversión: Sistema nacional de inversión pública” (Guide for the
                                                               Design and Evaluation of Investment Projects: National Public Investment
                                                               System). Montevideo, Uruguay. http://www.opp.gub.uy/images/guia_snip.pdf.


146
                                                                                EMBARGOED
                                                Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                              until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                        Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Project Management Institute. 2001. A Guide to the Project Management Body of
        Knowledge (PMBOK Guide). 4th ed. Newtown Square, PA: Project Management
        Institute

Reeves, Eoin, Dónal Palcic, and Darragh Flannery. 2013. “Are We There Yet? The Length of
        the Tendering Period under PPP in Ireland.” Department of Economics Working
        Paper WP012013, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland.

Straub, Stéphane. 2008. “Infrastructure and Growth in Developing Countries.” Policy
        Research Working Paper 4460, World Bank, Washington, DC.

UNCITRAL (United Nations Commission on International Trade Law). 2001. UNCITRAL
      Legislative Guide on Privately Financed Infrastructure Projects. New York: United
      Nations. https://www.uncitral.org/pdf/english/texts/procurem/pfip/guide/
      pfip-e.pdf.

World Bank. 2010. “Guidelines Procurement under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits.”
       Washington, DC. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPROCUREMENT/
       Resources/ProcGuid-10-06-RevMay10-ev2.doc

———. 2012. “Unsolicited Proposals.” PPIAF Note 6, Washington, DC, World Bank.
     http://www.ppiaf.org/sites/ppiaf.org/files/documents/Note-Six-Unsolicited-
     Proposals.pdf.

———. 2013. Disclosure of Project and Contract Information in Public-Private
     Partnerships, Washington, DC: World Bank.




                                                                                                                                 Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
———. 2014. Public-Private Partnership Reference Guide 2.0. Washington, DC: World
     Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/600511468336720455/
     Public-private-partnerships-reference-guide-version-2-0.

———. 2016. The State of PPPs: Infrastructure Public-Private Partnerships in Emerging
     Markets & Developing Economies 1991–2015. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Yescombe, E. R. 2013. “PPPs and Project Finance.” In The Routledge Companion to Public-
      Private Partnerships, edited by Piet de Vries and Etienne B. Yehoue, 227–46.
      Abingdon, Oxon, U.K., and New York: Routledge.

Yong, H. Kim, ed. 2010. Public-Private Partnerships Policy and Practice: A Reference Guide.
        London: Commonwealth Secretariat.




                                                                                                                                147
                                                                                                                                                                    EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                                    Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                                  until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                                            Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




                                                        Endnotes
                                                        1	    For information about the BPP project, see its website at http://bpp.worldbank.org.

                                                        2	    World Bank 2014.

                                                        3	    Straub 2008; Calderón and Servén 2004, 2008, 2010.

                                                        4	    The infrastructure gap is defined as the difference between what is invested in infrastructure and what
                                                              is needed to achieve the economy’s development goals.

                                                        5	    World Bank 2016.

                                                        6	    As defined by the World Bank PPP CCSA.

                                                        7	    World Bank 2016.

                                                        8	    Estache and Saussier 2014.

                                                        9	    See, for instance, Yescombe 2013; Yong 2010; EPEC 2011.

                                                        10	 In 2015, the Benchmarking PPP Procurement project was successfully piloted in 10 economies: Cameroon,
                                                            Colombia, the Arab Republic of Egypt, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Peru, South Africa, Tanzania, and Tunisia.
                                                            The report can be found at the Benchmarking PPP Procurement website (http://bpp.worldbank.org/
                                                            reports) and the PPP Knowledge Lab website (http://www.pppknowledgelab.org).

                                                        11	   The ECG comprises leading PPP legal experts and other PPP practitioners from many organizations,
                                                              among them the World Bank Group, including both the World Bank and International Finance
                                                              Corporation; the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; the Inter-American
                                                              Development Bank; the Asian Development Bank; the Islamic Development Bank; The George
                                                              Washington University; American University; Georgetown University; the University of Central Florida;
                                                              and the Maxwell School of Public Administration.

                                                        12	   The selection criteria for identifying the 82 economies were (a) economies covered in the pilot
                                                              assessment, (b) economies with active PPP markets (measured by number of projects reaching financial
                                                              close in the preceding 10 years according to the World Bank’s Private Participation in Infrastructure
                                                              Database http://ppi.worldbank.org), (c) economies with ongoing work programs on PPPs with the World
                                                              Bank Group, (d) Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility priority economies, (e) priority economies
 Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                              identified by other multilateral development banks, and (f) economies covered by the Benchmarking
                                                              PPP Procurement initiative, which makes it possible to tap into the existing network of contributors and
                                                              increase the survey response rate.

                                                        13	   Points are awarded on the basis of whether something is done in practice, as well as whether that
                                                              practice is codified in the law. More points are awarded to an economy if the practice is codified in law.
                                                              This approach rewards economies that systematically codify their rules and practices.

                                                        14	   See the APMG Public-Private Partnership (PPP) Certification Guide website at https://ppp-certification.
                                                              com/sites/default/files/documents/Chapter-2-Establishing-a-PPP-Framework.pdf.

                                                        15	   Yong 2010, 32.

                                                        16	 Brazil, article 2, Law no. 11,079/2004 (PPP law).

                                                        17	   France, article 5, Ordinance no. 2016-65, dated January 29, 2016.

                                                        18	   When referring to the number of economies following or not following specific practices in the stages
                                                              of the PPP procurement cycle, counting of these five economies will be based on the practices and
                                                              regulatory frameworks for PPPs in the strictest sense. Noticeable differences from the framework for
                                                              concessions will be presented throughout the text when relevant.

                                                        19	 In these economies, PPP guidelines constitute the most specific source of guidance for the development
                                                            of PPP projects. Other relevant laws and regulations might also apply if they are in place (for example,
                                                            public procurement laws, public financial management laws, and so on).
148
                                                                                            EMBARGOED
                                                            Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                          until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                    Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).



20	 Uruguay, article 3, Law 18.786, adopted July 19, 2011.

21	   OECD 2010, 11.

22	 Honduras, article 13 of Legislative Decree 143 of 2010, the Public-Private Partnership Promotion Law.

23	    Arab Republic of Egypt, article 16, Law no. 67 of 2010 regulating Partnership with the Private Sector in
      Infrastructure Projects, Services, and Public Utilities, and article 2, PPP Executive Regulations of Law no. 67
      of 2010, issued in Prime Ministerial Decree no. 238 of 2011.

24	   Delmon 2011.

25	 Ibid.

26	 OECD 2012.

27	 Arab Republic of Egypt, articles 14 and 15(e), Law no. 67 of 2010 promulgating the Law Regulating
    Partnership with the Private Sector in Infrastructure Projects, Services, and Public Utilities, and articles 3
    and 4, PPP Executive Regulations of Law no. 67 of 2010, issued in Prime Ministerial Decree no. 238 of 2011.

28	 World Bank 2014, section 2.3.1.

29	 Philippines, section 2.3, BOT Law, Act no. (RA) 6957, “An Act Authorizing the Financing, Construction,
    Operation and Maintenance of Infrastructure Projects by the Private Sector and for Other Purposes,” as
    amended by RA 7718.

30	 Kenya, sections 2, 24, and 25, Public Private Partnerships Act no. 15 of 2013.

31	   Peru, article 7.1, Legislative Decree no. 1012, published on May 13, 2008, as modified by Law no. 30167,
      published on March 2, 2014. The legislation approves the framework law of PPPs for the generation of
      employment and dictates rules for expediting the private investment promotion processes.

32	 Pakistan, section K.i.a., Public Procurement Policy as approved by the Economic Coordination Committee
    of the Cabinet, dated January 26, 2010.

33	   World Bank 2014, box 3.3.

34	   For a guide to the design and evaluation of investment projects, see OPP (2014).




                                                                                                                                             Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
35	   Cameroon, section 8, Decree no. 2008/0115.

36	   Argentina, article 13, Decree no. 967/2005.

37	 In Moldova, according to section 28 of Government Resolution no. 476, if the PPP project is initiated
    by the government in such a way that implementation requires the participation of the state budget,
    the feasibility study is submitted to the Ministry of Finance for examination and assessment of project
    sustainability.

38	 Timor-Leste, article 8, Decree Law no. 42/2012 of September 7, 2012, as amended by Decree Law no. 2/2014
    of January 15, 2014, regulating the Legal Regime on Public-Private Partnerships.

39	 Chile, article 40, Financial Management Law, D.L. no. 1.263 de 1975.

40	 The text of the manual is available at http://www.minhacienda.gov.co/HomeMinhacienda/
    ShowProperty?nodeId=%2FOCS%2FMIG_6047857.PDF%2F%2FidcPrimaryFile&revision=latestreleased.

41	   Chapter 1, section 2, of the Arab Republic of Egypt’s PPP Guidelines on the PPP Structure.

42	 ICC 2014.

43	 For examples, see the guides at the following websites: https://colaboracion.dnp.gov.co/CDT/
    Participacin%20privada%20en%20proyectos%20de%20infraestructu/Guia%20de%20APP%20%20
    Capitulo%203%202016.pdf and https://www.dnp.gov.co/programas/participación-privada-%20y-en-
    proyectos-de-infraestructura/asociaciones-publico-privadas/Paginas/guias-app.aspx.

44	 Brazil, article 10.I, General Law for Public-Private Partnerships, Federal Law no. 11,079 of 2004.

                                                                                                                                            149
                                                                                                                                                                   EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                                   Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                                 until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                                           Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).



                                                        45	 Philippines, section 4.5(d), PPP Governing Board Policy Circular no. 01-2015.

                                                        46	 Reeves, Palcic, and Flannery 2013.

                                                        47	 World Bank 2010.

                                                        48	 No provision regulates this matter for PPPs in Cambodia, Cameroon, Gabon, Papua New Guinea, Togo,
                                                            and Uganda.

                                                        49	 World Bank 2004.

                                                        50	 EPEC 2011.

                                                        51	   For example, Argentina, Armenia, Bulgaria, Ghana, Kazakhstan, Lithuania, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama,
                                                              Poland, Romania, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Uganda, and Ukraine.

                                                        52	 The 13 economies are Canada, China, the Arab Republic of Egypt, India, Indonesia, Lebanon, Nigeria, the
                                                            Philippines, South Africa, Tajikistan, the United Kingdom, the United States, and Zambia.

                                                        53	 Arab Republic of Egypt, article 81, PPP Executive Regulations.

                                                        54	   Nigeria, section 5, Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission Act of 2005.

                                                        55	   Nigeria, section 111, Procurement Regulation (procurement of goods and works).

                                                        56	   UNCITRAL 2001, section 119.

                                                        57	 Summaries of the PPP contract present provisions pertaining to the object and conditions of the project,
                                                            its term, and performance requirements, as well as a summary of the monitoring system.

                                                        58	   World Bank 2013.

                                                        59	   Farquharson, Torres de Mästle, and Yescombe 2011.

                                                        60	 Hodges and Dellacha 2007.

                                                        61	   World Bank 2014. 

                                                        62	   According to paragraph 3.2 of the ICRC Guidelines for Implementing Unsolicited Proposals for PPPs in
                                                              Nigeria, the procedure is as follows:
                                                              (1)	 The USP is submitted to and reviewed by the relevant ministry, department, or agency (MDA) with
 Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                                   oversight for the relevant sector.
                                                              (2)	 The MDA is required to review the proposal to determine that it meets the following criteria: (a)
                                                                   the project serves a credible public interest, (b) the project is in line with the national development
                                                                   goals of the relevant MDA; (c) the project falls within the category of critical infrastructure, (d) the
                                                                   project is viable and does not require viability gap funding, and (e) the project proponent possesses
                                                                   the requisite competence and profile to implement the project.
                                                              (3)	 Following the review of the proposal by the MDA, the unsolicited proposal is forwarded to the ICRC
                                                                   for its review and issuance of “no objection,” if the proposal is satisfactory.
                                                              (4)	 Technical and financial due diligence will be carried out to ascertain the capability of the project
                                                                   proponent in implementing the project, if selected.
                                                              (5)	 Following the issuance of “no objection” from the ICRC and success of the project proponent from
                                                                   the due diligence exercise, the proposal may then be approved at the ministerial level.
                                                              (6)	 The project proponent is issued a formal acknowledgment as the project author, and the project
                                                                   moves to a competitive bidding stage.
                                                              (7)	 Following the competitive procurement process (expression of interest, request for proposal, and
                                                                   so forth), the project proponent is then requested to submit a best and final offer, along with the
                                                                   preferred bidder.
                                                              (8)	 The successful bidder is then determined by the most economically and financially viable
                                                                   submission



150
                                                                                            EMBARGOED
                                                            Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                          until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                    Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).



63	   Uganda, section 34(5), PPP Act.

64	   Hodges and Dellacha 2007.

65	   Ibid.

66	 Peru, article 16, PPP law; article 31, PPP regulations.

67	   Jamaica, section 9.0.3.3, PPP policy.

68	 Albania, article 22(4), Law no. 125/2013.

69	 World Bank 2014.

70	   World Bank 2012.

71	   The ABFO compensation mechanism is used in the context of two-stage bid processes. In this
      procurement procedure, the higher-ranked bidders from the first stage are invited to participate in the
      second stage when the final private partner is selected. Through the ABFO mechanism, the original
      proponent of the USP is automatically included in the second stage of the bidding process.

72	   When a developer’s fee is used, the original proponent is reimbursed for some or all of the USP
      development costs either by the government or by the winning bidder.

73	   With a bid bonus, the original proponent is given a premium to his or her offer during the competitive
      bidding procedure.

74	   Under a Swiss challenge system, once the relevant authority accepts the USP, a competitive bidding
      procedure commences. If the original proponent is unsuccessful or if there is a better offer in place, the
      original proponent has the option of submitting a counteroffer to match or beat the offer from the best
      bidder. The Swiss challenge is very useful in a tender procedure when price is the only award criterion.

75	   World Bank 2014, 156–57.

76	   World Bank 2014, 208, para. 3.7.2.

77	   Only Armenia, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Iraq, Lebanon, Nicaragua, and Papua New Guinea do
      not explicitly establish a monitoring and evaluation system for PPP contracts.




                                                                                                                                             Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
78	   Colombia, article 33, PPP law.

79	   Costa Rica, articles 36 and 37, concessions law, and article 48, concessions regulations; Ecuador, article 9,
      PPP law.

80	 Exactly half (41) of the surveyed economies have a regulatory provision or an established practice of
    designing a PPP procurement team. In the other half, no provision or established practice exists in this
    regard.

81	    Within the context of project management, risk mitigation involves (a) establishing a risk progress
      monitoring system to track identified risk and identify new risks appearing as the project develops and
      (b) planning actions to minimize the threats to the project’s objectives that the identified risks imply
      (adapted from Project Management Institute 2001).

82	   Australia, appendix H.3, National PPP Guidelines, vol. 2.

83	   World Bank 2014, 211, para 3.7.3.

84	   Guasch 2004.

85	   Ibid.

86	 The economies that did not appear to embody explicit regulatory provisions on PPP contract
    renegotiation included Algeria, Armenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Congo, the Democratic
    Republic of Congo, Ecuador, Gabon, Guatemala, Honduras, India, Lebanon, Malawi, Malaysia, Myanmar,
    Nicaragua, Pakistan, and Papua New Guinea.


                                                                                                                                            151
                                                                                                                                                                  EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                                  Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                                until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                                          Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).



                                                        87	    See, for instance, article 41 of the Cambodian law on concessions, which requires the approval of
                                                              the Ministry of Economy and Finance to modify the concessions contract, and article 57 of the Costa
                                                              Rican concession law, which provides that the comptroller general must approve any extension to the
                                                              contract.

                                                        88	   See, for example, the obligatory approval of both the Federal and Ontario Province Treasury Boards in
                                                              Canada, according to section 12.9.1 of the Federal Contracting Policies and section 5.8.5 of the Ontario
                                                              Procurement Directives.

                                                        89	 See, for example, the obligatory approval of both the Federal and Ontario Province Treasury Boards in
                                                            Canada, according to section 12.9.1 of the Federal Contracting Policies and section 5.8.5 of the Ontario
                                                            Procurement Directives.

                                                        90	 The complete list of economies is as follows: Albania, Australia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, France, Jordan,
                                                            Mexico, Moldova, Morocco, Peru, the Philippines, Portugal, Romania, South Africa, the United Kingdom,
                                                            and Uganda.

                                                        91	   South Africa, Treasury Regulation 16.8.2.

                                                        92	   UNCITRAL 2001, 173, para 1.

                                                        93	   Ibid.

                                                        94	 These economies are Afghanistan, Armenia, Colombia, Ghana, Jamaica, Lebanon, Malaysia, Nicaragua,
                                                            Panama, Papua New Guinea, Portugal, and the Russian Federation.

                                                        95	   Chile, articles 35, 36, and 36 bis, concession law.

                                                        96	 Guatemala, article 95, PPP law.

                                                        97	   Uruguay, article 54, PPP law.

                                                        98	 Points are awarded on the basis of whether something is done in practice, as well as whether that
                                                            practice is codified in the law. More points are awarded to an economy if the practice is codified in the
                                                            law. This approach rewards the economies that systematically codify their rules and practices.
 Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




152
                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




Contributors
Afghanistan                              Algeria                                       Economic Development and Research
                                                                                       Center
Ahmad Khalid Hatam                       Vincent Lunel
                                                                                       Hakob Tadevosyan, Grant Thornton
Jamshi Khesra, ALI                       Samia Goudjil, Benslimane A&C                 Legal and Tax LLC
Kakar Advocates                          Amine Bensiam, CMS Bureau Francis             Ministery of Justice
                                         Lefebvre
Khalid Sekander, Khalid Sekander, Esq.
                                         Amine Sator, CMS Bureau Francis
Mohammad Khalid Massoudi, Masnad         Lefebvre                                      Australia
Legal Consultancy
                                         Ahmed Djouadi, Djouadi & Hadj Hamou           James Abbott, Allen & Overy
Sayed Jawid Hashimi, MLC Masnad
Legal Consultancy                        Yves Baratte, Simmons & Simmons LLP           Simon Hayes, Allen & Overy
Bilal Alsamarrai, RIAA Barker Gillette                                                 Adam Stapledon, Allen & Overy
Mazhar Bangash, RIAA Barker Gillette     Angola                                        Nick Beresford-Wylie, Allens
Zahid Safi, RIAA Barker GIllette         Luís Filipe Carvalho, ADCA Advogados          Scott McCoy, Allens
                                         Carvalho & Associados
Rafiullah Nabeel                                                                       Michael Ryan, Allens
                                         Ana Ferreira da Costa, ADCA
                                                                                       Emma Warren, Allens
                                         Advogados Carvalho & Associados
Albania                                  Catarina Levy Osório, Angola Legal
                                                                                       Richard Foster, Foster Infrastructure
                                                                                       Pty Ltd
Redi Basha, Abkons                       Circle Advogados
                                                                                       David Templeman, Herbert Smith
Artan Bozo, Bozo & Associates            António Vicente Marques, António
                                                                                       Freehills
                                         Vicente Marques
Enida Zeneli, Bozo & Associates                                                        New South Wealth Treasury
                                         GLA Gabinete Legal Angola
Iva Cucllari, CMS Adonnino Ascoli &
Cavasola Scamoni                         Liliana Canudo Cruz, MLGTS Morai
                                         Leitao, Galvao Teles, Soares da Silva         Bangladesh
Marco Lacaita, CMS Adonnino Ascoli &     and Associados
Cavasola Scamoni                                                                       A.S.A Bari, A.S & Associates
                                         Claudia Santos Cruz, MLGTS Morai
Gjergji Gjika, Gjika and Associates      Leitao, Galvao Teles, Soares da Silva         Dewan Faisal, A.S & Associates
                                         and Associados                                Ibtida Farhat Tropa,A.S &Associates     
Evis Jani, Gjika and Associates




                                                                                                                                                            Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
Krisela Qirushi, Gjika and Associates                                                  Ibtida Farhat Tropa,A.S &Associates     
Eris Hoxha, Hoxha, Memi & Hoxha
                                         Argentina                                     Shahwar Nizam, DFDL Bangladesh
                                         Santiago Maqueda, Baker & Mc Kenzie           Hasan Shahrear, DFDL Bangladesh
Elion Shkodrani, Hoxha, Memi & Hoxha
                                         Luis Dates, Baker & McKenzie                  Osman Goni, OGR Legal
ISUFI International & Associates
                                         Guillermo Ferraro, KPMG                       Md. Bashar, PPP Authority
Elira Hroni, Kalo & Associate
                                         Agustina Chaufan, Marval, O’Farrell &         Mohammad Rashed, PPP Authority
Renan Berati, LPA Legal and
                                         Mairal
Professional Services Albania
                                                                                       Shammi Ahsan, Vertex Chambers
                                         Francisco Antonio Macias, Marval,
Albana Fona, LPA Legal and
                                         O’Farrell & Mairal                            Junayed Chowdhury, Vertex Chambers
Professional Services Albania
                                         María Lorena Schiariti, Marval, O’Farrell     Abdul Monem Khan, Vertex Chambers
Oltjan Hoxholli, LPA Legal and
                                         & Mairal
Professional Services Albania
                                         Clara Vela, Marval, O’Farrell & Mairal
Anjeza Kalanxhi, Ministry of Transport                                                 Benin
and Infrastructure                       Horacio Ruiz Moreno, Mitrani Caballero
                                         Ojam & Ruiz Moreno Abogados                   Guy Lambert Yekpe, Cabinet GL Yekpe
Olsi Coku, Optima Legal & Financial
                                         Juan Cruz Azzarri, PAGBAM                     Saïdou Agbantou, Cabinet Me. Saïdou
Vilma Gjyshi, Optima Legal & Financial                                                 Agbantou
Ali Turhani, University “Aleksander                                                    S. Marcel Hounnou, Cabinet Me. Saïdou
Xhuvani”, Economic faculty               Armenia                                       Agbantou
Argita Malltezi, University of Tirana    Mariam Hovsepyan, “Ter Tachatyan”             Silas Hounsounou, Cabinet Me. Saïdou
                                         legal and business Consulting CJSC            Agbantou
Lealba Pelinku, University of Tirana
                                         Andranik Vahanyan, “Ter Tachatyan”            Yvon Detchenou, Carré 582 Boulevard
                                         legal and business Consulting CJSC            Saint Michel
                                         AM Law Firm                                   Théophile Capo Chichi
                                                                                                                                                           153
                                                                                                                                                            EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                            Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                          until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                                    Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).



                                                        Bosnia and Herzegovina                     Eduardo Soares, Soares Bumachar               Cambodia
                                                                                                   Chagas Barros Advogados
                                                        Nenad Baroš, B&B Legal                                                                   Seka Hep, DFDL
                                                                                                   Anita Reis, Souza, Cescon, Barrieu &
                                                        Maida Becirovic, Foreign Investment        Flesch Advogados                              Guillaume Massin, DFDL
                                                        Promotion Agency
                                                                                                   Carla Rossi, Souza, Cescon, Barrieu &         Tayseng Ly, HBS Law
                                                        Davorin Marinkovic, Karanovic & Nikolic    Flesch Advogados                              Ministry of Land Management Urban
                                                        Helena Babic, Law firm Sajic               Karin Yamauti, Souza, Cescon, Barrieu         Planning and Construction
                                                        Milica Karadza, Law firm Sajic             & Flesch Advogados                            Prak Allen, P&A Asia Law Office
                                                        Aleksandar Sajic, Law firm Sajic           Henrique Frizzo, Trench, Rossi &              Potim Yun, Potim
                                                                                                   Watanabe
                                                        Arela Jusufbasic Goloman, Lawyers’                                                       Leung Seng, PYT & Associates
                                                        Office Tkalcic Dulic, Prebanic, Rizvic &   Diogo Coutinho, University of Sao Paulo
                                                        Jusufbasic Goloman                                                                       Sotheary Hout, R&T Sok & Heng Law
                                                                                                   Ana Carolina Barretto, Veirano                Office
                                                        Samra Hadžović, Wolf Theiss                Advogados
                                                                                                                                                 Sophonnaroth Tiv, R&T Sok & Heng
                                                        Lajla Hastor, Wolf Theiss                  Catarina Freitas, Veirano Advogados           Law Office
                                                        Jasmin Omerdić, Wolf Theiss                Marina Aidar, Vieira Rezende                  Vichannadeth Uy, R&T Sok & Heng Law
                                                                                                   Advogados                                     Office
                                                                                                   Carlos Costa e Silva, Vieira Rezende          Sakan In, The Ministry of Economy and
                                                        Brazil                                     Advogados                                     Finance
                                                        Frederico Bopp Dieterich, Phd, Azevedo     Cláudio Guerreiro, Vieira Rezende
                                                        Sette Advogados                            Advogados
                                                                                                                                                 Cameroon
                                                        Leonardo Felisoni Torre, Campos Mello      Alberto Vieira, Vieira Rezende
                                                        Advogados                                  Advogados                                     Divine Afuba, Cabinet Marie Andrée
                                                                                                                                                 Ngwe
                                                        Silvia Fiszman, Campos Mello               Ana Luiza Abdalla, Soares Bumachar
                                                        Advogados                                  Chagas Barros Advogados                       Comfort Lobe, Cabinet Nyemb
                                                        Eduardo Schneider, Campos Mello            Marc Zablith, Veirano Advogados               Emmanuel Massoda, Cabinet Nyemb
                                                        Advogados
                                                                                                                                                 Jacques Nyemb, Cabinet Nyemb
                                                        Renato Poltronieri, Demarest
                                                        Advogados                                  Bulgaria                                      Dieudonne Bondoma Yokono, Conseil
                                                                                                                                                 d’Appui à la Réalisation des Contrats de
                                                        Viktor Ruppini, Demarest Advogados         Denitsa Dudevska, CMS Bulgaria                Partenariat
                                                        Ademilson Viana, Demarest Advogados        Plamena Kostadinova, CMS Bulgaria             Achille Gwet, Conseil d’Appui à la
                                                                                                   Zornitsa Stoykova, CMS Bulgaria               Réalisation des Contrats de Partenariat
                                                        Luiz Assis, Levy & Salomão Advogados
                                                                                                   Pavlin Stoyanoff, CMS Cameron                 Marcel Mbella, Conseil d’Appui à la
                                                        Ana Cecília Manente, Levy & Salomão                                                      Réalisation des Contrats de Partenariat
                                                        Advogados                                  McKenna LLP Bulgaria Branch/Duncan
                                                                                                   Weston CMS Bulgaria
 Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                                                                                                                 Willy Freddie Ndjana, Conseil d’Appui
                                                        Ana Karina Esteves De Souza,                                                             à la Réalisation des Contrats de
                                                        Machado, Meyer, Sendacz e Opice            Metodi Baykushev, Dimitrov, Petrov &
                                                                                                   Co.                                           Partenariat
                                                        José Virgilio Lopes Enei, Machado,                                                       David Etah Akoh, Etah Nan & C
                                                        Meyer, Sendacz e Opice                     Boyan Ivanov, Dimitrov, Petrov & Co.
                                                                                                                                                 Attorneys
                                                        Rafael Vanzella, Machado, Meyer,           Boyana Milcheva, Dimitrov, Petrov & Co.
                                                                                                                                                 Brice Tcheuffa W., Etah Nan & C
                                                        Sendacz e Opice                            Bogdan Petrov, Dimitrov, Petrov & Co.         Attorneys
                                                        Floriano Azevedo Marques Neto,             Donka Stoyanova, Dimitrov, Petrov &           Jing & Partners
                                                        Manesco, Ramires, Perez, Azevedo           Co.
                                                        Marques Sociedade de Advogados                                                           Francis Asanga Sama, Sama
                                                                                                   Radina Tomanova, Dimitrov, Petrov &           Chambers, Bamenda
                                                        Leonardo Barbosa Sousa, Manesco,           Co.
                                                        Ramires, Perez, Azevedo Marques                                                          Tina Sama, Sama Chambers, Bamenda
                                                        Sociedade de Advogados                     Vessela Daneva, Ministry of Finance
                                                                                                                                                 Stanley Abane, The Abeng Law Firm
                                                        Tatiana Matiello Cymbalista, Manesco,      Anastasiya Hadrish, Ministry of Finance
                                                        Ramires, Perez, Azevedo Marques                                                          Roland Abeng, The Abeng Law Firm
                                                                                                   Galin Zhelev, Ministry of Finance
                                                        Sociedade de Advogados                                                                   Oscar Alebga, The Abeng Law Firm
                                                                                                   Penev LLP
                                                        Guilherme Mundim, Mattos Filho, Veiga
                                                        Filho, Marrey Jr e Quiroga Advogados       Maria Pashalieva, Penkov, Markov and
                                                                                                   Partners                                      Canada
                                                        Mario Saadi, Mattos Filho, Veiga Filho,
                                                        Marrey Jr. e Quiroga Advogados             Kalina Savova, Penkov, Markov and             David Ho, Aird & Berlis LLP
                                                                                                   Partners                                      Patrick Oufi, Aird & Berlis LLP
                                                        Marina Schneider, Mattos Filho, Veiga
                                                        Filho, Marrey Jr. e Quiroga Advogados      Roman Stoyanov, Penkov, Markov and            Heidi Visser, Aird & Berlis LLP
                                                                                                   Partners
                                                        Bruno Werneck, Mattos Filho, Veiga
                                                                                                                                                 Douglas Younger, Aird & Berlis LLP
154                                                     Filho, Marrey Jr. e Quiroga Advogados
                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).



Canadian Council for Public Private       Colombia                                     Côte d’Ivoire
Partnerships
                                          Rodolfo Gutierrez, Brigard & Urrutia         Guillaume Decaen, Eiffage Concessions
Ilan Dunsky, Dentons Canada               Abogados
                                                                                       Bile Aka Joachim, SCPA Bile Aka,
David Little, Fasken Martineau DuMoulin   Maria Luisa Porto Fox, Brigard & Urrutia     Brizoua Bi & Associes
LLP                                       Abogados
                                                                                       Claude Julie, SCPA Bile Aka, Brizoua Bi
Jensen Clarke, Fengate Capital            Astrid Fernández, Deloitte                   & Associes
Management
                                          Angelica Velasco, Departamento               Kouable Loa Clarisse, SCPA Bile Aka,
Peter Hughes, Fengate Capital             Nacional de Planeacion                       Brizoua Bi & Associes
Management
                                          Juan Pablo González, Esguerra                Guezeon Sylvie Laure, SCPA Bile Aka,
Kevin Reid, Fengate Capital               Asesores Jurídicos                           Brizoua Bi & Associes
Management
                                          Juan José Huertas, Esguerra Asesores         Kouakou Eloi Yao, Yao K. Eloi
George Theodoropoulos, Fengate            Jurídicos
Capital Management
                                          Victor Cordoba Pinto, Fanalca S.A.
Gary Webster, KPMG LLP                                                                 Dominican Republic
                                          Financiera de Desarrollo Nacional
Jane Shackell, Qc, Miller Thomson LLP                                                  Alexander Medina Herasme, Alexander
                                          Samuel Cano, Lloreda Camacho & Co            Medina Herasme
Sandra Sultana, Ministère des
Transports du Québec                      Carlos Carvajal, Lloreda Camacho & Co        Maria Esther Fernandez De Pou,
                                                                                       Camara Americana de Comercio de la
Mark Liedemann, Partnerships BC           Andrés Hidalgo, Lloreda Camacho & Co         Republica Dominicana
Transports Canada, Gouvernement du        Óscar Fabián Gutiérrez, Palacios Lleras      María Portes, Castillo y Castillo
Canada                                    Christoph Möller, Parra Rodríguez            Abogados
                                          Abogados                                     Leandro Corral, Estrella & Tupete
Chile                                     Francisco Morón, Parra Rodríguez             Eileen Jimenez, Headrick Rizik Alvarez
                                          Abogados                                     & Fernandez
Fernando Jamarne, Alessandri
                                          Bernardo Rodríguez Ossa, Parra               Marisol Vicens, Headrick Rizik Alvarez &
Benardita Saez Rozas, Alessandri          Rodríguez Abogados                           Fernandez
Max Spiess, Baraona Abogados
                                                                                       José Cruz Campillo, Jiménez Cruz Peña
Andrés Chirgwin, Chirgwin Larreta         Congo Dem. Rep.                              Henry Pastrano, Jiménez Cruz Peña
Peñafiel Abogados
                                          David Luboya Kayaya, Cabinet Ebic            Giselle Valera, Jiménez Cruz Peña
Raquel Frattini, Chirgwin Larreta
Peñafiel Abogados                         Gabriel Kazadi Muteba, Cabinet Emery         Vilma Veras, Jiménez Cruz Peña
                                          Mukendi Wafwana & Associates SCP
Matías Moreno, Chirgwin Larreta                                                        Laura Bobea, Medina Garrigó Abogados




                                                                                                                                                            Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
Peñafiel Abogados                         Conseiller Senior Primature
                                                                                       Marielle Garrigó, Medina Garrigó
Cristina Holuigue, Coordinación de        Edouard Laddy Tshishimbi Mpamba,             Abogados
Concesiones Ministerio de Obras           Emery Mukendi Wafwana
Públicas de Chile                                                                      Milvio Coiscou, Milvio
                                          Aubin Mabanza, Klam & Partners
Jorge Delpiano, Guerrero Olivos           Avocats                                      Marlene Herrerar, Milvio

Rodolfo Guerrero, Guerrero Olivos         Christian Lukusa, Klam & Partners            Yulianna Ramón Martínez, OMG
                                          Avocats
Diego Muñoz, Morales y Besa                                                            Manuel Silverio, OMG
                                          Madeleine Matala Kayembe, Klam &
Rodrigo Ropert, Morales y Besa            Partners Avocats                             Hipolito Garcia, Quiroz Santroni

Luis Felipe Hübner, Uribe, Hübner &                                                    Mónika Fiallo Paradas, Russin, Vecchi &
Canales                                                                                Heredia Bonetti
                                          Congo Rep.
                                                                                       Ingrid G. Fermin, Seibel Dargam
                                          Secretariat permanent du comite de           Henríquez & Herrera
China                                     privatisation
                                                                                       Armando Paino Henriquez, Seibel
Shouqing Wang, Department of                                                           Dargam Henríquez & Herrera
Construction Management, Tsinghua
University                                Costa Rica                                   Paola Mañón Taveras, Seibel Dargam
                                                                                       Henríquez & Herrera
Jie Li, Herbert Smith Freehills           Marcos Camacho

Monica Sun, Herbert Smith Freehills       Carlos Ubico, Arias & Muñoz
                                                                                       Ecuador
Helena Hsi Chia Chen, Pinsent Masons      Raúl Guevara, Batalla Salto Luna
LLP                                                                                    Diego Almeida, Andrade Veloz
                                          Marco Ureña, Batalla Salto Luna              Abogados
David Li, White & Case LLP                Luis Ortiz, Business Law Partners            Xavier Andrade, Andrade Veloz
Mengbi Xu, White & Case LLP               Rafael Quirós, Central Law Quirós            Abogados
                                          Abogados
                                                                                                                                                           155
                                                                                                                                                            EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                            Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                          until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                                    Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).



                                                        Francisco Bustamante Luna,               Sébastien Pinot, Bignon Lebray                  Lizzeth Villatoro, Casco Fortín Cruz y
                                                        Bustamante & Bustamante                                                                  Asociados Law Firm
                                                                                                 Sophie Pignon, Bird & Bird
                                                        Mario Flor, Bustamante & Bustamante                                                      Roberto Williams, Casco Fortín Cruz y
                                                                                                 Maud De Vautibault, Etat Direction              Asociados Law Firm
                                                        Alejandro Pérez Arellano, Bustamante &   Générale du Trésor
                                                        Bustamante                                                                               Marcela Aguilar, Central Law Honduras
                                                                                                 Marc Frilet, Frilet et associes
                                                        Bayardo Poveda, Bustamante &                                                             Enrique Chain, Central Law Honduras
                                                        Bustamante                               Jones Day
                                                                                                                                                 Claribel Medina De Leon, Central Law
                                                        Gabriela Guzman, Coronel & Pérez,        Jérémie Embareck, Suez Consulting               Honduras
                                                        abogados
                                                                                                                                                 Erasmo Padilla, Coalianza
                                                        Hernan Pérez Loose, Coronel & Pérez,     Gabon
                                                        abogados                                                                                 Jazna Vanessa Oquelí Juárez, García y
                                                                                                 Jean Paul Angoue                                Bodán, Honduras
                                                        Daniel López, Corporacion Legal CL
                                                        Ecuador                                  Sophie Pignon, Bird & Bird AARPI                Astrid Villeda, García y Bodán,
                                                                                                                                                 Honduras
                                                        Andrea Moya, Corral Rosales              Serge Dimitri Mba Bekale, FFA Earnst
                                                        Carmigniani Perez                        & Young

                                                        Francisco Rosales, Corral Rosales        Jean Nicaise Leyama, Ministere                  India
                                                        Carmigniani Perez                        de l’Energie et des Ressources                  Balasubramanian Ananthasubramanian,
                                                                                                 Hydrauliques
                                                        Juan Sebastián Córdova, Ferrere                                                          Prashanth Sabeshan, AZB & Partners,
                                                                                                 Jean-Pierre Bozec, Project Lawyers              Advocates and Solicitors
                                                        Paola Gachet, Ferrere
                                                        Javier Robalino, Ferrere                                                                 Amrit Pandurangi, Deloitte
                                                                                                 Ghana                                           Abhaya Krishna Agarwal, Ernst & Young
                                                        Ernesto Velasco, Ferrere
                                                                                                 Ekow Coleman                                    LLP
                                                        Juan Fernando Larrea Savinovich,
                                                        Tobar ZVS LLP                            Philip Asante, CPCS Transcom                    Anjan Dasgupta, HSA Advocates
                                                                                                 International                                   Nishant Beniwal, Khaitan & Co
                                                        Agustín Mora Bowen Pérez, Tobar ZVS
                                                        LLP                                      Manuel Perez, JGCC Investment and               Prateek Bhandari, Khaitan & Co
                                                                                                 financing
                                                                                                                                                 Amitabh Sharma, Khaitan & Co
                                                                                                 Kimathi Kuenyehia, Kimathi & Partners
                                                        Egypt, Arab Rep. of                                                                      Gagan Anand, Legacy Law Offices,
                                                                                                 Enyonam Tsegah Aheto, Kimathi &                 India
                                                        Rana Hegazi, Al Tamimi & Company         Partners
                                                        Ayman Abdallah, Am                       Ayirebi Dansoh, Kwame Nkrumah
                                                        Mahmoud Alkhouly, Am                     University of science and technology            Indonesia

                                                        Suzan Hashim, Am                         Magdalene Apenteng, Ministry of                 Norman Bisset
                                                                                                 Finance
                                                                                                                                                 Reggy Firmansyah
 Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                        Bassam Moussa, Bassam
                                                        Muhammad El Haggan, Hegazy &                                                             Aprilda Fiona Butar, Aprilda fiona &
                                                        Associates                               Guatemala                                       Partners Law Firm

                                                        Ibrahim Elsalamoni, Hegazy &             Pedro Aragon, Aragon & Aragon                   Jamal Rizki, Hermawan Juniarto
                                                        Associates                               Gustavo Hernández Ruano, Arias &                Sianti Candra, Roosdiono & Partners a
                                                        Walid Hegazy, Hegazy & Associates        Muñoz                                           member of ZICO | law

                                                        Atter Hannoura, Ministry of Finance      Ana Gabriela Platero Midence, Arias &           Evi Pasaribu, Roosdiono & Partners a
                                                                                                 Muñoz                                           member of ZICO | law
                                                        Eman Riad, Riad & Riad
                                                                                                 José Augusto Toledo, Arias & Muñoz              Afriyan Rachmad, Roosdiono & Partners
                                                        Khaled Attia, Sarie Eldin & Partners                                                     a member of ZICO | law
                                                        Sarwat Abd El-Shahid, Shahid Law Firm                                                    Awang Fahrizal Bahrin, Soewito
                                                                                                 Honduras                                        Suhardiman Eddymurthy Kardono Legal
                                                        Salma Abdel Aziz, Shahid Law Firm                                                        Consultants
                                                                                                 Juan José Alcerro Milla,
                                                        Mohammed Gomaa, Zaki Hashem &            AguilarCastilloLove                             Rusmaini Lenggogeni, Soewito
                                                        Partners, Attorneys at La                                                                Suhardiman Eddymurthy Kardono Legal
                                                                                                 Claudia Midence, Arias & Muñoz
                                                        Sameh Kamal, Zaki Hashem & Partners,                                                     Consultants
                                                        Attorneys at La                          José Álvarez, Business Law Partners
                                                                                                                                                 Syahdan Zainoel Aziz, Soewito
                                                        Mohamed Abdel Wahab, Zulficar &          Lauren Castejon, Business Law                   Suhardiman Eddymurthy Kardono Legal
                                                        Partners Law Firm                        Partners                                        Consultants
                                                                                                 Rafael Chicas, Business Law Partners

                                                        France                                   Gabriela Padilla, Casco Fortín Cruz y           Iraq
                                                                                                 Asociados Law Firm
                                                        Jacques Dabreteau, Ashurst LLP                                                           Ahmed Al Janabi, Ahmed
156
                                                                                                            EMBARGOED
                                                                            Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                          until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                    Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).



Ahmed Dawood, BHC firm                     Jamaica                                      Yerlan Serikbayev, Michael Wilson &
                                                                                        Partners, Limited
Zainab Al Qurnawi, Qurnawi Legal           Christopher Bovell, DunnCox
Consultancy and Advocates known as                                                      Elzhan Birtanov, Ministry of healthcare
QC Law Firm                                Narda Graham, DunnCox                        and social development Republic of
                                           Donia Joevion Fuller, LEX Caribbean,         Kazakhstan
Ammar Naji, Two Rivers Confluence
Legal Consultancy                          Attorneys at Law                             Anara Musrepova, Ministry of healthcare
                                           Trevor Patterson, Patterson Mair             and social development Republic of
                                           Hamilton                                     Kazakhstan
Italy                                                                                   Aida Akhmetova, Morgan Lewis LLP
                                           Veronica Bennett Warmington, PPP Unit
Alfredo Lucente                                                                         Bakhytzhan Kadyrov, Morgan Lewis LLP
Alberto Cucchiarelli, A.N.A.C. Autorita                                                 Aset Shyngyssov, Morgan Lewis LLP
Nazionale Anticorruzione                   Jordan
Cristina Giorgiantonio, Bank of Italy,     Khaled Asfour, Ali Sharif Zu’bi Advocates
Department of Economics, Statistics and    & Legal Consultants, CPSC                    Kenya
Research                                   Leena Nusseir, Ali Sharif Zu’bi              Jeremmy Okonjo, Mwagambo & Okonjo
Giuliana Palumbo, Bank of Italy,           Advocates & Legal Consultants, CPSC          Advocates
Department of Economics, Statistics and    Jumana Toukan, Ali Sharif Zu’bi
Research                                                                                Joyner Okonjo, Mwagambo & Okonjo
                                           Advocates & Legal Consultants, CPSC          Advocates
Simone Cadeddu, Bird & Bird                Mohammad Bashayreh, Dicta                    Edwin Baru, Anjarwalla & Khanna
Valentina Ciocca, CP DL Capolino           Consulting Attorneys & Legal                 Advocates
Perlingieri & Leone                        Consultants
                                                                                        Rosa Nduati Mutero, Anjarwalla &
Dante Leone, CP DL Capolino                Aya Bassoumi, Hammouri & Partners            Khanna Advocates
Perlingieri & Leone                        Tariq Hammouri, Hammouri & Partners          Mary Waititu, Anjarwalla & Khanna
Pasquale Marasco, Department for           Ahmed Khalifeh, Hammouri & Partners          Advocates
Planning and Coordination of Economic
Policy Presidency of the Council of        Yotta Pantoula Bulmer, Hammouri &            Coulson Harney Advocates
MInisters                                  Partners                                     Paul Karekezi, GIBB Africa Ltd
Gabriele Pasquini, Department for          Jumana Telfah, Jumana                        Kiragu Kimani, Hamilton Harrison &
Planning and Coordination of Economic                                                   Mathews
                                           Osama Sulieman, Ministry of Finance
Policy Presidency of the Council of
MInisters                                  Anwar Sukkari, Osama Sukkari &               Lawson Ondieki, Hamilton Harrison &
                                           Associates                                   Mathews
Paolo Piacenza, Department for
Planning and Coordination of Economic      Feras Sukkari, Osama Sukkari &               Muthomi Thiankolu, Muthomi & Karanja
Policy Presidency of the Council of        Associates                                   Advocates




                                                                                                                                                             Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
MInisters
                                           Shaker Shaer, Zalloum & Laswi                Felister Munyua, PPP Unit
Marco Tranquilli, Department for
                                           Azzam Zalloum, Zalloum & Laswi               Hadija Diba, PPP Unit National treasury
Planning and Coordination of Economic
Policy Presidency of the Council of                                                     Ronoh Tuimising, PPP Unit National
Ministers                                                                               treasury
                                           Kazakhstan
Daniela Fioretti, Grimaldi Studio Legale                                                Gregory Namusonge
                                           Yuliya Badenko, Aequitas Law Firm
Francesco Sciaudone, Grimaldi Studio                                                    Elizabeth Njenga
Legale                                     Nurlan Sholanov, Aequitas Law Firm
                                                                                        Sung Whan Lee, Ahnse Law Offices
Giovanna Ottaviani, Italian National       Almaty Branch of Norton Rose Fulbright
Statistical Institute ISTAT                Kazakhstan Limited                           Eui Young Shon Shon, Department of
                                                                                        Transportation Engineering, University
Giovanni Cucchiarato, Jenny Avvocati       Ainur Botakhanova, Colibri Law               of Seoul
Paola Pellini, Jenny Avvocati              Azim Usmanov, Colibri Law                    Seung Yeon Stella Lee, Globla Green
                                                                                        Growth Institute
Grazia Sgarra, Ministry of Economy and     Birzhan Zharasbayev, Dentons
Finance                                                                                 Sounman Hong, Yonsei University
                                           Lola Abdukhalykova, GRATA
Umberto Antonelli, Studio Legale           International
associato ad Ashurst LLP
                                           Shaimerden Chikanayev, GRATA                 Lebanon
Elena Giufrrè, Studio Legale associato     International
ad Ashurst LLP                                                                          Lili Khairallah, EKP in association with
                                           Maksim Grekov, Kinstellar                    Holman Fenwick Willan LLP
Pamela Infantino, Studio Legale
                                           Asset Kussaiyn, Michael Wilson &             Hadi Melki, EKP in association with
associato ad Ashurst LLP
                                           Partners, Limited                            Holman Fenwick Willan LLP
Francesco Angelini, Tonucci & Partners
                                           Elena Lee, Michael Wilson & Partners,        El Aref International Law Office
Gianluca Cambareri, Tonucci & Partners     Limited
                                                                                        Tarek Dandashli, Tarek
Luca Spaziani, Tonucci & Partners
                                                                                                                                                            157
                                                                                                                                                            EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                            Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                          until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                                    Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).



                                                        Lithuania                                  Wilfred Abraham, Zul Rafique &                Copetchi Stanislav, ACI partners
                                                                                                   Partners
                                                        Jekaterina                                                                               Marina Zanoga, ACI partners
                                                        KPMG Baltics, UAB                                                                        Roger Gladei, Gladei & Partners
                                                                                                   Mauritius
                                                        Ausrys Sliavas, Law Firm Cobalt                                                          Lilia Oglinda, Gladei & Partners
                                                                                                   Ravindra Chetty, 5 St James Court
                                                        Kęstutis Adamonis, Law firm Sorainen                                                     Lulian Pasatii, Gladei & Partners
                                                        and partners                               Benoit Chambers
                                                                                                                                                 Andrei Briceac, PB & Partners Law Firm
                                                        Augustas Klezys, Law firm Sorainen and     Natasha Behary Paray, ENSafrica
                                                                                                   Mauritius                                     Diana Ichim, Turcan Cazac Law Firm
                                                        partners
                                                        Jurgita Nikita, Law firm Sorainen and      Shrivan Dabee, ENSafrica Mauritius
                                                        partners                                                                                 Mongolia
                                                                                                   Thierry Koenig, ENSafrica Mauritius
                                                        Neringa Gražinytė, Law Firm Tark,                                                        Nicolas Audier, Audier & Partners
                                                                                                   Deoprakash Khoodeeram, Ministry of
                                                        Grunte, Sutkiene
                                                                                                   Finance                                       Nyamtseren Bataa, ELC LLP Advocates
                                                        Rasa Narbutaitė, Law Firm Tark, Grunte,
                                                        Sutkiene                                                                                 Enkhjargal Tumenjargal, ELC LLP
                                                                                                   Mexico                                        Advocates
                                                        Dainius Stasiulis, Partner Dainius
                                                        Stasiulis                                  Heidi Sada                                    Bekhbat Sodnom, Mongolian PPP
                                                                                                                                                 development center
                                                        Tadas Jagminas, Tadas                      Ingrid Sada
                                                        Marius Dobilas, Valiunas Ellex             Teo Berdeja, Berdeja Abogados, S.C.
                                                                                                                                                 Morocco
                                                        Laura Ziferman, Valiunas Ellex             Tracy Delgadillo, J.A. Treviño Abogados
                                                                                                                                                 Kamal Habachi, Bakouchi & Habachi HB
                                                                                                   Luis Alberto Balderas Fernández,              Law Firm LLP
                                                                                                   Jáuregui y Del Valle, S.C.
                                                        Madagascar                                                                               Noha Lemkhanat, Boulalf & Mekkaoui
                                                                                                   Diego Hernández Schmidt Tophoff,              Law Firm
                                                        Lisivololona Razanajaholy, Agence de
                                                                                                   Jáuregui y Del Valle, S.C.
                                                        promotion de l’investissement                                                            Ahlam Mekkaoui, Boulalf & Mekkaoui
                                                                                                   Vanessa Franyutti Johnstone, Nader,           Law Firm
                                                        Jean Marcel Razafimahenina, Cabinet
                                                                                                   Hayaux y Goebel
                                                        Delta Audit                                                                              Corinne Duvnjak, Clifford Chance
                                                                                                   Carolina Perez Rendon, Nader, Hayaux
                                                        Erika Ramananarivo, Directeur de la                                                      Mustapha Mourahib, Clifford Chance
                                                                                                   y Goebel
                                                        Promotion du Partenariat Public privé.
                                                        Secrétariat Général                        Oscar Ramos Ahuage, Nader, Hayaux             Direction of Public Entreprises and
                                                                                                   y Goebel                                      privatisation
                                                        Faniry Rambelo, HK Jurifisc
                                                                                                   Francisco Treviño, Rios Ferrer, Guillen       Zineb Idrissia Hamzi, Hamzi Law firm
                                                        Landy Raveloson, HK Jurifisc
                                                                                                   Llarena, Treviño y Rivera, S.C.               Houda Habachi, HB Law Firm
                                                        Hantamalala Rabarijaona, John W.
                                                                                                   García Rojas Castillo, Sandro                 Paule Biensan, White & Case LLP
                                                        Ffooks & Co.
 Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                                                                   Sergio Chagoya Díaz, Santamarina y            Kenza Bounjou, White & Case LLP
                                                        Vannissa Rakokotonirina, John W.
                                                                                                   Steta, S.C.
                                                        Ffooks & Co.                                                                             Hugues Martin Sisteron, White & Case
                                                                                                   Belén Gómez Fernández, Santamarina            LLP
                                                        Olivier Ribot, Lexel Juridique et Fiscal
                                                                                                   y Steta, S.C.
                                                                                                                                                 François Guilhem Vaissier, White &
                                                                                                   Gustavo Mendoza Müggenburg,                   Case LLP
                                                        Malawi                                     Santamarina y Steta, S.C.
                                                        Shiraz Yusuf, Ernst & Young Malawi         Diego Ostos Guerresi, Santamarina y
                                                                                                   Steta, S.C.                                   Mozambique
                                                        Elton Jangale CA (M), PFI Partnerships,
                                                        PPP & Law Consultants                      Úrsula Carreño Colorado, Secretaria de        Raquel Sampaio, Abreu Advogados
                                                                                                   Hacienda y Crédito Público
                                                        Krishna Savjani Obe Sc, Savjani & Co                                                     Mafalda Teixeira De Abreu, Abreu
                                                                                                   Carlos Guevara Vega, Secretaria de            Advogados
                                                        Duncan Singano, Savjani & Co               Hacienda y Crédito Público
                                                                                                                                                 Inocencio Cumaio, Fernanda Lopes
                                                        Audrey Mwala, The PPP Center               Mariela Diaz, Universidad Autónoma de        Associados & Advogados
                                                                                                   la Ciudad de México
                                                                                                                                                 Fernanda Lopes, Fernanda Lopes
                                                                                                   Alberto Espejel Espinoza                      Associados & Advogados
                                                        Malaysia
                                                                                                   Irma Sandoval Ballesteros                     Rodrigo Ferreira Rocha, Fralaw Ferreira
                                                        David, Chan Tong Ong, Chooi &
                                                                                                                                                 Rocha Advogados
                                                        Company
                                                                                                                                                 Zara Jamal, Fralaw Ferreira Rocha
                                                        Christopher Lee, Christopher & Lee Ong     Moldova                                       Advogados
                                                        Kee Hooi Wong, Zaid Ibrahim & Co           Odobescu Igor, ACI partners                   Fabrícia Almeida Henriques, Henriques,
                                                        Nadesh Ganabaskaran, Zul Rafique &         Maia Pircalab, ACI partners                   Rocha & Associados
                                                        Partners
158
                                                                                                               EMBARGOED
                                                                               Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                             until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                       Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).



Tiago Arouca Mendes, Henriques,              Victor Green, G. Elias & Co.                  Papua New Guinea
Rocha & Associados
                                             Oluwatoyin Nathaniel, G. Elias & Co.          Lisa Kudada, Gadens
Hélder Paulo Frechaut, HPF Advogados
                                             Fred Onuobia, G. Elias & Co.                  Komdal Lonagata, Gadens
Orlanda Rafael, O. Rafael Advogados,
Sociedade Unipessoal, Lda.                   Folasade Olusanya, Jackson, Etti and          Stephen Massa, Gadens
                                             Edu
Oldivanda Bacar Bacar, Scan
Sociedade de Advogados                       Adeola Owolabi, Jackson, Etti and Edu
                                                                                           Peru
Celia Chitara, Scan Sociedade de                                                           José Luis Escaffi, Apoyo Consultoria
Advogados                                    Pakistan
                                                                                           Juan Carlos De Los Heros, Estudio
Hemma Tengler, Universidade Catolica         Yusha Barakzai, Haidermota BNR & Co.          Echecopar, member firm of Baker &
de Mocambique                                                                              McKenzie International
                                             Saboor Karamat, Haidermota BNR &
                                             Co.                                           Angela Raygada, Estudio Echecopar,
Myanmar                                                                                    member firm of Baker & McKenzie
                                             Ali Khan, Haidermota BNR & Co.
                                                                                           International
William Greenlee, Jr., DFDL Myanmar          Huzaifa Muqaddam, Haidermota BNR
Limited                                                                                    Ana Sofía Reyna, Estudio Echecopar,
                                             & Co.
                                                                                           member firm of Baker & McKenzie
Pedro Jose Bernardo, Kelvin Chia             Marium Fatima, Infrastructure Project         International
Yangon Ltd                                   Development Facility, Ministry of
                                                                                           Michelle Barclay, Grau Abogados
Karina Peng, Polastri Wint & Partners        Finance
                                                                                           Daniela Camacho, Grau Abogados
Alessio Polastri, Polastri Wint & Partners   Adil Anwar, Infrastructure Project
                                             Development Facility, Ministry of             Giancarlo Villafranqui, Grau Abogados
Hyun Joong Chung, VDB                        Finance, Pakistan
Vanderbruggen Loi                                                                          Daniel Querub, IBT Group LLC Sucursal
                                             Syed Shayan Ahmed, Liaquat Merchant           del Peru
Jonathan Linton, VDB Vanderbruggen           Associates
Loi                                                                                        Claudia Cornejo, Ministry of Economy
                                             Rizwan Butt, Mohsin Tayebaly & Co             and Finance
Jean Loi, VDB Vanderbruggen Loi
                                             Mehreen Manto, Mohsin Tayebaly & Co           Germán Ferreyra Espinoza, Ministry of
                                                                                           Economy and Finance
                                             Nadeem Ahmad, Orr, Dignam & CO.
Nepal                                                                                      Adolfo Pulgar Soarez, Ministry of
                                             Adnan Qureshi, Qureshi Law Associates
                                                                                           Economy and Finance
Sombhojen Limbu, Kathmandu
University School of Law                     Mustafa Munir Ahmed, RIAA Barker
                                                                                           Alvaro Valencia, Ministry of Economy
                                             Gillette
                                                                                           and Finance
Khem Raj Bhandari, Khem Raj Bhandari
                                             Bilal Alsamarrai, RIAA Barker Gillette
                                                                                           Cecilia Ma, Ministry of Health
Shiva Prasad Rijal, Shiva




                                                                                                                                                                Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
                                             Saira Khalid, RIAA Barker Gillette
                                                                                           Carlos Baldeon, Payet, Rey, Cauvi,
                                             Aftab Ahmad Khan, Surridge &                  Perez Abogados
Nicaragua                                    Beecheno, Advocates, Corporate
                                                                                           Alonso Rey, Payet, Rey, Cauvi, Perez
                                             Consultants & IP Attorneys
Nestor Chavarria                                                                           Abogados
                                             Syed Adil Gilani, Syed
Carlos Ordeñana, Pacheco Coto                                                              Eldda Bravo, Proinversion
                                             Tariq Saeed Rana
                                                                                           Verónica Sattler Correa Rey, Verónica
                                                                                           Sattler Correa Rey
Nigeria
                                             Panama                                        Sergio Chang, Yrivarren Abogados
Modupe Dabiri, Templars
                                             Mario Rognoni                                 Luis Miguel Yrivarren, Yrivarren
Bernard Ehigiamusor, Templars                                                              Abogados
                                             Gabriel Almanza Jaén, Almanza &
Chike Obianwu, Templars                      Almanza                                       Gracy Zapata
Desmond Ogba, Templars                       María Virginia Almanza Jaén, Almanza
Seeke Sadipe, Templars                       & Almanza
                                                                                           Philippines
Funmilayo Otsemobor, Aluko &                 Siaska Lorenzo, Aris & Muñoz
                                                                                           Rosa Michele Bagtas, Cruz Marcelo &
Oyebode                                      Hendrick Almanza, Ministerio de               Tenefrancia
Gbenga Oyebode, Aluko & Oyebode              Economia y Finanzas
                                                                                           Eric Dykimching, Cruz Marcelo &
Damilola Wright, Aluko & Oyebode             Marissa Echevers, Ministerio de               Tenefrancia
                                             Economia y Finanzas
Philip Asante, CPCS Transcom                                                               Manuel Manaligod, Jr., Cruz Marcelo &
International                                Horacio Estribi, Ministerio de Economia       Tenefrancia
                                             y Finanzas
Juliet Ezeanya, F.O.Akinrele & Co                                                          Aida Araceli Roxas Rivera, Cruz
                                             Khatiya Asvat, Patton, Moreno & Asvat         Marcelo & Tenefrancia
Awele Ojechi, F.O.Akinrele & Co
                                                                                           Pancho Umali, Cruz Marcelo &
                                                                                           Tenefrancia                                                         159
                                                                                                                                                            EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                            Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                          until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                                    Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).



                                                        Department of Public Works and            André Dias, Macedo Vitorino &                  Rahimine Azimari Toure, Geni & Kebe
                                                        Highways                                  Associados                                     Law firm
                                                        Nelia Raule Lumanog, Divina Law           Susana Vieira, Macedo Vitorino &               Bocar Balde, Geni & Kebe Law firm
                                                                                                  Associados
                                                        Louie Ferrer, Megawide Construction                                                      Mansour Gningue, Geni & Kebe Law
                                                        Corporation                               António Vitorino, Macedo Vitorino &            firm
                                                                                                  Associados
                                                        Cosette Canilao, Public Private                                                          Antsa Andriantsoa, John W. Ffooks &
                                                        Partnership Center of the Philippines     Ana Luísa Guimarães, Sérvulo &                 Co
                                                                                                  Associados
                                                        Russell Sy, SM Prime Holdings Inc.                                                       Vannissa Rakotonirina, Senior
                                                                                                  Teresa Empis Falcão, Vieira de Almeida         Association
                                                        Alma Porciuncula
                                                                                                  Mariana Patrocínio, Vieira de Almeida
                                                                                                  Manuel Protásio, Vieira de Almeida             Singapore
                                                        Poland
                                                                                                  Sofia Viana Fernandes                          Chee Wai Kok, Allen & Gledhill LLP
                                                        Dominika Wągrodzka, BNT Neupert
                                                        Zamorska & Partnerzy                                                                     Lynette Lim, Allen & Gledhill LLP
                                                        Jakub Woliński, BNT Neupert Zamorska      Romania                                        Wee Meng Tan, Allen & Gledhill LLP
                                                        & Partnerzy
                                                                                                  Ruxandra Pîrlan, BPV Grigorescu                Kelvin Wong, Allen & Gledhill LLP
                                                        Public Procurement Office                 Stefanica
                                                                                                                                                 Kelvin Aw, Morgan Lewis Stamford LLC
                                                        Paweł Halwa, Schönherr Poland             Miriam Constantin, D&B David si Baias
                                                                                                  S.C.A                                          Mark Rathbone,
                                                        Jakub Nawrocki, Schönherr Poland                                                         PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
                                                                                                  Diana Poputoaia, Dentons
                                                        Igor Hanas, Squire Patton Boggs
                                                                                                  Corina Gabriela Ionescu, Ionescu Miron
                                                        Peter Swiecicki, Squire Patton Boggs      SPARL                                          South Africa
                                                        Michał Zieniewski, White&Case             Roxana Stoica, Ionescu Miron SPARL             Claire Tucker, Bowman Gilfillan Inc
                                                        M.Studniarek i Wspólnicy Kancelaria
                                                        Prawna sp. k.                             Maria Hoaghia, Nestor Nestor Diculescu         Claire Barclay, Cliffe Dekker Hofmeyr
                                                                                                  Kingston Petersen                              Inc
                                                        Anna Flaga Martynek, WKB Wierciński,
                                                        Kwieciński, Baehr Sp.k.                   Razvan Olaru, Nestor Nestor Diculescu          Samantha Brener, Cliffe Dekker
                                                                                                  Kingston Petersen                              Hofmeyr Inc
                                                        Marta Midloch, WKB Wierciński,
                                                        Kwieciński, Baehr Sp.k.                   Valentin Voinescu, Nestor Nestor               Irina Unkovski, Deloitte
                                                                                                  Diculescu Kingston Petersen                    Alex Mbikayi, Emery Mukendi Wafwana
                                                        Tomasz Pleskot, WKB Wierciński,
                                                        Kwieciński, Baehr Sp.k.                   Bogdan Creteanu, PeliFilip SCA                 & Associates

                                                                                                  Madalina Fildan, PeliFilip SCA                 Emery Mukendi Wafwana, Emery
                                                                                                                                                 Mukendi Wafwana & Associates
                                                        Portugal                                  Tudorie Irena, Popovici Nitu Stoica &
                                                                                                  Asociatii                                      Ernst & Young
 Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                        Fernando Crespo Diu
                                                                                                  Pentilescu Ramona, Popovici Nitu               Grant Williams, Eversheds
                                                        Paulo de Moura Marques, AAMM              Stoica & Asociatii
                                                        Abecasis, Azoia, Moura Marques &                                                         Tomiwa Toriola, Eversheds SA Inc
                                                        Associados, Soc. de Advogados, RL         Daniel Anghel, PricewaterhouseCoopers          Rekha Adjoodha, Fasken Martineau
                                                                                                  Tax Advisors & Accountants S.R.L.
                                                        Manuel Andrade Neves, Abreu &                                                            Lara Bezuidenhoudt, Fasken Martineau
                                                        Associados                                Vlad Cercel, Tuca Zbarcea & Asociatii
                                                                                                                                                 John Janks, Fasken Martineau
                                                        Sofia Barbosa Vieira, Abreu &             Iuliana Leon, Tuca Zbarcea & Asociatii
                                                        Associados                                                                               Lerato Nonyana, Fasken Martineau
                                                                                                  Florentin Tuca, Tuca Zbarcea & Asociatii
                                                        Mafalda Teixeira de Abreu, Abreu &                                                       Lindokuhle Hlatshwayo, Government
                                                        Associados                                Elena Iacob, Zamfirescu Racoti &               Technical Advisory Center
                                                                                                  Partners
                                                        Carlos Lopes, Carlos Lopes                                                               Tumi Moleke, Government Technical
                                                                                                  Iuliana Negoita, Zamfirescu Racoti &           Advisory Center
                                                        João de Lemos Portugal, Cuatrecasas,      Partners
                                                        Gonçalves Pereira                                                                        Anri Bernot, KPMG

                                                        Ana Graça Remondes, Cuatrecasas,                                                         Malcolm Pautz, KPMG
                                                        Gonçalves Pereira                         Senegal
                                                                                                                                                 De Buys Scott, KPMG
                                                        Ana Chacim, Ernst & Young                 Sophie Pignon
                                                                                                                                                 Marianna Naicker, White & Case LLP
                                                        Mário Pena, Ernst & Young                 Moustapha Ndoye, Cabinet Maître
                                                                                                  Moustapha Ndoye                                Matthew Richards, White & Case LLP
                                                        Sofia Gouveia Pereira, Gouveia Pereira,
                                                                                                  Abdoullah Cisse, Carapaces Stratégies          Thabo Rakoloti
                                                        Costa Freitas & Associados
                                                                                                  & Conformités
                                                        Patrícia Vinagre e Silva, Gouveia
                                                        Pereira, Costa Freitas & Associados       Marc Fornacciari, Dentons

160
                                                                                                           EMBARGOED
                                                                           Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                         until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                   Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).



Sri Lanka                                 Ittipol Narkbenjaporn, DLA Piper             The Public Private Interactions Center,
                                          Thailand Ltd.                                National Research University Higher
Savantha De Saram, D. L. & F. De                                                       School of Economics
Saram                                     Supreedee Nimitkul, DLA Piper Thailand
                                          Ltd.                                         Dmitri Vinogradov, University of Essex
Aloka Nandasena, D.L. & F. De Saram
                                          Seree Nonthasoot, Institute of Research      Irina Dolgikh, Vegas lex
Arjuna Herath, Ernst and Young            and Development for Public Enterprises
                                                                                       Albert Eganyan, Vegas lex
Kolitha Dissanayake, F.J. & G. De         David Beckstead, Tilleke & Gibbins
Saram                                                                                  Denis Shtirbu, Vegas lex
Charana Kanankegamage, F.J. & G. De
Saram                                     The Kyrgyz Republic
                                                                                       Timor Leste
Anjali Fernando, F.J.& G. De Saram        Aisulu Chubarova, ARTE Law Firm
                                                                                       Sofia Riço Calado, Buzzword
Priyanga Algama, Priyanga                 Liliia Kim, ARTE Law Firm
                                                                                       Bernardo Correia Barradas, Central
Asanka Abeysekera, Tiruchelvam            Zhanyl Abdrakhmanova, Colibri Law            Bank of Timor Leste
Associates                                Firm
                                                                                       António Ljorge, Da Cunha Jorge
Thuwaraka Ganeshan, Tiruchelvam           Dinara Batyrova, Colibri Law Firm            Advogados
Associates
                                          Lira Kasymbekova, Investment                 Ricardo Alves Silva, Miranda &
Lasantha Garusinghe, Tiruchelvam          Promotion Agency under the Ministry of       Associados
Associates                                Economy of the Kyrgyz Republic.
                                                                                       Alberto Galhardo Simões, Miranda &
Nirosha Peiris, Tiruchelvam Associates    Елена Бабицкая, Общество с                   Associados
                                          ограниченной ответственностью
                                          “Юридическое агентство “VERITAS”             Renato Guerra De Almeida, Miranda &
                                                                                       Associados
Tajikistan                                Лидия Васильева, Общество с
                                          ограниченной ответственностью                Rui Amendoeira, Vieira de Almeida &
Jienshoh Bukhoriev                                                                     Associados, Sociedade de Advogados,
                                          “Юридическое агентство “VERITAS”
Zhanyl Abdrakhmanova, Colibri Law                                                      R.L.
Firm                                                                                   João Cortez Vaz, Vieira de Almeida &
Khujanazar Aslamshoev, Colibri Law        The Russian Federation                       Associados, Sociedade de Advogados,
Firm                                                                                   R.L.
                                          Konstantin Garmonin, Baker Botts L.L.P.
Farukh Sultonov, Tajnor                                                                Teresa Empis Falcão, Vieira de
                                          Kira Gladkoborodova, Baker Botts L.L.P.      Almeida & Associados, Sociedade de
                                          Irada Diyakova, Capital Legal Services       Advogados, R.L.
Tanzania                                  Pavel Karpunin, Capital Legal Services       Vitor Paiva
Neema Lwise Kileo, Astute Attorneys       Ekaterina Romanova, Capital Legal




                                                                                                                                                            Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs
Thomas Sipemba, East African Law          Services                                     Togo
Chambers                                  Rimma Tolmacheva, Capital Legal              Ali Hojeij, Bird & Bird AARPI
Kamanga Wilbert Kapinga, Mkono & Co       Services
Advocates                                                                              Sophie Pignon, Bird & Bird AARPI
                                          Artem Rodin, CMS Russia
Adam Lovett, Norton Rose Fulbright                                                     H. Kuassi Deckon, Faculté de droit/
                                          Ilya Skripnikov, Dentons                     Université de Lomé
Angela Mndolwa, Norton Rose Fulbright     Tair Suleymanov, Dentons                     Tahirisoa Rakotonirina, John W Ffooks
Saidi Amiri, Tanzania Invetsment Centre   Elena Shadrina, Elena                        Legal

                                          Artem Chigrin, KPMG Moscow                   Vannissa Rakotonirina, John W Ffooks
                                                                                       Legal
Thailand                                  Sergey Ignatushchenko, KPMG Moscow
                                                                                       Martial Akakpo, Martial Akakpo &
Monsicha Pongrujikorn, Allen & Overy      Natalia Reznichenko, KPMG Moscow             Associes
Thailand Company Limited
                                          Stepan Svetankov, KPMG Russia and            Sandrine Badjili, Martial Akakpo &
Sarah Wilson, Allen & Overy Thailand      the CIS                                      Associes
Company Limited
                                          Dmitry Krupyshev, Lecap Law firm LLC         Yaovi Montcho, Martial Akakpo &
Charuwan Charoonchitsathian,
                                                                                       Associes
Chandler and Thong ek Law Offices         Polina Strekalova, Lecap Law firm LLC
Limited                                                                                Edem Zotchi, Martial Akakpo & Associes
                                          Roman Zhirnov, Lecap Law firm LLC
Kobchai Nitungkorn, Chandler and
                                          Matthew Keats, Linklaters
Thong ek Law Offices Limited
                                          Marina Ushakova, Linklaters
                                                                                       Tunisia
Jessada Sawatdipong, Chandler and
Thong ek Law Offices Limited                                                           Adly Bellagha, Adly
                                          Julia Voskoboinikova, Linklaters
Tanadee Pantumkomon, Chandler and                                                      Mahmoud Anis Bettaieb, Bettaieb Law
                                          Svetlana Maslova, Maslova
Thong ek Law Offices Limited                                                           Firm
                                          Paola Valbonesi, Paola
                                                                                                                                                           161
                                                                                                                                                              EMBARGOED
                                                                                                                              Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                                                                            until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                                                                                      Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).



                                                        Elyes Chafter, Chafter Raouadi             Mark Smith, Deloitte                            Ukrainian Public Private Partnership
                                                                                                                                                   Development Support Center
                                                        Zine El Abidine Chafter, Chafter Raouadi   Francis Kisirinya, Francis
                                                        Habiba Raouadi, Chafter Raouadi            Isaac Newton Kyagaba, Kampala
                                                                                                   Associated Advocates                            United Kingdom
                                                        Mohamed Lotfi El Ajeri, El Ajeri Lawyers
                                                                                                   Charles Ndandiko, Kyambogo                      David Hartley, Ashurst LLP
                                                        Selima Ben Hamouda, Eversheds              University School of Management and
                                                                                                   Entrepreneurship                                Cameron Smith, Ashurst LLP
                                                        Raouf El Heni, Eversheds
                                                                                                   Orono Otweyo, PPP Unit, Ministry of             Tom Ballard, CMS Cameron McKenna
                                                        Fares El Heni, Eversheds                                                                   LLP
                                                                                                   Finance
                                                        Atef Masmoudi, Ministère des Finances                                                      Robert Gray, CMS Cameron McKenna
                                                                                                   Francis Kamulegeya,
                                                        Sarra Elloumi, Zaanouni & Associates       PricewaterhouseCoopers                          LLP
                                                        Law Firm                                                                                   Paul Smith, CMS Cameron McKenna
                                                                                                   Eeshi Katugugu,
                                                        Mohamed Zaanouni, Zaanouni &               PricewaterhouseCoopers Uganda                   LLP
                                                        Associates Law Firm                                                                        Liam Cowell, DLA Piper
                                                                                                   Kenneth Lenox Sseguya,
                                                        Hend Ben Achour                            PricewaterhouseCoopers Uganda                   Sharon Fitzgerald, DLA Piper
                                                                                                                                                   Louise Huson, DLA Piper
                                                        Turkey                                     Ukraine                                         Alex Carver, Freshfields Bruckhaus
                                                        Beril Akol, Bener Law Firm                 Alina Kuksenko, Asters                          Deringer

                                                        Onur Kordel, Bener Law Firm                Oles Kvyat, Asters                              Henry Lbrendon, White & Case LLP

                                                        Muhammet Yiğit, Bener Law Firm             Vadym Samoilenko, Asters                        Caroline Miller Smith, White & Case LLP

                                                        Haluk Bilgiç, Bilgiç Law Firm              Iuliia Savchenko, Asters                        Lucy Plowright, White & Case LLP

                                                        Banu Özyalçın, Bilgiç Law Firm             Andriy Tsvyetkov, Attorneys’ Association
                                                                                                   Gestors                                         United States
                                                        Cagdas Evrim Ergun, Çakmak Avukatlık
                                                        Bürosu                                     Nadiia Filozop, Baker & McKenzie CIS,           Bradley J. Richards, Haynes and Boone,
                                                                                                   Limited                                         LLP
                                                        Nilay Celebi, Erdem & Erdem Law Office
                                                                                                   Lina Nemchenko, Baker & McKenzie                Preston Bryant, McGuireWoods
                                                        Ercüment Erdem, Erdem & Erdem Law
                                                                                                   CIS, Limited                                    Consulting, LLC
                                                        Office
                                                                                                   Oleksandra Kondratenko, CMS Reich               Isidro A. Jiménez, Nossaman LLP
                                                        Ozgur Kocabasoglu, Erdem & Erdem
                                                                                                   Rohrwig Hainz
                                                        Law Office                                                                                 Andres Berry, Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw
                                                                                                   Maria Orlyk, CMS Reich Rohrwig Hainz            Pittman LLP
                                                        Ahmet Kesli, Group Law Firm
                                                                                                   Kateryna Soroka, CMS Reich Rohrwig              David Miller, Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw
                                                        Senem Ismen, Hergüner Bilgen Özeke
                                                                                                   Hainz                                           Pittman LLP
                                                        Attorney Partnership
 Benchmarking Public-Private Partnerships Procurement




                                                                                                   Mykhaylo Byelostotskiy, DLA Piper               Fernando Rodriguez Marin, Pillsbury
                                                        Emre Eser, Ministry of Development
                                                                                                   Ukraine LLC                                     Winthrop Shaw Pittman LLP
                                                        Sedef Yavuz Noyan, Ministry of
                                                                                                   Oleksandra Protsenko, DLA Piper                 Clark Lewis, Troutman Sanders
                                                        Development
                                                                                                   Ukraine LLC                                     Strategies
                                                        Orçun Çetinkaya, Moroğlu Arseven
                                                                                                   Dmitro Romenskyi, Dmitro                        Morteza Farajian, Virginia P3 Office
                                                        Pelin Oğuzer, Moroğlu Arseven
                                                                                                   Oliynyk Kateryna, Egorov Puginsky               Ryan Pedraza
                                                        Burcu Tuzcu Ersin, Moroğlu Arseven         Afanasiev and Partners Ukraine
                                                                                                                                                   Robin Smith
                                                        PAE Law Office                             Roman Stepanenko, Egorov Puginsky
                                                                                                   Afanasiev and Partners Ukraine
                                                        Sinan Sunay, Pekin & Pekin
                                                                                                   Ievgen Gusiev, Ievgen                           Uruguay
                                                        Elif Tolunay, Pekin & Pekin
                                                                                                   Integrites                                      Rodrigo Ferrés, Ferres Law,
                                                        Murat Yazıcı, Yazici Law Offices                                                           International PPP Legal Consultant
                                                                                                   Iryna Marushko, Lavrynovych and
                                                        Işıl Ökten, Yüksel Karkın Küçük            Partners Law Firm                               Federico Formento, Fischer &
                                                                                                                                                   Schickendantz
                                                                                                   Artem Komolov, LLC Dentons Europe
                                                                                                                                                   Federico Caresani, Galante & Martins
                                                        Uganda                                     Natalia Selyakova, LLC Dentons Europe
                                                                                                                                                   Diego Galante, Galante & Martins
                                                        Dorcus Bayiga, C.R Amanya Advocates        Nikolay Zhovner, LLC Dentons Europe
                                                        & Solicitors                                                                               Pilar Alvarez, Guyer & Regules
                                                                                                   Oksana Holovko, Nobles
                                                        Claire Amanya Rukundo Kakeeto, C.R                                                         Marcos A. Payssé, Guyer & Regules
                                                        Amanya Advocates & Solicitors              Denis Vergeles, Nobles
                                                                                                                                                   Silvina Panizza, Ministry of Economy
                                                        Kenneth Legesi, Deloitte                   Alexander Weigelt, Nobles                       and Finance Uruguay
162                                                     John Ponsonby, Deloitte                    Volodymyr Yakubovskyy, Nobles                   Juan Martin Olivera, Olivera Abogados
                                                                                                       EMBARGOED
                                                                       Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                                     until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                               Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).



Federico Rocca, Olivera Abogados        Martin Desautels, DFDL                     Zambia
Cecilia Trujillo, Olivera Abogados      Charles Magdelaine, Gide Loyrette          Andrew Chitembo, Andrew Chitembo
                                        Nouel A.A.R.P.I.                           Consultancy
Guillermo Fuentes
                                        Nasir Pkm Abdul, Gide Loyrette Nouel       Sydney Chisenga, Corpus legal
Guillermo Fuentes                       A.A.R.P.I.                                 Practitioners
                                        Vietnam Global Consulting Company          Oliver Munthali, Corpus legal
Vietnam                                 Limited                                    Practitioners

Huong Nguyen Thu                        Vu Nguyen Quang, Vietnam                   Joseph Jalasi, Eric Silwamba, Jalasi and
                                        International Law Firm                     Linyama Legal Practitioners
Linh Tran Thi Ngoc
                                        Phuong Nguyen, Zicolaw Vietnam Ltd.        Pinalo Chifwanakeni, University of
Duc Tran, Allen & Overy Legal Vietnam                                              Lusaka
LLC                                     Jerome Buzenet
                                                                                   Zambia Chamber of Commerce and
Nicolas Audier, Audier & Partners       Linh Dao
                                                                                   Industry
Vietnam                                 Phong Anh Hoang
                                                                                   Bruno Mweemba
Nicolas Picard, Audier & Partners       Tung Pham Thanh
Vietnam
                                        Thi Vu Hanh Tran
Marijn Sprokkereef, Audier & Partners
Vietnam




                                                                                                                                                        Assessing Government Capability to Prepare, Procure and Manage PPPs




                                                                                                                                                       163
                                  EMBARGOED
  Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
          Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).
                                                                                          EMBARGOED
                                                          Not for news wire transmission, posting on web sites, or any other media use
                                                        until Thursday, September 29, 2016 at 10:00 AM Washington D.C. Eastern Daylight
                                                                  Time (EDT) is 4 hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT-4).




The World Bank Group provides assistance to governments in developing
countries to improve access to infrastructure and basic services through
public-private partnerships (PPP). When designed well and implemented
in a balanced regulatory environment, PPPs can bring greater eﬃciency
and sustainability to the provision of such public services as water,
sanitation, energy, transport, telecommunications, health care and
education.

The World Bank Group’s unique value proposition rests with its capacity
to provide support along the entire PPP cycle —upstream policy and
regulatory guidance, transaction structuring advice, as well as ﬁnancing
and guarantees to facilitate implementation.

PPIAF provides technical assistance to governments to support the
                                                                                                         worldbank.org/ppp
creation of a sound enabling environment for the provision of basic
                                                                                                         ppiaf.org
infrastructure services by the private sector. PPIAF also supports the
generation and dissemination of knowledge on emerging practices on
matters relating to private sector involvement in infrastructure. The                                    @WBG_PPP #PPPs
production of this report was funded by PPIAF.                                                           @PIAF_PPP




                                                                                                                   2017
