                 CONFE R E NCE E DITION


The World Bank Group’s Support
  to Capital Market Development
The World Bank Group’s Support to
     Capital Market Development
                              main report




                         Careful observation and
                         analysis of program data
                         and the many issues
                         impacting program
                         efficacy reveal what
                         works as well as what
                         could work better. The
                         knowledge gleaned is
                         valuable to all who strive
                         to ensure that World
                         Bank goals are met and
                         surpassed.
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org



This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of
Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.
    The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part
of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
boundaries.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full
attribution to this work is given.
    Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625;
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.




ISBN: 978-1-60244-263-4
contents

abbreviationsVII
acknowledgmentsXI
overviewXII
management response*
management action record*	
chairperson’s summary: committee on development effectiveness*



1. Context, Scope, and Approach		                                                                                    1
   Capital Markets and the Current Development Agenda		                                                         3
   Bank Group Strategy toward Capital Market Development 	                                                      4
   Capital Markets, Economic Growth, and Poverty Alleviation		                                                  5
   IEG’s Evaluation of Capital Markets: Objectives, Audience, and Evaluation Questions		 5
   Analytic Underpinning in FSAPs: A Diagnostic Approach		                                                     10
   Reflection of Capital Markets Issues in Country Strategies and Country Programs		 12
   FSAPs and Country Strategies—A Summary of Findings		                                                        14


                         Results and Performance of the
2. Instruments: Building Bond Markets 	                                        16

                                              World
   Building Bond Markets: Core Clusters of Operational           Bank Group 2015
                                                       Interventions		      19
   Bond Market Development: Links to Country Strategies and Sequencing over Time		 29
                                                                     An Independent Evaluation
   Building Bond Markets through World Bank and IFC Treasury Operations		              33
   Bond Markets—A Summary of Findings		                                                                        44


3. Instruments: Public and Private Equity		                                                                         49
   Encouraging Private Equity—IFC	                                                                             51
   Private Equity—A Summary of Findings		                                                                      58


4. Instruments: Mortgage-Backed Securities and Market-Based
   Housing Finance	                                                                                                 60
   Developing Market-Based Finance for Housing 	                                                               62
   Housing Finance and Capital Markets—A Summary of Findings		                          Careful observation and
                                                                                                                70
                                                                                         analysis of program data
                                                                                         and the many issues
5. Investors: Insurance and Pension Funds		                                                                   72
                                                                                         impacting program
                                                                                         efficacy
    The Bank Group and Institutional Investors: Contributions to Capital Market Development 	    reveals what
                                                                                                         77
                                                                                         works as well as what
    Institutional Investors and Capital Markets—A Summary of Findings 	                                 87
                                                                                         could work better. The
                                                                                         knowledge gleaned is
                                                                                         valuable to all who strive
                                                                                         to ensure that World
                                                                                         Bank goals are met and
*To come.                                                                                surpassed.




                                                              Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group        iii
6. Capital Market Infrastructure 	                                                                         90
     Establishing Sound Legal and Regulatory Frameworks		                                            93
     Corporate Governance: Support Extended by the Bank Group—An IEG Assessment		101
     Securities Settlement Systems		                                                                102


7. Real Sector Support: Infrastructure Finance and the Environment		114
     Supporting Infrastructure Finance through Capital Markets Instruments		                        116
     Green Bonds and Theme Bonds		                                                                  126
     Real Sector Support at the Bank Group and Capital Markets Instruments—A Summary		128


8. Sustainability, Quality, Monitoring, and Coordination		                                                 131
     Funding the Capital Markets Work Program 		                                                    133
     Assessing Work Quality 		                                                                      141
     Client Interaction and Coordination within the Bank Group 	                                    144
     Sustainability, Quality, Monitoring, and Coordination—A Summary		                              148


9. Conclusions and Recommendations: What Worked, What Didn’t, and
     What’s Next?150
     Recommendation 1		                                                                             152
     Recommendation 2		                                                                             153
     Recommendation 3		                                                                             154
     Recommendation 4		                                                                             155


References                                                                                                 157

Appendixes	
           		

     Appendixes to Chapter 1
     Appendixes to Chapter 2
     Appendixes to Chapter 3
     Appendixes to Chapter 4
     Appendixes to Chapter 5
     Appendixes to Chapter 6
     Appendixes to Chapter 7
     Appendixes to Chapter 8

Boxes

     Box 1.1 	   What Are Capital Markets and What Is the Scope of the IEG Evaluation?		              6
     Box 2.1 	   The Three Prongs of the GEMLOC Program		                                            21
     Box 2.2 	   Local Bond Market Development and the Bank Group: Vietnam 	                         31
     Box 2.3 	   IBRD and IFC Risk Management Tools for Clients: Deepening Domestic Capital Markets 	 34
     Box 2.4 	   IBRD Treasury Bond Issues and Local Capital Market Development		                    37
     Box 2.5 	   IFC Treasury Bond Issues and Local Capital Market Development		                     39
     Box 2.6 	   IFC Treasury Bond Issues in Indian Rupees: Impact on Capital Market Development		 42




iv          The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Contents
  Box 3.1 	     World Bank Engagement in Stock Market Development—Select Countries		                                   52
  Box 3.2 	     IFC’s Investments in Private Equity: An Overview		                                                     54
  Box 3.3 	     IFC and Private Equity Development in Nigeria		                                                        56
  Box 3.4 	     IFC and Private Equity Development—Select Countries		                                                  57
  Box 4.1 	     IFC’s Securitization Transactions		                                                                    62
  Box 4.2 	     Housing Finance and Capital Market Development		                                                       63
  Box 4.3 	     IFC and Mortgage Securitization in Colombia		                                                          66
  Box 5.1 	     Pensions and Insurance: Knowledge Products on Linkages with Capital Markets		 76
  Box 5.2 	     Pensions: World Bank AAA, Lending, and Capital Market Development		                                    80
  Box 5.3 	     Institutional Investors: Bank Group Support in Colombia		                                              86
  Box 6.1	      Examples of Select Capital Market Regulation and Development Interventions		 95
  Box 6.2 	     Securities Clearance and Settlement: Significant Early World Bank Work		                          102
  Box 6.3 	     Global Forums on Payments Systems: World Bank Participation 		                                    104
  Box 6.4 	     Projects with Relevant Payments Elements—Results Achieved		                                           107
  Box 6.5 	     World Bank Support for Payments and Securities Settlement Systems: Country Perspectives	109
  Box 7.1 	     Project Bonds and Infrastructure Finance		                                                            117
  Box 7.2 	     World Bank Infrastructure Lending: Support for the Use of Capital Markets Instruments 	               119
  Box 7.3	      World Bank–Supported Project, Corporate, and Sovereign Bonds for Infrastructure Finance	123
  Box 7.4 	     MIGA Guarantees for Bond Instruments and Guarantees for Infrastructure		                              125
  Box 7.5 	     IFC: Infrastructure Support through Bond Purchases		                                                  127
  Box 8.1 	     FIRST—An Introduction		                                                                               137
  Box 8.2 	     Monitoring and Evaluation Frameworks for Capital Markets Projects		                                   145

Figures

  Figure 1.1 	 Results Chain—Bank Group Support to Capital Markets: Activities, Outputs, and Outcomes	                  9
  Figure 2.1 	 Bank Group Bond Market Interventions (FY04–14)—Basic Characteristics		                                  19
  Figure 2.2 	 Bank Group Bond Issuance—Total and Non-Core Currencies 	                                                35
  Figure 2.3 	 Bank Group Bond Issuance—Total Issuance and Non-Core Currencies (Percent total issuance)	                36
  Figure 5.1 	 Institutional Investor Portfolio Diversification in Kenya: Insurance and Pensions		 85
  Figure 7.1 	 Bank Group Infrastructure Interventions and Capital Markets–Related Financing (FY04–14)	 118
  Figure 8.1 	 Financial Sector Funding and Capital Markets Funding (2004–14) 		                                  134
  Figure 8.2 	 Changes in the Relative Share of Financial Sector Work at the Anchor: Capital Markets,
  		            Financial Systems, and Financial Inclusion (2004–14) 		                                           135
  Figure 8.3 	 Contributions of Non-Bank Budget Funding to Finance and Private Sector Development Work	135

Tables

  Table 1.1 	   Examples of Supplementary Evaluative Questions Specific to Individual Areas of Bank Group Support 	     8
  Table 1.2	    FSAP Follow-up in IEG’s Capital Markets Portfolio: Advisory and Lending Services		 12
  Table 1.3	    FSAP References in Country Assistance Strategy Documents: Timeframe of Delivery and
  		            Nature of Reference		                                                                                  13
  Table 5.1	    FSAP Specialized Reviews of Pensions and Insurance: 2001–15 	                                          77
  Table 5.2 	   IEG’s Portfolio Review of World Bank Pension Interventions—Capital Markets (2004–15)	                  79
  Table 5.3	    World Bank Pensions Interventions: Relevance for Capital Market Development (2004–14)	                  79
  Table 5.4	    IEG’s Portfolio Review of Bank Group Insurance Interventions and Capital Markets (2004–15)	             83
  Table 6.1	    Capital Markets Regulation and Development: Availability of Documentation (29 Projects)	 94
  Table 6.2	    Capital Markets Regulation and Development: Project Relevance—CAS/CPS Context		 96
  Table 6.3	    Capital Markets Regulation and Development: Project Relevance—Links to FSAPs		 97
  Table 6.4	    Capital Markets Regulation and Development: Project Relevance—Completion Reports	                      98




                                                                    Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group           v
     Table 6.5	   Securities Settlement Systems and the World Bank Payments System Portfolio (2004–14)	105
     Table 8.1	   Funding Sources for Bank Group Advisory Services for 86 Bond Market
     		           Interventions (2004–14)		                                                           136
     Table 8.2	   FIRST Projects Relevant to Capital Markets (2002–15) 		                             139
     Table 8.3	   IEG Capital Markets Portfolio: Importance of FIRST (2004–14) 		                     140
     Table 8.4	   Capital Markets Portfolio—Projects with Evaluation 	                                141
     Table 8.5	   Capital Markets Portfolio—Work Quality Ratings (average rating)		                   143
     Table 8.6	   Capital Markets Portfolio—Documentation Availability by Topic Area 		               144
     Table 8.7	   Quality of the Results Framework and Monitoring and Evaluation—Lending and
     		           Non-Lending Technical Assistance		                                                  146




vi          The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Abbreviations
abbreviations

	    AAA	    analytic and advisory activities

	   ABMI	    Asian Bond Market Initiatives

	    ABS	    asset-backed securities

	    ADB	    Asian Development Bank

	    AfDB	   African Development Bank

	    AMC	    asset management company

	     AS	    advisory services

	   BETF	    Bank-executed trust fund

	     BIS	   Bank for International Settlements

	    CAB	    Climate Awareness Bond

	    CAS	    Country Assistance Strategy

	    CAT	    Catastrophic Risk (bonds)

	    CBR	    Central Bank of Russia

	    CCD	    certificate of capital development

	 CEMLA	     Center for Latin American Monetary Studies

	     CG	    corporate governance

	   CHMC	    Colombian Home Mortgage Corporation

	    CMA	    Capital Markets Authority (Kenya)

	     CIS	   Commonwealth of Independent States

	     CPI	   consumer price index

	   CPMI	    Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures

	    CPS	    Country Partnership Strategy

	    CSD	    clearance, settlement, and depository systems

	     DA	    distressed asset

	   DARP	    Debt and Asset Recovery Program

	     DFI	   development financing institution

	    DFID	   Department for International Development (UK)

	    DMF	    Debt Management Facility

	   DOTS	    Development Outcome Tracking System

	    DPL	    development policy loan




                                                  Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   vii
	       DPR	            diversified payment receipts

	       EAC	            East African Community

	        EAP	           East Asia and the Pacific

	      EBRD	            European Bank for Reconstruction and Development

	        EIB	           European Investment Bank

	      EMRC	            Egyptian Mortgage Refinance Company

	      ESMID	           Efficient Securities Markets Institutional Development program

	        ETF	           exchange-traded fund

	       F&M	            Finance and Markets

	 FABDM	                Financial Advisory and Debt Management program

	       FDN	            Financiera de Desarrollo Nacional (National Development Fund)

	      FIRST	           Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative

	       FOVI	           Fondo de Operacion y Financiamiento Bancario a la Vivienda (Mexico)

	        FPD	           Finance and Private Sector Development

	       FSAP	           Financial Sector Assessment Program

	       GBP	            Green Bond Principles

	GEMLOC	                Global Emerging Markets Local Currency Bond program

	      GEMX	            Global Emerging Markets Local Currency Sovereign Bond Index

	        G20	           A group of 20 major economies including 19 countries and the European Union

	       GDP	            gross domestic product

	        IAIS	          International Association of Insurance Supervisors

	       IBRD	           International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

	       ICRR	           Implementation Completion and Results Review

	 I-D ETF	              issuer-driven bond exchange-traded fund

	        IDA	           International Development Association

	        IDB	           Inter-American Development Bank

	        IEG	           Independent Evaluation Group

	       IFFIm	          International Finance Facility for Immunization

	         IFC	          International Finance Corporation

	          IFI	         international financial institution

	        IMF	           International Monetary Fund


viii        The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Abbreviations
	   IOSCO	   International Organization of Securities Commissions

	     IPO	   initial public offering

	    ISDA	   International Swap and Derivatives Association

	     LAC	   Latin America and the Caribbean

	    LNG	    liquefied natural gas

	    MDB	    multilateral development banks

	    MBS	    mortgage-backed securities

	    MIGA	   Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

	    MILA	   Mercado Integrado LatinoAmericano (Integrated Latin American Securities
		Exchange)

MosPrime	
	            Moscow Prime Offered Rate

	    M&E	    monitoring and evaluation

	   NMRC	    Nigeria Mortgage Refinance Company

	     NSE	   National Stock Exchange (Kenya)

	   OECD	    Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

	    PCR	    Project Completion Report

	    PDM	    public debt management

	      PE	   private equity

	     PPP	   public-private partnership

	     PRI	   Principles for Responsible Investment

	    RAS	    Reimbursable Advisory Services

	   ROSC	    Reports on Observance of Standards and Codes

	   RTGS	    real-time gross settlement

	 RUONIA	    Ruble Overnight Index Average

	     SEB	   Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken

	     SEC	   Securities and Exchange Commission

	   SECO	    Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs

	    SIDA	   Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency

	    SME	    small and medium enterprise

	 SOFOLs	    Sociedades Financieras de Objeto Limitado (Mexico)

	     SPV	   special-purpose vehicle



                                                Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   ix
	    SSA	           Sub-Saharan Africa

	    SSS	           securities and settlements system

	      TA	          technical assistance

	      TC	          Titularizadora Colombiana

	    TMD	           Treasury Mobile Direct

	     TTL	          task team leader

	     UN	           United Nations

	   USAID	          United States Agency for International Development

	   VBMA	           Vietnam Bond Market Association

	    WHI	           Western Hemisphere Initiative

	   XPSR	           Expanded Project Supervision Report




x       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Acknowledgments
acknowledgments

This report of the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) was prepared by a core team led by Anjali
Kumar with Jack Glen as a co-team leader until his retirement in June 2015. Major contributions to
the report were provided by Jacqueline Andrieu, Hany Assad, Suman Babbar, Amitava Banerjee,
Eric Cruikshank, Ismail Dalla, Houqi Hong, Wasiq Ismail, Takatoshi Kamezawa, Jonathan Katz,
Pamela Lamoreaux, Ruben Lee, Chad Leechor, Keita Miyaki, Swizen Rubbani, Isaac Salem, Robert
Singletary, Silvina Vatnick, and Tarisa Watanasage. The team collaborated with Mariano Cortes and
Maria Elena Pinglo in the section on housing finance. Administrative and logistic support support
was generously provided by Yasmin Angeles, Emelda Cudilla, Marylou Kam-Cheong, Manucher
Daruvala, Lily Kew, Joan Mongal, Aimee Niane, Rosemarie Pena, Agnes Santos, and Gloria Soria.
Heather Dittbrenner, Kia Penso, and Cheryl Marie Toksoz provided editorial assistance.

The team gratefully acknowledges the support of managers and staff throughout the World Bank
Group, especially at the Finance and Markets Global Practice, the Treasury Departments of both the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Finance Corporation
(IFC), and the Financial Institutions Group of IFC. IEG appreciates the many individual staff
throughout the World Bank who have been generous with their time for consultations and interviews
on aspects of the World Bank’s capital market development–related work. Particular thanks are
offered to the field-based Finance and Markets team members who provided assistance and logistic
support for field visits in Colombia, India, Kenya, Morocco, and Vietnam, and for arranging meetings
with key officials as well as numerous private institutions. IEG would like to thank the country officials
as well as the private sector persons who participated in IEG’s surveys and interviews for making
their time available for discussion, offering perspectives, and supplying data.
The report benefited from generous support from the Japan Policy and Human Resources Development
Fund, and IEG would like to thank Kazuki Nadarate for enabling and expediting this. Budget
management and administrative support for the use of the trust fund was provided by Shimelis Dinku.
The team benefitted greatly from rich discussions with staff at the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development (EBRD) and the European Investment Bank (EIB), who shared their own
experiences and perspectives in terms of international financial institution support for client countries’
capital market development. They especially include Andre Kuusvek, Jessica Pulay, and Peter
Tabak at EBRD; Pedro de Lima, Monique Koning, and Yamina Safer at EIB; and Bernard Ziller,
who supported all aspects of the IEG visit. IEG also acknowledges valuable exchanges with Inter-
American Development Bank and Asian Development Bank (ADB) staff members.

Peer reviewers for the evaluation included Noritaka Akamatsu, chair, Financial Sector Community of
Practice, ADB, and former World Bank staff; Cesare Calari, former vice president, Financial Sector,
World Bank; Isabelle Laurent, deputy treasurer, EBRD; Amedée Prouvost, director, Chief Risk Office,
World Bank; and Andrew Sheng, former head of the Hong Kong Securities Commission and the
Hong Kong Monetary Authority and now distinguished fellow at the Fung Global Institute, Hong
Kong South Asia Region, China. The team also appreciates comments and support provided by IEG
colleagues, especially Belen Barbeito, Leonardo Bravo, Zeljko Bogetic, Unurjargal Demberel, Beata
Lenard, Mario Marchesini, Raghavan Narayan, and Andrew Stone.

The evaluation was conducted under the guidance of Marvin Taylor-Dormond, director, and Stoyan
Tenev, manager, IEG Finance and Private Sector Evaluation, and Caroline Heider, IEG director general.

                                                   Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   xi
overview

T h i s e va luat i o n o f t h e Wo r l d B a n k G r o u p ’s contributions toward client

countries’ capital market development comes at a strategic juncture when Bank Group commitment

to help mobilize long-term finance for development has grown increasingly prominent. Motivated by

the recognition that long-term finance is limited, attention in the development community has turned

toward market-based solutions. Well-functioning capital markets help channel capital toward areas

that are essential for development and poverty reduction.


Capital markets, for the buying and selling of long-term security instruments, enable issuers (supply
side) and investors (demand side) to trade such instruments within a certain market infrastructure.
Bank Group support encompassed interventions that spanned virtually all these areas of capital
market development.

On the issuance side, early emphasis on local currency government bond markets reflected the
Bank Group’s strategy as well as global concerns following the Asian crisis. The Bank Group’s
response was innovative, albeit only partially successful. Attempts to develop markets through
Treasury bond issues could have had more sustained impact if linked to operational support. The
International Finance Corporation (IFC)’s move away from support for the development of public
stock markets toward private equity partly reflected diminishing equitization. Its frontier role in private
equity helped support local fund managers, though initial public offering (IPO) exits were rare and
financial returns were mixed. More can be done with equity financing models for small business
that involve new market technologies. The Bank Group’s role in the development of instruments
such as asset-backed and mortgage-backed securities has been necessarily limited by the level of
development of client countries’ markets; its interventions were sometimes ahead of their time. Bank
Group use of capital markets instruments or project bonds for infrastructure financing in its own
transactional support was small; within this small universe guarantees were an important instrument.

On the investor side, most operational interventions in the areas of insurance and pensions had
little focus on asset management or capital market investment, although this could have aided their
own sustainability. There were missed opportunities for linkages between issuers of securities and
institutional investors.

In regard to market infrastructure, objectives in developing regulations were largely achieved within
countries, although bottom-up program selection may not have optimized the Bank Group’s global
impact. In the payments and securities settlement area, the Bank Group’s advice was recognized to
be valuable and influential in global forums; however, synergies between country, global, and regional
levels were difficult to realize. Some activities had little discernible impact, which reflected in part the
slow and difficult process of building markets and institutions.

Although Bank Group support encompassed virtually all capital market segments, coherence
across areas of engagement was weak in bringing together the demand, supply, and infrastructure



xii       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Overview
sides of market development. Such fragmented interventions partially reflected prevailing Bank
Group strategy, though a more comprehensive strategic approach is emerging. Significant reliance
on a variety of external or unusual financing sources likely also contributed to fragmented program
design, both within and across countries. Although recent adjustments in funding structures have
partially strengthened opportunities to adopt more programmatic or comprehensive approaches
within countries, issues of how choices are made across countries and program areas remain:
avoiding duplication of learning, ensuring prioritization of countries that are most likely to benefit, and
maintaining the role of cross-country or global programs.

Ultimately, the credibility and impact of this largely knowledge-based practice area rest on
developing, maintaining, and disseminating information. The role of the Global Practice is
fundamental to helping the Bank Group transcend the typical country-driven model and move toward
developing and maintaining cross-country and global knowledge that could enable the Bank Group
to develop the capacity to contribute as an innovator and not only as a replicator. At a day-to-day
level, there is also clear scope for improvement in knowledge management. This requires a multi-
pronged approach, beginning with better document maintenance, better indicators in finance and
markets databases, and closer program tracking.



Motivation, Scope, and Approach
The year 2015 marked a milestone in global discussions on “financing for development,”
acknowledging the implications of the Sustainable Development Goals for mobilizing huge additional
resource flows for development, as well as the need for countries to develop their own institutions
and policies to mobilize resource flows that would complement concessional finance. As noted by
the heads of international financial institutions (IFIs), “financing from private sources, including capital
markets, institutional investors and businesses, will become particularly important.” The Addis Ababa
Action Agenda confirmed the commitment of the international community to “work towards developing
domestic capital markets, particularly long-term bond and insurance markets” and “to strengthen
supervision, clearing, settlement and risk management.” It recognized “that regional markets are
an effective way to achieve scale and depth not attainable when individual markets are small,” and
encouraged further growth in lending in domestic currencies by multilateral development banks.

Well-functioning capital markets help ensure the financial system’s efficiency, stability, and risk
management, preventing costly crises and helping channel savings toward capital that is essential for
economic development and poverty reduction. Capital markets provide competition to bank finance,
encouraging banks to increase their efficiency, and allowing households and firms to better manage
risks associated with long-term investments. The World Bank Group and other IFIs have been well
positioned to help countries develop enabling environments to strengthen domestic capital markets
and institutions.

Capital markets comprise both public sector and private corporate issuers, who issue a range of
securities instruments: bonds, or fixed-income securities; stocks or equities which are risk-sharing



                                                            Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   xiii
with variable returns and bundles of claims such as asset-backed or mortgage-backed securities
(discussed in chapters 2, 3, and 4). They are long-term, with maturities of more than a year, and they
are held by investors such as insurance and pension funds (discussed in chapter 5) that need to
match their long-dated liabilities. Well-functioning markets require sound market infrastructure—
both “soft” aspects such as laws, regulations, and corporate governance and “hard” aspects such
as systems for trading, clearance, and settlement (discussed in chapter 6). Specific capital markets
instruments finance the real sector, including infrastructure and the environment (discussed in
chapter 7). The Bank Group has had interventions in all these areas (Figure O.1).

Elements of capital market development have long been acknowledged in the Bank Group agenda.
The 2007 World Bank strategy clearly recognizes key elements, although interlinkages are less
explicit. Since 2011, emerging IFC strategy toward capital market development reflects a recognition



Figure O.1   | Scope of Evaluation: Areas of World Bank Group Support




                                         CAPITAL MARKET INFRASTRUCTURE
                                                    (Chapter 6)

                                        • REGULATION
                                        • CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
                                        • SECURITIES CLEARANCE AND SETTLEMENT
                                          Other: Creditor Rights, Rating Agencies




                                                                Returns

           INSTRUMENTS/ISSUERS                                                                           INVESTORS
               (Chapters 2, 3, 4)                                                                         (Chapter 5)

      • BONDS:
                                                          Intermediaries




                                                                                            • INSURANCE COMPANIES
                                                                           Intermediaries




        – Sovereign/Treasury (Government)
                                                                                            • PENSION FUNDS
        – Corporate bonds (Companies)
        – Supranationals (IFIs/MDBs)                                                         Other funds: e.g., mutual funds, sovereign
      • EQUITIES/STOCKS:                                                                     wealth funds
        (Firms/Businesses)
      • ASSET-BACKED SECURITIES
      • MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES

                                                              Investment




                      FINANCING THE REAL SECTOR THROUGH CAPITAL MARKET INSTRUMENTS
                                                 (Chapter 7)




xiv       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Overview
of the interlinkages, and proposes unified supply and demand approaches. The purpose of this
evaluation is to assess Bank Group support to client countries for development of their capital
markets across the full spectrum of associated activities.



Evaluation Questions and Methodology
The overarching evaluation question is:

n	   Has the Bank Group been relevant, effective, and efficient in supporting the development of its
     client countries’ domestic capital markets to deepen their financial systems, realize real sector
     development, and to support the achievement of its twin goals of poverty alleviation and shared
     prosperity?

Given the heterogeneity of interventions, the evaluation constructs metrics to assess effectiveness
in each of the main areas of focus: (i) capital market instruments or issuers; (ii) capital market
infrastructure; and (iii) capital market investors (insurance and pension funds). The report also reviews
(iv) the extent to which support for the use of capital market instruments is reflected in select areas of
its own portfolio of real sector financing: infrastructure and the environment.

The Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) has used well-accepted qualitative and quantitative
methods: structured portfolio analysis, category building and scoring benchmarked against
international standards; structured interviews including with other IFIs, standard-setting bodies and
market experts, external data from the Bank of International Settlements (BIS), Bloomberg, and other
sources, triangulated with findings from five field visits.

Portfolio: Projects and Countries
The evaluation focuses on Bank Group operational interventions in areas relevant to capital markets
during FY04–14, using a succession of filters for identification and selection. The portfolio thus
identified included 1,071 interventions; each is assigned to a primary thematic area of capital market
development. Interventions showed a mild increase in average numbers over time. All observations
were reviewed in the majority of market segments, and principal clusters were reviewed in a few
segments, spanning at least 64 countries. Case study countries had additional purposive elements:
no more than one country per continent, inclusion of countries at all income levels, and a high level
of representation in the IEG portfolio. The countries thus selected were Colombia, India, Kenya,
Morocco, and Vietnam.

From Diagnostics to Country Strategies
Although Financial Sector Assessment Programs (FSAPs)—the Bank Group’s primary diagnostic
tools for financial and capital markets—provided considerable diagnostic information on capital
markets at the country level, in many countries there was limited follow-up on critical findings.

IEG’s review of 39 FSAPs in 20 countries finds that coverage of most areas relevant to capital market
development was high, though coverage diminished over time. While focused most frequently on the
regulatory framework or supervisory capacity, there was significant substantive discussion of themes


                                                              Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   xv
relevant to capital market development. Despite these rich diagnostics, follow-up interventions in
FSAP countries only referred to FSAPs a quarter of the time, on average. FSAPs themselves tended
not to connect recommendations in individual areas to make overall blueprints for capital market
development.

Country Assistance or Partnership Strategies (CASs or CPSs), in the same countries, frequently alluded
in some capacity to FSAPs, but only a few offered clear, connective references between the FSAPs and
the work program. CAS or CPS reports consistently expressed overall support for the financial sector,
though support for capital market development was lower and more variable, with some decline over
time. Country case studies attest to the variability of the extent to which FSAPs were used to underpin
countries’ capital market development programs, from close congruence in Colombia and Morocco
and consistency in Kenya, to negligible attention in India. Vietnam’s capital market–related work was
directed largely by country demand; it did not have an FSAP report until 2014.



Instruments
Bond Market Development
Bond market development formed the backbone of the Bank Group’s capital market interventions.
Early programs reflected innovation and risk taking, but achieved only partial success. More recent
focus has moved toward corporate bonds, emphasizing the integrated development of markets and
transactions in selected countries. Nevertheless there is a need to safeguard successful multicountry
government bond market development programs.

Both IBRD and IFC Treasury departments undertook local currency bond issues; in IFC an explicit
objective was local bond market development. Both made innovative and pioneering issues, but
market impact beyond demonstration effects is evident in only some cases. Achievement of scale
and containment of risk and cost could limit IFC’s operations. Integration with advisory interventions
in bond market development, as done by other IFIs, could valuably be increased.

Bond market development, especially government bond markets, constituted the core of the Bank
Group’s focus on capital market development. The Bank Group adopted major innovative and large-
scale programs for bond market development. Two clusters of work, under the Global Emerging
Markets Local Currency bond (GEMLOC) and Efficient Securities Markets Institutional Development
(ESMID) programs, accounted for over half the number of projects and three-fourths of the total value
of bond market advisory work.

The three-pronged flagship GEMLOC program for emerging government bond markets was
successful at strengthening government bond markets, notably through the low-cost and
effective advisory support of its web-based Peer Group dialogues, together with other targeted
or comprehensive interventions. GEMLOC’s highly original second and third pillars, the GEMX
index and the PIMCO-managed fund for emerging market sovereign bonds, sought to increase
the attractiveness of the local currency sovereign bond asset class by tracking and investing in
them. PIMCO transferred a part of its earnings back to the Bank Group for the financing of advisory


xvi      The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Overview
services under the first pillar of GEMLOC. These were admittedly less successful. The GEMX index,
though still in use, was not widely adopted, and the PIMCO fund did not succeed in attracting hoped-
for large volumes of funds; it closed in 2015.

ESMID, entirely donor financed, aimed to complement GEMLOC through its focus on corporate and
project bonds in selected markets, offering integrated solutions from addressing market barriers
to bringing transactions to market. Its legal and regulatory agenda has been the most successful,
and some success is emerging in increasing market activity. Market players report that they value
the Bank Group’s’s “honest broker” role and its undertaking prior reforms to create a conducive
environment that could facilitate transactions.

ESMID undertook useful groundwork toward regional capital market integration in Africa—a difficult
agenda. It had less presence in the Latin American Mercado Integrado Latinoamericano (MILA)
initiative). Meanwhile, the next phase of bond market development in selected countries is beginning
with the Bank’s “Deep Dive” program, too early to evaluate, which proposes, a fortiori, integrated
solutions across all market segments from issuers to investors and including legal infrastructure,
aimed at the eventual achievement of actual transactions.

Beyond these programs, other bond market support is illustrated at the country level, where
the Bank Group’s interventions were often reinforced by project preparation through the FIRST
(Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative) Trust Fund in addition to GEMLOC, and
through programmatic lending. Typically though not invariably, programs were underpinned by FSAP
guidance on design. Close links to the FSAP are present in Morocco and, to a significant degree, in
Colombia and Kenya, although in India, in the absence of comprehensive dialogue and sustained
engagement, some core areas received limited attention. In Vietnam, there was no FSAP until 2014,
yet there was successful bond market engagement emanating largely from country-driven demand.
Most countries with the Bank Group’s bond market interventions show progress in their bond market
development; the contribution of the Bank Group has been significant although difficult to quantify
precisely.



IBRD/IFC Treasuries’ Local Currency Bond Issues
Both IFC and IBRD Treasuries issued local currency bonds, mostly offshore, largely for funding
purposes, but also, in the case of IFC, with the development of local bond markets as one objective.
IFC’s issuance of onshore bonds has necessarily been more active, because it is linked to its
business needs (local private investment), its very careful management of currency risk, and its
mandate, since 2013, of local capital market support.

Both Treasuries have undertaken several innovative transactions. Programmatic issuance is valuable
and can help establish local AAA rating benchmarks and build a yield curve, as IFC’s effective
issuance of offshore Rupee “Masala” bonds has demonstrated. Demonstration effects have been
positive but the impact in domestic markets also depends on relative scale.




                                                        Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   xvii
Experience in other multilateral development banks (MDBs) shows impact can be increased not
only through programmatic engagement but also, as in EBRD and ADB, through more systematic
integration of an issuance program with advisory work. Bond issuance by MDBs, of itself, cannot
create a viable local capital market unless a country is fully committed to a broad range of reforms.
When these conditions are in place, together with investor confidence, the need for local currency
bond issues by MDBs diminishes, and the role of IFI bond issues will be genuinely catalytic.



Public and Private Equity
The Bank Group extended limited support to the development of public equities markets over the
evaluation period, partly reflecting diminished “equitization.” IFC’s support to intermediaries and
infrastructure for public stock markets also declined; the latter is more debatable. World Bank
support, mostly legal or regulatory in nature, was often a part of an FSAP follow-up. By contrast.
IFC’s role in private equity accelerated in the 2000s, following the setting-up of its dedicated funds
management department.

Although IFC committed a significant volume of investment to its emerging private equity funds, as
the largest emerging market “fund of funds,” IFC’s role has been small in terms of global investment
volume. During 2004–14, IFC represented 1 percent of total capital raised globally (8–10 percent of
the funds in which IFC participated) for investment in emerging market private equity funds, though
given that IFC’s average share in these funds was around 12 percent, the total value of these funds,
in which IFC was a significant minority investor, was 8.5 times higher. IFC played a countercyclical
and frontier market role. Its share of global commitments increased to 2 percent in 2009–10 in the
wake of the crisis, later dropping back to 1 percent. The financial performance of IFC’s private equity
investments has been mixed, which constrains them from attracting new investment. Of the funds
originated during 2004–09, 44 percent had negative returns.

As the private equity industry has matured in client countries, IFC’s role as a fund provider has
diminished, though it continues to play a catalytic role supporting first-time fund managers and,
especially, in setting high environmental, social, and governance standards. Yet its direct impact on
the development of public securities markets is negligible, and most of the time, was not an objective.
IPO exits are not a feasible strategy in most client countries and are consequently rare. Private equity
development can at best have an indirect and long-term impact on capital market development.

Mortgage-Backed Securities for Housing Finance
Both IFC and the World Bank had significant interventions in the area of housing finance, focused
primarily on banks. In a subset of countries, such as Egypt, Ghana, Nigeria, and Tanzania, the Bank
Group supported the use of mortgage liquidity facilities, which issue their own bonds to provide
financing to banks, and in Brazil, India, and Morocco is supporting the introduction of covered
bonds—effectively, a precursor of the mortgage-backed security. In a few countries, the Bank Group
also supported the development of secondary-market mortgage instruments.




xviii    The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Overview
IFC was pivotal in the development of mortgage-backed securities in Colombia and the Russian
Federation, where its interventions were well-designed, mutually reinforcing, progressive, and
sustained. Its contributions in India have been innovative and noteworthy in a difficult environment,
but there has been limited engagement on core underlying obstacles. IFC’s investments to support
securitization in Brazil made limited headway. IFC also made positive contributions toward the
development of mortgage-backed securities in Mexico, though the institutions proved unsustainable
when faced with the global crisis.

Securitization, or secondary-market instruments, are not the first choice in many Bank Group
client countries. In principle, liquidity facilities and products such as covered bonds may be more
viable options; however, these, too, need to be carefully screened for market readiness: the
macroeconomic environment and the financial sector and institutional setting. In several Bank Group
client countries (for example, Egypt, Ghana, Peru, and Tanzania) markets were not ready for these
instruments, either because of a weak environment or a premature model of intervention, where
existing market infrastructure could not support such instruments, or because of lack of government
or sponsor commitment. Yet, the Bank Group was able to make significant upstream contributions by
supporting the development of appropriate legal and regulatory frameworks for such instruments and
providing advisory work on design which could ultimately be useful.



Investors
Insurance and Pension Funds
Institutional investors can be a powerful vehicle for capital markets development, and the Bank
Group’s strategies on insurance and pensions affirm support for this role. Although the World Bank
has made significant intellectual contributions in this direction, capital market support via institutional
investors has not been a strong element of World Bank operations. Most interventions in insurance
have a product or risk-management focus. Pension interventions focus, understandably, on issues of
coverage and fiscal sustainability, possibly reflecting the dominance of public pensions in many client
countries and many client countries’ nascent multi-pillar pension systems.

IFC advisory services were focused on product development, usually for specific micro insurance
products, highlighting expansion of access. IFC investments in insurance companies provided
upstream support for capital markets through leveraged fund accumulation. Strengthened regulation
and development in insurance and pensions have provided indirect upstream support for capital
markets development.

Downstream attention to fund management or asset allocation has received negligible attention,
although this is necessary for their sound management, even apart from capital market development
considerations. There was little focus on asset management; thus, opportunities were missed to link the
Bank Group’s interventions in the areas of insurance and pensions with capital market development.

Evidence from IEG field visits suggests that in many, though not all countries, much valuable
diagnostic work on insurance and pensions that was undertaken through the FSAP program was


                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   xix
rarely operationalized—though exceptions exist. Country strategies in these countries also made little
reference to contractual savings in the context of capital market development, although Colombia
is a clear exception, and the Morocco program has also made efforts to reflect this issue. There is
a new impetus in a few countries, especially in the wake of the ESMID program, to refocus on the
accumulation and investment aspects of contractual savings, for infrastructure finance. So far, results
suggest that there has been little change (as Kenya’s experience illustrates).

The World Bank Pension Reform evaluation (IEG 2006), similarly showed that diversification of
pension funds’ investments was not achieved.

Findings serve to illustrate that links between institutional investors and capital market development
may be taken for granted, and that there has been negligible direct effort at the Bank Group to
ensure that such links actually operate, by looking at asset management. The analysis also suggests
divergence between the “public” incentive for capital market development, and “private” concerns
about liquidity, returns, and risk aversion, which need to be recognized explicitly. Moreover, in a risk-
based capital framework, greater attention to the nature of the portfolio of assets held would be a
part of overall review of soundness. If capital market development is an institutional objective, greater
thought could be given to harnessing the insurance and pensions agenda to support this objective.



Infrastructure for Capital Markets
Regulation and Development
The heterogeneous projects focusing on legal, regulatory, or development issues regarding capital
markets generally appear relevant in a country context, often reflecting FSAP findings. There
remain questions as to whether the country-driven model on its own is adequate, for strategic
global prioritization—for example, building stand-alone national securities markets in relatively small
countries. The majority of output was of good quality, and some was certainly adopted. Outcomes
are more difficult to assess, and allowances must be made for long lags before final results become
available in the legal and regulatory area. In many cases draft laws or regulations were completed
but not acted upon for years, or not at all. Better World Bank monitoring of long-term change is also
desirable because completion reports are usually done too soon after the interventions. It is difficult
to see how much market practice has really changed as a result. In this respect the periodic FSAPs
might provide a vehicle for considering and assessing longer-term outcomes.

Project design in many cases reflected traditional best practice in advanced countries; for example, with
regard to supervision, and was not well adapted to specific country circumstances. The challenges of
trying to impose sophisticated international best practices on a market in its infancy were clearly illustrated
in the case of one project in the West Bank and Gaza. Similarly, efforts to develop sophisticated securities
products, such as asset-backed securities in Sri Lanka, may have been relatively complex for the country.

Corporate governance
Corporate governance is an integral part of policy for capital market development. Good corporate
governance is essential for the effective functioning and growth of equities markets, to protect


xx       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Overview
investors, and to ensure that savings are effectively channeled to corporations that need capital for
innovation, job creation, and growth.

Most client countries made progress in their corporate governance environments. Some did so with
limited support from the Bank Group beyond diagnostics. Deteriorations in corporate governance in
some prominent Bank Group clients was the effect of known external factors. In most countries, the
World Bank’s Corporate Governance Reports on Observance of Standards and Codes (CG ROSC)
assessments, like FSAPs, were able to provide information for designing the Bank Group’s corporate
governance interventions, though in over a third of countries both the World Bank and IFC programs
for corporate governance were likely unrelated to these assessments.

Progress has been uneven across corporate governance areas. Success was attained in accounting
and auditing, and in the independence of external auditors. Gains are noticeably fewer in difficult
areas such as “disproportionate control disclosure” or “shareholders’ rights to participate in
fundamental decisions,” as well as with respect to enforcement. Structural factors limited the extent
to which change could be realized in some countries, (for example, owing to dominance of some
industrial groups, poor internal collaboration, stalled decision making, or political factors).

Payments and Securities Clearance, Settlement, and Depositories
The World Bank has played a pioneering role in promoting the modernization of payment systems,
highlighting the need to integrate securities settlement within the overall payments framework, and
contributing to the formulation, implementation, and dissemination of global standards on financial
infrastructure. The World Bank played a unique role in reflecting emerging-market perspectives
to standards setters, thus enabling the standards to be globally applicable, and in undertaking
assessments against these standards through the FSAP process.

In successive regions (starting with the Western Hemisphere Initiative, followed by the Arab Payments
Initiative, and others) the World Bank supported the building of regional knowledge forums as
institutions that brought together regional regulators in the payments area and created momentum for
peer learning and the cross-fertilization of ideas. Regional forums led to country-level diagnostics and
were followed by projects for systems enhancement.

Interventions at the level of individual countries usually focused on sound and efficient payment
systems overall that reduced systemic risk and increased efficiency, especially through projects on
the legal framework for payments, oversight, and “real-time gross settlement” (RTGS) systems. To
the extent that securities clearance and settlement were a focus, the emphasis was generally on
government and public securities, because of their use as collateral in intraday liquidity facilities, and
not primarily for capital market development per se. Such designs often reflected the limited overall
capital market development of many client countries.

Most such projects appear to have been well designed, reflecting preceding diagnostic work, often
through FIRST or FSAP recommendations. The World Bank was able to adjust the relevance of its
designs over time and across countries to maintain its relevance in different country contexts. Long-
term engagement helped. Documents provide limited evidence on outputs or outcomes; most, but



                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   xxi
not all, appear anecdotally to have achieved desired outputs. It is difficult to capture outcomes such
as risk reduction or increases in efficiency. Delivery of technical assistance and legal and regulatory
advice was reputedly of high caliber, though the extent of its uptake was sometimes unclear.

Financing the Real Sector
Infrastructure Finance
Although the Bank Group provided advisory support for the use of capital markets instruments in
infrastructure financing, its direct support to capital markets transactions in its own operations has
been more limited in the move toward more holistic public-private partnership (PPP) frameworks.

Specific operational support to infrastructure finance through project bonds or bond guarantees has
been limited. The noticeable decline in the offer of World Bank bond guarantees for infrastructure
may reflect difficulties with project finance in the wake of the global financial crisis.

Support for the development of capital markets–based infrastructure finance has been most evident
in the broad-based bond market advisory services of the Bank Group, notably the ESMID and, more
recently, the “Deep Dive” programmatic initiatives. These programs have tried to bring together the
multiple elements of bond market development, institutional investor involvement, and the creation of
PPP frameworks, to support project finance with capital market involvement, with some recent success.

The Environment and Other Priorities: Green Bonds and Theme Bonds
Bank Group Treasuries have directly supported other priority sectors of activity through the issue of
dedicated “thematic” bonds. Such bond issues “ring-fenced” suitable ongoing and new investments,
and helped to showcase and win support for the substantial portfolio of Bank Group work in this area.
However, they do not lead to incremental funding, because these issues are integrated with overall
Bank Group funding arrangements, with no noticeable difference in funding costs or terms. However,
these programs attracted new investor classes and diversified the Bank Group funding base.

The Bank Group was not the first IFI to issue green bonds, and has not been the largest. In fact,
it now accounts for only a tenth or so of the global green bond market. Although the Bank Group
has rapidly come to account for only a modest share in global green bond issues, it has played an
important catalytic role, especially through its assistance in the development of the Green Bond
principles, where it once again leveraged its convening power to define a new global asset class. In
IFC’s other theme bonds, the Banking on Women bonds and the Inclusive Business bonds, the “ring-
fencing” structuring was identical to that of the Green bonds.

IBRD also made innovative contributions through its catastrophic risk bond; a creative structure
for insurance against natural disaster, as well as through its Treasury management services for the
Vaccine Alliance, GAVI’s “vaccine bonds,” including the innovative sukuk.

Program Funding and Sustainability
World Bank Funds and Trust Funds
The future sustainability of capital markets work requires stable funding. Although the finance and
private sector development program maintained or even increased its share of overall funding within
the World Bank’s budgetary environment, this reflected a disproportionately high and growing


xxii     The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Overview
reliance on trust funds. The capital markets segment of work was more reliant on external funding
than the finance and private sector development network as a whole.

Besides World Bank–executed Trust funds, however, the finance and private sector development
network and, especially, the capital markets practice, made use of funding from additional
unconventional sources normally classified as World Bank budget: externally financed outputs and
reimbursable advisory services. In addition, the capital markets practice (and especially the bond
market segment) enjoyed funding from GEMLOC, which has now come to an end. The FIRST trust
fund has been a prominent funding source, together with a limited number of large donors, who have
financed the ESMID program and will fund the next wave of bond market work.

Though the high level of external funding suggests commendable donor and partner support for the
significance and quality of the work undertaken, it has consequences for the coherence and quality
of the work program. The country-led and fragmented model of submission of demand for support
to programs such as FIRST, which have been a major funding source for advisory work, led to an
opportunistic pattern of engagement.

Knowledge Management
A key characteristic of the capital markets program is its knowledge intensity. Although conventional
assessment was hampered by limited evaluative evidence, failure to maintain and file core
documentation has also been a factor. This failure also limits knowledge sharing and learning, both
internally and vis-à-vis clients. Just 40 percent of World Bank AAA, on average, has all the required
core documentation, though results for IFC are better. If knowledge sharing and learning are core
institutional goals, this is a first area to be remedied.

Related to these issues is the only partial availability, in the Bank Group’s databases, of financial
market information. IEG’s comparison of FinDebt and Bloomberg suggested that the former do not
adequately capture the information needed to track World Bank programs.

Quality and Coordination
Finally, available evidence suggests better than average overall program quality, measured against
the Bank Group’s averages, according to many, if not all, measures. This is largely corroborated by
IEG’s country case studies. Strategic engagement with the client was good in most countries, and
clients were largely appreciative of work quality, though process sometimes remains an issue. Internal
coordination varied considerably across different parts of the portfolio, from best practice to mixed,
where scope for improvement remains.



Conclusions and Recommendations: What Worked, What Didn’t,
and What’s Next?
Making Strategic Choices
Both IFC and the World Bank took the right strategic choices with regard to many broad directions
over the past decades. One critical question was whether or not to “sequence” market-based finance



                                                            Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   xxiii
after banking. Both IFC and the World Bank decided to support capital market development in
tandem with overall financial reform, a decision later supported by empirical research, which did not
favor either a bank-led or market-led model.

The World Bank’s attention to local currency government bond market development began in the
aftermath of the Asian crisis, as recognition of the importance of local currency government borrowing
grew, and its GEMLOC program responded. IFC’s early support for emerging market asset classes
proved pioneering, as was its contribution toward the building of investability indices in these assets.
As markets matured and private players emerged, the Bank Group emphasized areas of a public
good nature or where catalytic frontier market support was needed. Thus IFC moved attention away
from public stock markets as “equitization” receded, and toward private equity for small businesses
and the development of local fund managers. Today as low-income countries graduate from IDA, new
emphasis on local bond market development is needed for their domestic resource mobilization.

These early decisions were in line with the Bank Group’s aims of development support, especially
for public sector management and also for smaller enterprises. The costs of the traditional model of
being a “public, listed company,” are inherently too high for most small businesses.

Thus the Bank Group followed broadly correct strategic directions at critical points. And several
aspects of its program of interventions have been innovative: (ranging from several first-time and
unusually structured local currency issues of both IFC and IBRD Treasuries, its three-pronged self-
financing GEMLOC program for building government bond markets, some of IFC’s securitization
programs, its insurance-related “CAT” or catastrophic risk bonds), displaying global leadership and
convening power (as in the Green Bond principles and contributions to standards-setting for financial
infrastructure). Yet today, at a more detailed level, there is room for improvement in certain areas, and
for a more coherent program for capital market support across its elements.

Coordinating Across Program Areas
Driven in part by its funding model, and possibly reflecting the Bank Group’s partial strategic
underpinning for capital market development for most of the review period, capital market
development at the country level has sometimes been a patchwork of interventions. Even at a
broader level, links across key related segments of interventions have surprisingly failed to develop.
Thus while the Capital Markets group at the Finance and Markets anchor has had a strong program
for developing client countries’ bond markets, the local currency bond market development program
undertaken by IFC’s Treasury department focused, independently, on a quite different set of
countries. Treasury programs could be more effective if undertaken in tandem with deeper system
reforms for local bond market development. Such an integrated approach was adopted by the
ADB and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Plus Three (ASEAN+3) initiative, and there are
also elements of greater integration today at EBRD; for example, through its diagnostic work, or its
construction of benchmark money-market indices in markets which they aimed to support through
bond issuance (for example, Romania, Russia). Such upstream integration between money market
development and bond market development has been rare, although not unknown (for example,
Colombia, Morocco), at the Bank Group.



xxiv     The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Overview
Another area that would have benefitted from greater program integration has been the linkage
between insurance and pensions projects so that their potential role as institutional investors
contributing toward capital market development could be better captured. Although at an analytic
level the knowledge of these linkages and how they could be captured has been well known to
the Bank Group’s staff, in practice, this knowledge usually did not transfer to most operations in
these areas. One exception has been the initiative in Colombia to invest in infrastructure bonds. In
this context, some countries’ experiences with suitable investment vehicles, such as the Mexican
certificates of capital development (CCDs), largely held by Mexican pension funds, and Peruvian
infrastructure debt trust funds, are of interest. More broad-based menus of investment, that help to
optimize returns but nevertheless safeguard the funds of investors, are needed.

Sequencing and Clustering of Reforms
In most countries, the Bank Group engaged in dialogue on a broad front in capital market areas, and
the sequencing of interventions was not a major issue. But in some cases, where engagement was
demand driven and highly specific, it was not possible to achieve effectiveness, because the program
did not span important linked areas. One example was the corporate bond market work in India, in
which Bank outputs, though thorough and cognizant of the interrelation between government and
corporate bond market development, could have had greater overall impact had the dialogue also
spanned the government securities market.

Issues concerning the interrelationship between government and corporate bond markets are of
importance to the Bank Group, and it appears that early emphasis on the former, through vehicles
such as the GEMLOC program, is now giving way to greater emphasis on corporate bonds, for
example through the Deep Dive initiative, and eventually, to transactions support; for example, in
the area of infrastructure project bonds, as in Colombia. Countries point out that the Bank Group’s
“honest broker” role in addressing issues in the enabling environment, and not the transactional
support, per se, has been its most important contribution. Although recognition of and support to
project bonds is very important, care may be needed to maintain, as necessary, an arms-length
relationship between the policy and advisory support on the one hand, and transaction support on
the other, benefitting from IFC’s capabilities of translating policy into practice.

Adapting Advice to Country and Global Needs
International best-practices methods are an important benchmark but may not be optimal for every
country. In some instances, projects proposed the adoption or adaptation of developed capital
market solutions to smaller, less developed capital markets, which were not ready for such solutions.
Risk-based supervision procedures are currently viewed as international best practices, yet the
stage of market development in the West Bank and Gaza was far too preliminary to warrant the use
of this technique. Other examples were the introduction of mortgage liquidity facilities in countries
where macroeconomic and financial market conditions may not have had the depth or stability to
ensure their success, or projects to develop equities-based capital markets in countries where there
would be difficulty in finding a sufficient “critical mass” of private companies to issue and list equities.
Such Bank Group projects were “ahead of their time.” Conversely, there may a need to alert the




                                                           Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   xxv
most sophisticated clients to issues associated with products such as credit derivatives, or trading
processes associated with new technologies (for example, high-frequency trading) that can lead to
increased risk.

However, there were also instances of thoughtful adaptation and tailoring of solutions to country
circumstances. In the Europe and Central Asia region, payments systems interventions ranged from
the installation of basic real-time gross settlement systems in countries such as Turkmenistan and
Tajikistan, to others, where the World Bank supported the replacement of such basic systems with
newer generation systems with the additional features of the queuing of transfer orders and intraday
liquidity facilities, resulting in more efficient use of liquidity for real-time settlement.



Recommendation 1
Integrate capital market development within the Bank Group across different
areas of support.
Based on the preceding observations, to strengthen the loose-knit Bank Group strategy toward
capital market development, sometimes fragmented country-level interventions, and missed
opportunities for integration, IEG recommends that the Bank Group:

n   	 Prepare an underlying strategic framework for capital market development that spans all relevant
     elements of market development, from issuers to investors and including market infrastructure, for
     the Bank Group as a whole, and recognizes interlinkages and sets priorities.

n   	 Prepare guidelines for the Bank Group insurance and pensions programs that review, at the
     design stage, issues related to accumulation and asset management—for their own benefit as
     much as for the benefit of capital market development.

n   	 identify a set of countries where programs for IFC’s local currency Treasury bond issuance can
     be paralleled with support from the Capital Markets department to measures for deepening and
     strengthening the selected countries’ local currency bond markets.

n   	 Encourage consideration of enhancements, through the guarantees program, of infrastructure
     bond issuance in PPP approaches.

Using FSAP Diagnostics
A first issue in this regard is the need to improve use of FSAP findings. For a start, the
incorporation of FSAP findings into the work program has been highly reliant on the FIRST trust
fund, and translation into CASs has been a pale reflection of the underlying available knowledge.
Even FIRST-funded projects did not optimize the use of the FSAP; for example only a handful
referred specifically to underlying International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO)
assessments and the extent to which recommended priorities were observed. The FSAP process
could be used not only for the project planning and preparation process, but also to track long-
term project outcomes, especially because project completion reports, prepared soon after project




xxvi       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Overview
closure, are rarely in a position to capture final outcomes. Such linkages have been attempted
in some rare cases, as in Colombia (2014) on the strengthening of Colombia’s self-regulatory
organization framework.



Recommendation 2
Enhance the use of the FSAP instrument to underpin the design of capital
markets interventions.
Given the availability of high-quality diagnostics that could be better used to strengthen the
diagnostic underpinnings of capital market development, following any FSAP, the Global Practice, if
possible together with the relevant country department, should:

n   	 Incorporate FSAP recommendations in the preparation of Systematic Country Diagnostics and
     consider these findings, as appropriate, in Country Partnership Frameworks.

n   	 Establish Bankwide criteria to assess prioritization of FIRST or FSAP follow-up work and identify
     funding for FSAP follow-ups from sources additional to FIRST.

n   	 When successive FSAPs are undertaken, make use of them to track long-term project outcomes.

Generating, Sharing, and Using Knowledge
The Bank Group could further emphasize the development of cutting-edge knowledge work to
underpin future programs in capital markets. One example here is in the use of new technology for
funding options for small businesses. There is need for continued innovation in this area, even as new
digital financing models such as FinTech gain ascendance. IFC correctly moved away from the public
listed company model, which is not viable for small enterprises. However, private equity or venture
capital business does not represent an alternative small-company listing model, because such firms
rarely exit with an IPO. Today, local over-the counter trading platforms, crowdfunding, B2B trading
platforms, or startup nurseries that focus on private equity or venture capital investors, may better
serve small business needs. This is just one example of an area to explore; others must be explored if
the Bank Group is to maintain a reputation as an innovator and not just a replicator in this field.

For the Bank Group to be able to provide cutting-edge knowledge, and to continue to innovate
and maintain relevance, it needs to strengthen its learning culture and practices. There are
basic concerns relating to the systematic maintenance of documentation, and the setting of
better standards for self-evaluation in advisory services. The absence of documents—especially
downstream documents—hampers the extent to which lessons can be drawn or shared. As IEG
illustrates, procurement documents proliferate in project files where final reports are missing or only
available in local languages. Downstream documents are less commonly available than concept
notes, for which upstream clearances are required.

Data issues also affect the capital markets program. Although significant steps have been taken to
compile and standardize information available in databases such as FinDebt, it still falls short of what




                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   xxvii
is needed to monitor core program areas, for example, local currency bond market development.
IEG’s comparison of FinDebt information with that available from external vendors and country data
sources suggested shortfalls in core areas.

The Global Practice could make better use of its knowledge repository to enable access to
information on areas of common interest, through routine best-practice notes. For example, projects
on covered bonds have been undertaken in Brazil, India, Morocco, and Turkey, with few exchanges
of information (though in India, IFC staff introduced clients to the Turkish and European models).
Demutualization has been another topic of widespread interest in Costa Rica, India, Kenya, Morocco,
Nigeria, and Sri Lanka. A synthesis of experience would be of value. In the same vein, dissemination
is important, not only through written notes but also through convening events that bring together
clients across countries—as in the GEMLOC Peer Group Dialogues. Systematic maintenance and
publication of findings of such proceedings are also suggested.



Recommendation 3
Strengthen knowledge management within the capital markets area and
develop a frontier global knowledge program.

n   	 Implement and monitor service standards for maintenance of document repositories, data
     collection, and program monitoring and evaluation, including databases for capital market
     monitoring.


n   	 Ensure the write-up and cross-country dissemination of findings on priority topics, identified by
     the Global Practice Groups (for example, on GEMLOC peer group dialogues, or on frequently
     recurring themes such as demutualization).


n   	 Deepen the knowledge base both at a country and at a global level, to ensure that Bank Group
     knowledge is at the cutting edge and provides intellectual leadership.

Tailoring Funding to Program Sustainability
Future program sustainability at present rests precariously upon the adequate and consistent
availability of an array of trust funds and other sources, such as reimbursable advisory services.
Should funding cease, not necessarily because of weak performance but as a result of changes
in donors’ priorities, program sustainability becomes a concern, as the funding of GEMLOC has
demonstrated. Such funding models may have contributed to the opportunistic and sometimes
incoherent pattern of interventions across countries, as well as, in some cases, within countries.

To some degree this vulnerability has been addressed by new features of the FIRST program for
programmatic funding, allowing a longer time horizon within a country. However the new features
do not address questions of completeness of coverage, or choices across countries, or limiting
assistance to countries that do not meet preconditions for sustainability. GEMLOC country-level
technical assistance was also fragmented. Although new programs such as ESMID and the Deep


xxviii     The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Overview
Dive take a holistic view of capital markets segments in a given country, questions as to country
selection criteria remain. Clear criteria to ensure fairness and transparency across countries are
merited.

Finally, care must be taken, within such funding models, to safeguard the attention to global
programs, global engagement, and research, if the Bank Group is to provide knowledge leadership
and move toward the role of being an innovator rather than replicator of country-level programs.

Vulnerability of global programs under country-driven models is an issue.



Recommendation 4
Review funding sources available for capital market development and their
impact upon program design.

n   	 Provide stable sources of funding for core global and country capital markets programs that
     balance internal and external sources and allow the Bank Group to respond to its priorities.


n   	 Apply transparent and uniform criteria for country and program selection for new and continuing
     trust fund programs.

Beyond the Present Report: Extending the Analysis
Finally it must be recognized that the present report does not attempt to holistically cover all potential
sources of long-term development finance, and has limited itself to capital markets finance only.
Although the report has alluded, in some places, to the impact of the banking system upon capital
market development, a more complete treatment would require the development of a comprehensive
perspective on different sources of long-term finance—and on the role of the Bank Group’s
interventions, for example, vis-à-vis development finance banks. These areas are still to be evaluated.




                                                         Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   xxix
     1
                 highlights




  Context,       1     IEG’s evaluation comes at a juncture when

Scope, and             long-term finance is at the core of the

 Approach              development agenda.




                 2     Financial sector deepening and capital market

                       development spur growth and poverty

                       alleviation.




        Results
              3 and   Performance
                 Financial                           of the
                           sector strategies at the World

                World       Bank Group 2015
                 Bank Group alluded to the importance of

                       capital markets, though only recently, at IFC,
                                        An Independent Evaluation
                       acknowledging the interrelation between

                       market segments.




                 4     The central question is the relevance,

                       effectiveness, and efficiency of the Bank

                       Group’s support to clients’ capital markets for

                       financial and real sector development and the
                                                               Careful observation and
                       reduction of poverty and inequality.
                                                    analysis of program data
                                                      and the many issues
                                                      impacting program
                                                      efficacy reveals what


                 5     The evaluation portfolio covers

                       of capital market development
                                                          all as
                                                      works   segments
                                                      could work better. The
                                                         and includes
                                                      knowledge
                                                                 well as what

                                                                   gleaned isat
                                                      valuable to all who strive
                                                      to ensure
                       least 1,071 interventions across          that World
                                                          64 countries.
                                                      Bank goals are met and
                                                      surpassed.




                               Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group       1
                                         6
                                                  Although FSAPs provided a fairly rich basis of

                                                  diagnostic work for such interventions, albeit

                                                  with a decline over time in some areas, FSAPs

                                                  were reflected in, at best, half of the follow-up

                                                  interventions.




                                         7
                                                  Country program reflection of support for

                                                  FSAP-related guidance to capital market

                                                  development was variable, with strong

                                                  support in certain countries, and almost no

                                                  reflection of FSAP findings in others.




2                                                                  Chapter 1
    The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Management Action Record
Capital Markets and the Current Development Agenda

T h i s e va luat i o n o f t h e Wo r l d B a n k G r o u p ’s contributions toward capital

market development in client countries comes at a strategic juncture when the Bank Group’s

commitments to mobilizing long-term financial resources to meet development needs have grown

increasingly prominent in the “finance for development” dialogue, as witnessed by the Bank Group’s

umbrella report to the G201 on Long-Term Investment Financing for Growth and Development (2013);

statements of the G20 Investing in Infrastructure Working Group (2014) and the 2015 Addis Ababa

Action Agenda. Donor support, as well as long-term bank finance, are both limited. Capital markets

complement bank finance, helping households and firms to better manage risks associated with

long-term investments. The development of corporate and project bonds is itself predicated upon

the development of government securities markets that provide benchmarks for private sector bond

issues. As recognized after the Asian crisis, and reaffirmed today, as low-income countries graduate

from IDA, deep and liquid domestic government debt markets enable governments to finance their

fiscal deficits without exposure to currency risks associated with foreign borrowing, and at lower cost,

thereby helping finance development. Well-functioning capital markets, properly managed, cushion

poverty-inducing crises. As an integral part of the financial framework, capital markets help finance

growth and thereby alleviate poverty.


Major Elements of Capital Markets and the Scope of the Present
Evaluation
Capital markets comprise both public sector and private corporate issuers, who issue a range of
securities instruments: bonds, or fixed-income securities; stocks or equities; and bundles of claims
such as mortgage-backed securities. They have maturities of more than a year, and are largely held
by investors such as insurance and pension funds that need such assets to match their long-term
liabilities. Well-functioning markets require sound market infrastructure—both “soft” aspects such
as laws, regulations, and corporate governance, and “hard” aspects such as systems for trading,
clearance, and settlement.

The Bank Group has activities in all these segments of capital market development. In terms of
issuers and instruments, programs for public bond market support, initiated with the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD),
were gradually extended to encompass the corporate bond market, an area of focus today. The Bank
Group has also undertaken local currency bond issues through its Treasury departments. Attention



                                                        Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   3
to stock market development, though not central to capital markets work at the Bank Group during
the past decade, has been supported largely through interventions on market regulation. IFC also has
numerous private equity investments, which support the financing of small firms and could arguably
exit through the stock market. Support for the development of markets in asset-backed securities, at
the Bank Group, has been undertaken mainly through parts of its housing finance portfolio.

As regards investors, as well as capital markets infrastructure, the Bank Group collectively has
a substantial portfolio in the area of insurance and pensions. IFC directly supported insurance
companies while the World Bank focused on new product development and risk management. In
terms of capital market infrastructure, the Bank Group’s support encompassed both soft aspects,
such as the development of sound regulatory frameworks and good corporate governance, and hard
aspects: payment systems networks, and clearance and settlement arrangements.

Finally, both the World Bank and IFC have made use of capital markets instruments, indirectly
or directly, to finance their own real sector investments, through bond issues and guarantees.
IFC projects across a variety of sectors have introduced structured financing arrangements that
encourage the use of capital market instruments, and both the World Bank and IFC have supported
bond issues for project financing though credit enhancements and guarantees, in addition to
advisory work. Recent Treasury programs provide support for the financing of environment programs
and other areas of social impact investment. IEG has included all of the above in its review, in an
effort to provide a comprehensive picture.2



Bank Group Strategy toward Capital Market Development
IFC and World Bank strategies recognized the importance of developing capital markets (Appendix
1.1). Throughout this review period, IFC made consistent if limited reference to capital market
development, in the context of the importance of local currency financing and the need to support
frontier markets. Its overall strategy, from FY04–07 to its most recent strategy of FY15–17 echoed
these themes. In 2011, for the first time in this period, IFC prepared a detailed and integrated
roadmap that recognized that capital market development requires a full spectrum of agents to
connect low issuance of securities instruments on the supply side with low institutional investment on
the demand side, in the context of supporting institutions and infrastructure.3 It also referred to the
role of capital markets for real sector financing.

At the World Bank, there have been few formal articulations of financial sector strategy; but its most
recent, of March 2007, named capital market development as one of two areas that would receive
special attention. It gave prominence to government bond market instruments, then a major area of
focus, and also recognized the importance of the supply of capital market instruments for institutional
investors, in the context of a joint IFC–World Bank unit. One noteworthy feature of the articulation
of the strategy into the Bank Group’s organizational structure, however, was the separation of the
Capital Markets Development and Corporate Governance service line (mostly involved with developing
instruments and some elements of infrastructure), and the Non-Bank Financial Institutions service line



4        The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 1
(which focused mostly on developing insurance, housing finance, and pension fund markets). In 2015
these service lines were integrated under a single Global Lead. And today, in 2016, the World Bank is
in the process of formulating an updated financial sector strategy.



Capital Markets, Economic Growth, and Poverty Alleviation
A large body of research illustrates a link between financial depth and economic growth. Empirically,
with increasing economic development, countries tend to increase their demand for services
provided by securities markets relative to those provided by banks. Bank-based structures tend
to dominate in the early stages of growth, but the relative importance of banks decreases as
economies develop. Sound financial development can avert instability and incidents of crisis and can
disproportionately benefit the incomes of the poorest. Incidents of economic crisis can have severe
effects on poverty (Ötker-Robe and Podpiera 2013). Safe financial systems thus indirectly support the
twin goals of the Bank Group: reducing poverty and improving the lives of the poorest (Appendix 1.2).
Well-functioning capital markets are an integral part of such financial systems.

The development and expansion of capital markets, like that of all financial markets, has risks but
also brings benefits. Instability, exaggerated by present high levels of leverage, may limit the impact of
financial development on poverty alleviation. Certain technological shifts, new financial contracts, and
the rise of shadow banks bear their own risks. Yet, technology may also bring benefits—such as the
recent rise of new trading platforms for capital for small firms. Capital market development, though
desirable, must be harnessed for safety.4



IEG’s Evaluation of Capital Markets: Objectives, Audience, and
Evaluation Questions
The core purpose of the evaluation is to assess how well the Bank Group supported its client
countries in the development of their capital markets, across the full spectrum of activities that
contribute to the development of such markets. Its audience is the World Bank Group’s Boards of
Directors, followed by Bank Group management and technical staff, and finally, other international
financial institutions (IFIs) and the donor community. Its overarching question is:

n	   Has the Bank Group been relevant, effective, and efficient in supporting the development of its
     client countries’ domestic capital markets to deepen their financial systems, realize real sector
     development, and support the achievement of the Bank Group’s twin goals of poverty alleviation
     and shared prosperity?

The evaluation examines the relevance of objectives and design, effectiveness of outcomes and
impact, and program efficiency. Relevance of objectives refers to the extent to which the Bank
Group’s capital market interventions reflected prevailing financial sector knowledge and diagnostics.
Relevance of design looks at the extent to which intervention focused on the right issues in the




                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   5
Box 1.1 | What Are Capital Markets and What Is the Scope of the IEG Evaluation?

     Capital markets are financial markets for the buying and selling of long-term securities
     instruments. Capital markets provide an interface for allocating capital according to market-
     based pricing of risk and returns. They channel savings toward long-term productive
     investments, helping issuers—companies or governments—to raise long-term capital,
     and long-term investors, such as insurance and pension funds, to hold long-term assets
     and earn returns. Key securities instruments are:

     n	   Bonds or debt instruments that earn investors a regular “coupon,” allowing them to
          become creditors to the issuer;

     n	   Equity instruments or stocks and shares that permit investors to acquire ownership
          of companies and thereby share risk; and

     n	   Bundles of claims, such as asset-backed securities—mortgage-backed securities
          are an example.

     Capital market development needs the right infrastructure to develop, including “soft”
     aspects such as: a solid legal and institutional environment; good corporate governance
     that protects investor rights, especially those of minority shareholders; and “hard” aspects
     of s ound financial infrastructure—including the physical underpinnings of trading systems
     and securities clearance and settlement arrangements. Bank Group interventions have
     supported the development of all these areas: the development of securities instruments,
     long-term investors, and capital market infrastructure. They are all included in the IEG
     evaluation. IEG also reviews the Bank Group’s support for the use of capital markets
     instruments in key sectors of its own operations.

     Capital market instruments are generally deemed to have maturities of at least a year;
     instruments of shorter maturity, known as money market instruments, provide the liquidity
     to support secondary market development, also supported by repos and derivatives. On
     primary markets, issuers of new stocks or bonds sell them to investors via an underwriting
     process. In secondary markets, existing securities are sold and bought among investors
     or traders, on an exchange, or on over-the-counter markets, sometimes intermediated by
     brokers or primary dealers. Liquid secondary markets increase investors’ willingness to
     buy. Stable macroeconomic conditions (low inflation; stable interest rates) are critical for
     capital market development.




6         The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 1
Box 1.1 | What Are Capital Markets and What Is the Scope of the IEG Evaluation?
         (continued)

      Figure 1.1.1     | Capital Markets: Scope of IEG Evaluation


                                  CAPITAL MARKET INFRASTRUCTURE
                                             (Chapter 6)                                                      Soft
                                                                                                              Infrastructure
                                • REGULATION
                                                                                                              Hard




                                                                                                                               Client Countries’ Capital Markets
                                • CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
                                                                                                              Infrastructure




                                                                                                                                 WBG Support for Developing
                                • SECURITIES CLEARANCE AND SETTLEMENT
                                  Other: Creditor Rights, Rating Agencies




                                                           Returns



            INSTRUMENTS/ISSUERS                                                                       INVESTORS




                                                                                                                                                                   IEG Evaluation
                (Chapters 2, 3, 4)                                                                     (Chapter 5)
                                                     Intermediaries

                                                                      Intermediaries




     • BONDS:
       – Sovereign/Treasury (Government)                                               • INSURANCE COMPANIES
       – Corporate bonds (Companies)                                                   • PENSION FUNDS
       – Supranationals (IFIs/MDBs)                                                     Other funds: e.g., mutual funds,
     • EQUITIES/STOCKS:                                                                 sovereign wealth funds
       (Firms/Businesses)
     • ASSET-BACKED SECURITIES
     • MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES


                                                         Investment
                                                                                                                               Capital Market Instruments in
                                                                                                                               WBG Support for the Use of

                                                                                                                                    Its Own Operations




              FINANCING THE REAL SECTOR THROUGH CAPITAL MARKET INSTRUMENTS
                                         (Chapter 7)


              Government         Corporations:       Project finance:                    Other real           IFIs/MDBs
             budgets/public      – Risk capital       infrastructure                      sectors
               borrowing            (equity)            Mortgage
                                 – Long-term        finance: housing
                                      debt

 Note: IFI = international financial institution; MDB = multilateral development bank; WBG = World Bank Group.




                                                                                       Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group                                         7
country and sector contexts. IEG evaluates effectiveness in terms of the extent to which the Bank
Group’s interventions achieved their objectives, primary or secondary, relevant to capital market
development, in terms of both immediate outputs and outcomes, for domestic capital market
development or real sector support—and whether these results were sustained over time. Finally,
IEG also examines efficiency, in terms of program funding and sustainability, program monitoring,
tracking, and results measurement, internal and external coordination, and quality control. Given the
heterogeneity of interventions, the evaluation constructs metrics with supplementary questions for
each portfolio area (Table 1.1).


TABLE 1.1    | E
                xamples of Supplementary Evaluative Questions Specific to Individual
               Areas of World Bank Group Support

                   Supplementary Evaluation Questions for Areas Supported by the Bank Group

 Issuers and Instruments: Bonds, Equities, Asset-Backed/Mortgage-Backed Securities

    •	 Did the Bank Group support the development of robust government bond markets that (i) funded public
       borrowing? (ii) reduced funding costs and increased their predictability; (iii) improved liquidity; and (iii) built
       yield curve benchmarks?
    •	 Did the Bank Group help corporate stock and bond markets to meet private sector funding needs?
    •	 Did the Bank Group support securitization, for asset-backed and mortgage-backed securities and other
       capital market housing finance instruments through mortgage liquidity facilities?
    •	 Did the Bank Group’  s programs of Treasury bond issuance of local currency bonds and theme bonds (i)
       help develop clients’ capital markets; and (ii) provide additionality in funding?

    Investors: Insurance Funds, Pension Funds

    •	 Did the Bank Group support the development of insurance and pension systems that would accumulate
       funds for investment in capital markets, and manage their assets to undertake such investments? Did
       the Bank Group support the development of investment rules for these funds that would encourage the
       development of a diversified capital market? Did the Bank Group help to develop funded pension systems,
       with rules conducive to capital market investments?

    Market Infrastructure: Legal and Regulatory Frameworks, Corporate Governance, Payments Systems

    •	 Did the Bank Group help contribute to the preparation or modification of a sound legal and regulatory
       framework for securities?
    •	 Did the Bank Group effectively support the improvement of corporate governance for listed companies in
       terms of protecting the rights of minority shareholders, and more transparent appointments of boards of
       directors?
    •	 Did the Bank Group effectively support the development of sound systems for securities clearance and
       settlement, shortening elapsed time to settlement, achieving delivery versus payment, and reducing
       counterparty risk?

    Capital Markets and Real Sector Financing in the Bank Group Agenda: Infrastructure and the Environment

    •	 Did the Bank Group support long-term finance of infrastructure projects, environment finance, or other
       areas of the real sector through capital markets instruments?




8           The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 1
The results chain underpinning this evaluation, linking the full spectrum of the Bank Group’s
interventions with outputs and intended outcomes, is illustrated in Figure 1.1. The underlying theory
of change is that all interrelated areas of capital markets and their surrounding environment together
achieve the final output of market strengthening, more robust financial systems, supporting growth,
and the reduction of poverty and inequality.

Evaluation questions were answered largely through a combination of well-accepted methodologies
including: desk reviews of policy and strategy documents; theme- focused portfolio reviews based on
customized questionnaires, and five field visits. Contents were organized using both qualitative and
quantitative methods, organized by cluster, and benchmarked, where possible, against international
standards. The evaluation also incorporated external evidence from other IFIs or multilateral development
banks (MDBs) and data on market evolution from the Bank for International Settlements (BIS),
Bloomberg, Datastream, EMPEA, and other sources, relying on traditional processes of triangulation.




FIGURE 1.1   | Results Chain—Bank Group Support to Capital Markets: Activities,
               Outputs, and Outcomes
        Assumptions: Macroeconomic Stability, Competition, Political Commitment, Other External Factors


         Inputs/Activities                                     Outputs                                   Outcomes
    Bank Group interventions that                       Achievement of results                          Capital market
      support capital markets                    with regard to the identified activities               strengthening


  Helping the development                 • Liquid government debt markets, extended yield            • More long-term
  of capital markets Instruments            curve, lower funding costs; more benchmark issues;          funding
  (Bonds: Government Treasuries,          • Eased corporate bond issuance and more liquid               availability for
  Corporate bonds; Stocks/Equity;           corporate bond markets;                                     governments,
  Asset-Backed Securities/                • More firm-level access to private equity, entry of new      corporations,
  Mortgage-backed Securities);              domestic investors in private equity;                       and projects
  enabling Issuers to use capital         • More corporate public listing, greater liquidity and        needing long-
  markets instruments to meet               trading, reduced risk;                                      term finance.
  long-term financing needs.              • Better market for asset-backed/mortgage-backed            • Better resource
                                            securities, especially for housing finance;                 allocation, price
                                          • Greater access to capital market finance for                discovery, and
  Enable capital markets Investors:         brownfield and greenfield projects;                         efficiency in
  insurance funds, pension funds,         • Increased and eased local currency bond issuance,           financial
  to earn better returns on their           following IFIs, more investors, longer maturities.          intermediation.
  assets and match their long-term                                                                      Deeper and
  liabilities against assets held in                                                                    more liquid
  capital market instruments              • Strengthened regulatory environment for insurance           financial
                                            and better long-term funding, diversified investment;       markets
                                          • Multi-pillar funded pension systems that invest in        • Safer and
  Building better capital markets           domestic capital markets.                                   better-regulated
  Infrastructure: legal and regulatory                                                                  financial systems,
  frameworks, better corporate            • Sound legal and regulatory infrastructure for capital       reduced
  governance for listed companies           markets;                                                    instability.
  and exchanges, sound payments           • Reduced risk and shortened time in securities             • Greater financial
  and securities clearance and              clearance and settlement, reduced counterparty risk;        depth and
  settlement systems                      • Improved minority shareholder protection.                   resilience

                                                             Impacts
                          Deeper and More Robust Financial Systems, Economic Growth, Reduction of Poverty




                                                                     Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group         9
Challenges were faced: about half to three-fourths of interventions were advisory services and for many
interventions, capital market development was of secondary or indirect relevance. Netting out the 295
IFC private equity funds, three-quarters of the remainder consisted of advisory services. Just a quarter
had IEG evaluation notes, with no IEG micro-evaluative coverage of the 476 World Bank advisory and
analytical activities (AAA) (Appendix 1.3). Even on the investments and lending side, there was limited
evaluative material.5 An additional challenge was that activities such as insurance, pensions or housing
provided indirect, or secondary, support to capital market development. IFC investments (e.g., private
equity funds) had capital market development as, at best, a secondary objective. IEG consulted the
Bank Group’s sector staff to screen out the least relevant interventions and then undertook its own
project screening, to identify the most relevant for capital market development.

Portfolio Identification and Country Selection
The evaluation covers Bank Group operational interventions that have supported the development of
key segments of capital markets over the eleven year period (FY04–14); that is, before, during and after
the financial crisis. In some areas, the evaluation went further back.6 These especially include Country
Assistance Strategies (CASs) and Country Partnership Strategies (CPSs) and FSAPs that were initiated
before the evaluative period, but were relevant to the years of the evaluation. Project selection was based
on a succession of filters, beginning with World Bank and IFC system codes for sectors and themes,
supplemented by word searches, screening of project objective statements, and, finally, consultations
with the Bank Group’s staff in relevant thematic areas. The identified portfolio thus included 1,071
interventions, amounting to 3.7 percent of World Bank AAA activities, 1.4 percent of World Bank lending,
and averaging 2.9 percent of all World Bank interventions. The reviewed portfolio includes the Bank
Group’s interventions across at least 64 countries (Appendix Tables A1.1 and A1.2).

In many market segments (corporate governance, housing, insurance, pensions, payments, private
equity) all observations were reviewed. In select segments (bond markets, capital market regulation),
principal clusters of observations were reviewed—50 out of 100 projects in bond markets; 10
countries with at least three interventions each for capital market regulation and development, and
20 countries with at least two interventions for FSAPs and CASs. About two-thirds of country-
focused projects reviewed were in just 25 countries.7 Only nine of these countries are in the G20 and
belong to the Financial Stability Board. Case study countries had additional purposive elements: no
more than one country per continent, inclusion of countries at all income levels, and a high level of
representation in the IEG portfolio. The countries selected were Colombia, India, Kenya, Morocco,
and Vietnam. Over time, there was a mild trend increase, with some 90 projects per year in the first
half of the period, and about 100 per year in the latter half. As in global markets, the Bank Group’s
intervention rose in areas such as bond markets and private equity, while housing, corporate
governance, and public stock markets showed some, though not significant, decline.



Analytic Underpinning in FSAPs: A Diagnostic Approach
As a prelude to the examination of the Bank Group’s capital markets portfolio, the present chapter
reviews the extent to which there was an adequate and in-depth diagnostic foundation for such


10       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 1
interventions. These were undertaken mainly through the joint IMF/World Bank FSAPs. The chapter
also reviews the extent to which FSAPs underpinned the Bank Group’s actual interventions, as
reflected in country strategies, and whether they were reflected in work programs.

IEG’s review of 39 FSAPs in 20 countries finds that coverage of most areas relevant to capital market
development received reasonable even if diminishing coverage.8 The FSAP review included specific
annexes relevant to capital markets that accounted for 75 out of 192 annexes written on such topics.9

Specialized FSAP annexes on topics relevant to capital markets declined in frequency in the second
half of the review period, from 49 to 28, and also relative to all annexes. Declines were especially
noticeable in the areas of insurance and pensions. Overall capital market annexes and annexes on
public debt altered little. All FSAPs provided significant commentary on macroeconomic stability
and the financial environment. Most countries with several Bank Group capital markets interventions
had relatively stable macro environments. One country (Morocco) had a significant improvement
in its macroeconomic outlook—and an accelerated Bank Group intervention in capital markets. In
Colombia, where the World Bank had a significant series of interventions, the FSAP had pronounced
that the macroeconomic environment was appropriately prudent, favorable, and improving. However,
in Kenya, which also had significant interventions, and initial macroeconomic conditions appeared
favorable, the outlook deteriorated after the crisis but there was little discussion in the 2011 FSAP of
the impact of this factor on the program. A few Bank Group interventions occurred in countries with
a less conducive macro environment. For all 20 countries reviewed, IEG scored countries according
to the quality of the macroeconomic environment as well as changes over time, on a 10-point scale.
Some, such as Bangladesh and Nigeria, were in the lowest range, with a score of 3.3, in the earlier
period, and Azerbaijan, Ghana, and Kazakhstan remained at 5.0 or below.

In terms of the overall financial environment, market determination of interest rates was only
discussed explicitly in 10 of the 39 sampled FSAPs. FSAP assessments of financial sector soundness
in the 20 sampled countries broadly improved during the review period under review. Of the 16
countries that had more than one FSAP during the period, 13 saw improvement in the assessments
over time while only one, Pakistan, saw deterioration.

Many areas covered in this evaluation received near-universal coverage in FSAPs, especially from
a regulatory perspective (public bond market development, securities regulation and supervision,
payments systems). As many as 22 FSAPs recommended a change in investment policies for
pension funds; eight in broad terms (suggesting more diversification or liberalization of investment
guidelines) and another eight specified increased investments in nongovernment, corporate
securities. In insurance, aside from industry structure, regulatory frameworks, or supervisor capacity,
there were significant discussions of issues relating to the solvency of firms and risk management.
Seven FSAPs explicitly suggested more diversification and greater flexibility in investments.10

Despite rich diagnostics, follow-up interventions only referred to FSAPs a quarter of the time, on
average. However, the ratio increases to about half for follow-up lending and for technical assistance
under the FIRST program. For the 20 countries for which FSAPs and CASs were reviewed, IEG
examined post-FSAP follow-up interventions in the five years after the date of the FSAP, and



                                                         Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   11
TABLE 1.2    |  FSAP Follow-up in IEG’s Capital Markets Portfolio: Advisory and Lending
               Services

                 WB AAA	FIRST TA or Advisory	                                                    WB Lending


                             F o l l o w Total                     Follow          Total         Ref to Follow            Total
                 Ref to      FSAP in AAA in            Ref to      FSAP in         FIRST in      FSAP FSAP in 5           Lending in
 Countries       FSAP        5 years Country           FSAP        5 years         Country              years             County


  Total 20
  countries	12	 92	 142	 13	                                            27	            40	 19	 36	 46


Source: IEG; Appendix Table A2.1.

Note: AAA = analytic and advisory activities; FSAP = Financial Sector Assessment Program; TA = technical assistance; WB = World Bank.




examined each follow-up, to see whether a reference was made to the preceding FSAP (Table
1.2). Of the total of 155 interventions that occurred within five years of an FSAP, only 44 referred to
the preceding FSAP. The majority of AAA, however, appeared unrelated to the FSAP (13 percent
reference rate). These results are unsurprising, and they illustrate the dependence of the FSAP follow-
up on the FIRST trust fund, sometimes as a stepping stone contributing to the design phase of an
eventual lending project. Results varied considerably across countries. In two out of 20 countries,
there was no identifiable follow-up, and in another eight countries, only one. Yet in five out of 20
countries, there were between four and six follow-up interventions.



Reflection of Capital Markets Issues in Country Strategies and
Country Programs
IEG’s analysis of 46 country assistance and partnership strategies (CAS/CPS) in the same countries
found a high rate of allusion to FSAPs, though not necessarily linked to the work program (Table 1.3).
Although almost 80 percent of CAS/CPS documents referenced FSAPs, these references could be in
the context of the past, current, or future work program. Only a few, like Brazil and Kenya, offered clear
connective references.11 Whereas overall support to the financial sector was consistently expressed,
support was lower and more variable for capital market development (Appendix Tables A1.4 and A1.5).
For the financial sector as a whole, more than half the reports (34 out of 46) received high scores.
By contrast only 15 out of 46 documents received a high score for areas related to capital markets
development. Over time, scores for both overall financial sector support as well as specific support
for capital markets–related themes declined, with a greater drop in the latter category. Bond market
development, together with all forms of capital market infrastructure, received the highest and most
sustained scores (market regulation and development, as well as corporate governance and payments
systems). Stock market development received the lowest score (Appendix Table A1.5).




12          The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 1
TABLE 1.3    | FSAP References in Country Assistance Strategy Documents: Timeframe of
               Delivery and Nature of Reference

                                    Timeframe of FSAP Del.	Description FSAP Reference




                                                                                                                                                                          of work program
                                                                                                                                                       banking or other
                                                                                                       Mentions capital



                                                                                                                                    mentions capital




                                                                                                                                                                          References part
                                                                                                                                                       areas of finance
                                                    Concurrent with




                                                                                                                                    market relevant
                                                                            Forthcoming
                                     Prior to CAS




                                                                                          No mention




                                                                                                                                                                                            No mention
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Total




                                                                                                                                    Selectively




                                                                                                                                                       Refers to
                                                                                                                          markets




                                                                                                                                    areas
                                                                            FSAP
                                                                      CAS




                                                                                                                                                                          only
 Country Name

  Total 20 countries 	              30	                      16	               5	         13	                 11	                          3	               15	                22	          13	64

Source: Appendix Table A1.5, IEG.




IEG’s country case studies corroborate the variation in use of FSAPs and their incorporation in
country work programs. In Morocco, there was a high degree of congruence between FSAPs and
the financial sector work program. The 2008 FSAP documented the need to develop a benchmark
yield curve, with recommendations for the capital markets and insurance regulators.12 These issues
were reflected in the 2010 Sustainable Access to Finance development policy loan and supported
by the Global Emerging Markets Local Currency Bond Program (GEMLOC) and FIRST advisory
interventions. Morocco’s FY10–13 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), underpinning this operation,
made explicit reference to strengthening the role of capital markets: improved liquidity of the
benchmark yield curve was a program outcome. In Kenya, too, there was consistency between the
FSAP analyses and the actual country program in the financial sector. In Colombia, the FSAP was
influential for most of the period reviewed.

By contrast, although India’s two FSAPs of 2001 and 2013 had a significant focus on capital markets
development, this was only slightly reflected in its CAS and CPS documents, and congruence fell
over time. World Bank support for capital markets declined in importance during the evaluation
period. References to the financial sector moved away from the FSAPs and toward the challenges
of financial inclusion. World Bank interventions in the capital markets area grew piecemeal, with
fragmentary technical contributions in selective niches.

Vietnam had little opportunity to reflect its FSAP in its early capital markets program because its first
FSAP was undertaken in 2012/13. Vietnam’s early CAS documents also made no reference to work in
this area. The 2002 CAS referred to a division of responsibilities with the ADB, under which the ADB
would support the nonbank financial sector, and the World Bank would focus on the banking system.
It also referred to a Financial Sector Assessment, to be completed jointly with ADB in FY03. The 2007
CPS stated that an FSAP was planned for the period between 2007 and 2011. However, neither took
place and the subsequent CPSs do not state why.




                                                                                                        Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group                                                      13
FSAPs and Country Strategies: A Summary of Findings
FSAPs provided a rich source of guidance for the Bank Group’s capital markets interventions in
virtually all areas, despite some decline over time. There were, however, some minor gaps: Kenya’s
2011 FSAP did not discuss its crisis-affected macro environment or how it could affect financial
markets. A number of FSAPs were silent on the interest rate environment, critical for capital markets.
And money market discussions, and links thereof to bond market development, were variable. Bank
Group interventions did not necessarily heed the FSAP; for example, it had programs of capital
markets work even in less favorable macroeconomic environments.

FSAPs were referred to in follow-up interventions in the capital markets areas about half the time in
lending operations and FIRST-financed advisory work. A large spectrum of AAA was unrelated to
FSAP findings. There was striking variation across countries, with four to six follow-on interventions in
a quarter of the countries, but none or only one in about half. In the 46 country strategy documents
related to the 20 countries examined, during the relevant period, there were 64 mentions of FSAPs,
but only 14 referred to capital market–related areas. And only 15 out of 46 CASs and CPSs received
a high IEG score for mentions of capital market–related areas.

IEG’s country-level review of linkages between FSAPs, country strategies, and the work program
reinforce the finding of highly variable linkage. In Morocco there was considerable congruence
between the FSAP and the work program; and in Kenya, there was conscientious follow-up. In
Colombia the FSAPs had provided a rich overall context for its securities markets for most of the
review period, though recent references are more selective. By contrast, FSAPs in India had little,
and diminishing, influence on dialogue in this area. In Vietnam, the seeds of the Bank Group capital
market development program were sown even in the absence of an FSAP, largely at the behest of the
country government and seemingly unbeknownst to the Vietnam country strategy. However, closer
parallels are now emerging.

E ndnotes

1
     he G20 is made up of the finance ministers and central bank governors of 19 countries—Argentina, Australia, Brazil,
    T
    Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, South
    Korea, Turkey, the United Kingdom, the United States of America—and the European Union.

2
    S
     ome potentially relevant areas have been omitted: for example, IBRD Treasurers’ advice on the management of
    sovereign wealth funds, or Bank Group work on mutual funds. Market intermediaries have not been separately
    reviewed; nor have certain market building blocks: derivative instruments, money markets or repurchase agreements.
    In market infrastructure, the evaluation omits corporate insolvency and creditor rights.

3
    The strategy is described in an internal PowerPoint presentation.

4
     oes financial development help the poor through better resource allocation and more information—or, conversely,
    D
    does it inordinately help the rich, because the poor rely mostly on informal networks? World Bank–supported and
    external research leans toward the former—in countries with stable financial systems. See Clarke, Xu, and Zhou (2006)
    and Jeanneney and Kpodhar (2008) as well as the IEG Approach Paper for Capital Markets. However, the relationships
    are complex and nonlinear. And studies that isolate the effects of capital markets as a component of the financial
    system, and poverty, are rare.




14           The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 1
5
     Details of the availability of existing evaluative materials are available in Appendix A1.3.

6
     See Attachments 3, 4, and 5 of the Approach Paper to this evaluation.

7
      bout two-thirds of all country-focused projects reviewed were in a handful of 25 countries over the sample period (see
     A
     Attachments 4 and 5 to the Approach Paper).

8
     T
      he countries included all regions and income levels and accounted for almost 60 percent of Bank Group country-
     focused interventions: three in Africa (Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria); three in East Asia (China, Indonesia. Vietnam); four each
     in Eastern Europe (Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Serbia, Turkey) and Latin America (Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Mexico),
     two in the Middle East and North Africa Region, and four in South Asia (Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka).

9
      he six topics which had specialized annexes relevant to capital markets included Public Debt, Pensions, Insurance,
     T
     Payments, and Housing Finance—as well as overall reviews of capital markets issues.

10
     I
     EG’s major evaluation of the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) (IEG 2006b) points out that few FSAPs
     analyzed linkages between sectors. IEG’s present analysis finds some improvement: coverage of capital markets–
     related issues in the pensions sector was higher, at 22 out of 36 FSAPs, though only seven out of 33 FSAPs for
     insurance discussed investment rules.

11
     K
      enya’s FY04–07 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) noted that the design of two financial sector operations reflected
     both FSAP findings and World Bank–country dialogue. Both the FY10–13 and FY14–18 Country Partnership Strategies
     refer to the post-FSAP update. In Brazil, the FY12–15 Country Partnership Strategy refers to an ongoing FSAP that
     would “help with stocktaking and charting the route ahead, as there is consensus that further development of capital
     markets … is fundamental to mobilizing the resources needed to ratchet-up the pace of investment.”

12
      rior to the 2008 FSAP, a capital market surveillance assessment was prepared in 2006 by the International
     P
     Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), and a payments and securities settlement evaluation had been
     undertaken by the Arab Initiative for Payments and Securities Settlement Systems in 2007. These were clearly
     regarded as inputs to the 2008 FSAP and were discussed simultaneously with the authorities.




                                                                         Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group    15
      2
                highlights




 Instruments:   1         The Bank Group has adopted major innovative

Building Bond             and large-scale programs for bond market

      Markets             development, jointly housed under the

                          World Bank and IFC, and highly leveraged by

                          unconventional funding and donor support.




                2         Its flagship Global Emerging Market Local Currency

                          Bond Program (GEMLOC) for government bonds

                          was successful at strengthening government bond

                          markets, notably through the low-cost and effective

                          advisory support of its Peer Group dialogues.




                3
                          GEMLOC’s highly original second and third pillars,

                          the GEMX index and the PIMCO-managed fund

                          for emerging market sovereign bonds, sought

                          to increase the attractiveness of this asset class.

                          Though less successful, they still served useful

                          purposes.




                4         The Efficient Securities Markets Institutional

                          Development program (ESMID) aimed to

                          complement GEMLOC through its focus on

                          corporate and project bonds, offering integrated

                          solutions, from addressing market barriers



 x
 16             The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 2
    to bringing transactions to market. Its legal and

    regulatory agenda has been the most successful,

    with partial success in transactions.




5   Although the ESMID program was unusually broad

    in a number of respects, it is a question whether

    a final purposive focus on individual transactions

    could distract from broader initiatives and prior

    reforms required for the market as a whole. Arguably,

    a conducive environment would itself facilitate

    transactions.




6   Additional Bank Group support is evident at the

    country level, often reinforced by programmatic

    lending and typically, though not invariably,

    underpinned, where available, by FSAP guidance on

    design. In some countries, lack of comprehensive

    dialogue and sustained engagement limited

    effectiveness.




7
    Meanwhile, both IFC and IBRD Treasuries issued

    local currency bonds, mostly offshore, largely for

    funding purposes, but also, in the case of IFC, linked

    to its business needs (local private investment), within



                    Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   17
                                                 its tight constraints for currency exposure, and in

                                                 accordance with its mandate, since 2013, of local

                                                 capital market support.




                                       8         Both Treasuries have undertaken some

                                                 innovative transactions. Programmatic issuance

                                                 is valuable and can help build a yield curve and

                                                 establish an AAA-rated benchmark. Its impact

                                                 in domestic markets depends on relative scale.

                                                 However, positive demonstration effects have

                                                 been claimed in some countries.




                                       9         Experience in other multilateral development

                                                 banks shows that impact can be increased not

                                                 only through programmatic engagement but

                                                 also, as in the European Bank for Reconstruction

                                                 and Development and the Asian Development

                                                 Bank, though more systematic integration of an

                                                 issuance program with advisory work.




18   The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 2
Building Bond Markets: Core Clusters of Operational Interventions

Bond instruments, for fixed-income securities, are the core component of capital market

development, and support to bond markets lies at the heart of the Bank Group’s work for capital

market support. Deep and liquid domestic government debt markets support sound budget

management, strengthen monetary management, and build yield curves that support diversified

funding, especially longer-term funding, for the financial and real sectors.1 Apart from advisory and

technical assistance support by the World Bank’s Finance and Markets anchor (Appendix 2.1),

the Treasury’s debt management group, and regional units, IFC has also invested in bonds issued

by clients, and the Treasury departments of both IBRD and IFC have undertaken local currency

bond issues with the potential of support to client countries’ financial markets.2 The present review




FIGURE 2.1    | Bank Group Bond Market Interventions (FY04–14)—Basic Characteristics

 Total bond market interventions                                                  16
 reviewed	100
 WB lending projects	                          14
                                                                                  14
  Technical assistance / Inv. loans	            4

 Policy Based loans	                           10
                                                                                  12
  Advisory Services (WB/IFC)	                  86

 WB AAA	                                       77
                                                                                  10
                                                        NUMBER OF INTERVENTIONS




  IFC Advisory services	                        9

 Programs - ESMID	                             14                                  8

  Principal projects	                           5

 Supporting projects	                           9                                  6

  Programs - GEMLOC	                           30

 Country level, initial entry	                  9                                  4

  Country level, follow-ups	                    6
                                                                                   2
 Global, initial entry	                         7

  Global, follow-up	                            8
                                                                                   0
 Program - Debt Management	                     9                                      2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Note: AAA=analytic and advisory activities; WB = World Bank.




                                                                                              Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   19
focuses on 100 interventions that were primarily focused on bond market development (Figure 2.1),

acknowledging that components of projects relevant to bond market development may also be

embedded in combination with other areas of capital market work.3


Almost half the interventions were associated with programs under the GEMLOC and Efficient
Securities Markets Institutional Development (ESMID) clusters, and almost half took place at a global
or regional level.4 A third cluster comprised the advisory work on debt market development ancillary to
support for debt management, under the Financial Advisory and Debt Management group (FABDM).
GEMLOC and ESMID relied on unusual financing (discussed in greater detail in Chapter 8) and as
a result, more than half the program of some $20 million during 2004–14 has been financed by just
two external donors, the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) and the Swedish
International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA).5 SIDA has been the principal supporter of
the East Africa programs, while SECO has so far supported the regional Latin America programs, in
Colombia and Peru. In addition, GEMLOC contributed about 20 percent, with another 10 percent from
other donors, and about 2 percent from reimbursable advisory services. Partly as a reflection of the
large-scale ESMID regional programs, projects are skewed in size, with seven projects of more than $1
million, but an average size of the remaining 93 projects of $116,000 (Appendix Table A2.1 to A2.4).

Many projects funded under ESMID and GEMLOC were largely conducted by the Capital Markets group,
now a part of the Finance and Markets Global Practice, a joint IFC/World Bank unit.6 The relatively large
share of projects in the latter half of the evaluated period partly reflects the onset of these programs, and
the consolidation of the joint World Bank/IFC group after 2006. Geographically, low-income countries—
Kenya, Mozambique, Nigeria, and Tanzania—were the biggest program recipients by value.7

Given that the large clusters of programs, GEMLOC and ESMID, account for more than half of the
total number of projects and almost three-fourths of the total value of bond market advisory work,
the following desk-based review first focuses primarily on these two clusters of projects. There is
no previous evaluation of the GEMLOC program; however, major external evaluations have been
undertaken of the ESMID program; IEG draws upon these.8

GEMLOC—Global Emerging Markets Local Currency Bond Market
program
GEMLOC, a joint World Bank/IFC program launched in 2008, was a multipronged initiative that targeted
both improved issuance, increased investment, and improved “investability.” 9 Its three complementary
pillars comprised: i) a private sector–led index (GEMX) that tracked a set of emerging market local
currency sovereign bonds; ii) an investment fund committed to investing in such bonds in GEMLOC
program countries; and iii) advisory services provided by the Bank Group to strengthen local currency
government bond markets in these countries, primarily through three vehicles: peer group dialogues
across countries, country-specific programs, and applied research on relevant topics (Box 2.1).

The 30 GEMLOC projects reviewed were a heterogeneous group. Some were used to finance
program initiation and design.10 They enabled the hiring of the GEMLOC investment fund



20       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 2
Box 2.1 | The Three Prongs of the GEMLOC Program

     GEMX, the private sector–led global index, tracked emerging market local currency
     sovereign government bonds satisfying specified market size and scored against a set of
     investability criteria. The benchmark was maintained by the Markit Group Inc., a private
     sector index provider. Twenty countries were initially eligible for inclusion in the program and
     the benchmark, based on criteria that included measures of capital controls, market access,
     taxation, liquidity, investor base, regulatory quality, and market infrastructure. A portion of
     the revenues Markit obtained by selling data about the index were to be shared with the
     World Bank Group, once Markit had received a specified minimum amount of revenues to
     compensate it for running the index.

     PIMCO, a private investment manager, won the tender to create and offer the new
     investment fund to invest in local currency government bonds of GEMLOC program
     countries, the second arm of GEMLOC. It was established as an open-end fund,
     incorporated in Luxembourg. A portion of the fees, set at 30 basis points of the funds under
     management, were passed to the Bank Group to finance its advisory services
     to included countries. At its formation in 2007, expectations were high that the new
     investment fund managed by PIMCO would gather several billion dollars in assets—up
     to $5 billion was discussed in the press.1 This never happened, because revenues from
     GEMLOC reportedly amounted at most to up to $1 million per year. However, these were
     sufficient to finance the GEMLOC advisory services for its years of operation, leveraged by
     funding from other sources. In the fall of 2015, PIMCO closed the fund because its largest
     investor decided to pull out. Further financing for the Bank Group’s GEMLOC advisory
     services from PIMCO fees thus stopped, though some remains unspent and available for
     continued Bank Group bond market advisory services.

     Advisory Services for GEMX countries were provided through country-specific programs,
     Peer Group dialogues, and applied research on relevant topics (knowledge products), as
     well as conferences and “South-South” collaborations. Topics included market policies,
     regulation, trading, clearing, settlement, and the investor base.

     Sources: GEMLOC website, IEG discussions; http://www.reuters.com/article/2008/02/20/us-worldbank-fund­

     idUSN1929333720080220 and http://www.institutionalinvestor.com/article.aspx?articleID=1916281#.Vc8St3mFPIU.




manager, development of the investability indicators for the GEMX index, and a survey
of relevant policy makers for priority topics.11 The startup projects provided the roadmap,
and identified topics that were eventually the basis of handbooks prepared by the
GEMLOC team.




                                                                    Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   21
GEMLOC’s Peer Group Dialogue discussions provided policy makers with a virtual forum for
sharing expertise on issues related to government bond markets. Topics were innovative and
technical, including, for example, the links between efficient government cash management, target
cash buffers, and bond issuance; issuance practices in domestic public debt, including the use
of syndication; the roles of primary dealers; retail government debt programs; electronic trading
platforms; exchange traded bond funds; as well as topics such as securities lending facilities, repo
markets, and liability management. In the postcrisis period topics also included lessons from the
global crisis and challenges in sterilizing capital inflows. Specialized topics such as sukuk instruments
were also discussed. Client participation was strong. These web-based virtual dialogues promoted
decentralized learning, enabled the World Bank to extend its geographic reach in a cost-effective
manner, and helped it stay continuously abreast of challenges faced by client countries. Peer
Group dialogues were accompanied by background materials and surveys that were later compiled
for reference. Bilateral “South-South” collaboration among some participants also emerged, as
between Brazil and Turkey. Nonetheless, more broad-based attempts to launch online groups
through eCollaborate, to allow more dynamic discussion on Peer Group dialogue topics, with limited
involvement of the World Bank, did not gain traction. The team’s completion note commented that
“one of the challenges of starting and maintaining an online forum (even with an established set of
participants) is that it requires dedicating some resources to populate content when activity is low
and to moderate discussions. We have not been able to do this successfully so far.”12

GEMLOC’s innovations included the design of a new type of Issuer-Driven Bond exchange-traded
fund (I-D ETF), although implementation is yet to occur. The I-D ETF Program’s key innovation was
the active involvement of the issuer to alleviate the main bottlenecks of traditional exchange-traded
funds (ETFs), such as liquidity constraints. It was hoped that the involvement of the issuer would
facilitate efficient tracking, rebalancing, and alignment with development goals. The Completion
Summary pointed out that the team benefitted from the active network of debt managers of more
than 16 countries, as well as leading private sector institutions. The overall development objective
was deemed largely achieved, in terms of the design of a new product.13 A follow-up project in FY15
was designed to implement the pilot I-D ETF program in Brazil. Its peer reviewers stressed the
importance of capturing lessons to identify future likely candidates.

The remaining 13 GEMLOC projects for specific countries largely delivered their outputs
successfully, though some acknowledged difficulties owing to country readiness or political issues.
Successful projects included support for the Debt Management Office in Nigeria, and the Treasury
Mobile Direct project for retail bonds in Kenya. However, two projects in Uruguay grappled with the
need for better coordination of monetary and fiscal policies to standardize government securities
issuance.14 In Kazakhstan, a GEMLOC project on the primary dealership system withdrew support
“due to the lack of buy-in for reform implementation.”15 Finally, relatively little information is available
on some projects.

Contrary to initial expectations, the second major component of the GEMLOC work program, its
GEMX index, was not widely adopted.16 Created in 2008, it was intended to be used as a benchmark
by a range of market participants. Although the index management company, Markit, has clients



22       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 2
who purchase its GEMX index data (mainly asset management companies and a handful of banks),
there are no publicly listed funds benchmarked against it. Its limited adoption is partly ascribed to
competition from the better-established JP Morgan emerging markets local currency government
bond indices, and to some features related to the construction of the index itself. Its component
markets reflected the remit of GEMLOC rather than common investor perceptions. It excluded better-
established non-Bank Group client markets (Israel, the Republic of Korea), still considered a part of
the emerging markets class, while including smaller, frontier markets such as Egypt, Nigeria, or Peru.
Eventually it became an uneasy combination and did not succeed in delivering an index for either
segment. Concerns were also raised about the “theoretical” nature of some elements, for example
the bid/ask spread, in illiquid markets. The indicators have now been strengthened and made more
transparent. With the Bank Group’s permission, and no financial compensation, its methodology is
now used by Markit in other indices.17, 18 Today its continued publication is likely, despite its narrow
clientele.

GEMLOC—IEG Evaluation
It is reasonable to conclude that the GEMLOC project’s both at a broad level, and at the level of
its advisory services in particular countries, were relevant. At the broadest level, the development
of a local currency government bond market is arguably the most fundamental element of any
country’s capital markets, and interventions were demand-driven. The design of its three-pronged
structure was also relevant, efficient, and productive. Country selection criteria were transparent and
suitable, in terms of minimum market size, regulation, and infrastructure. Valuable implicit principles
underpinned its design: the usefulness of an experimental approach; the need for a range of actions
on both the issuer and the investor fronts; the importance of stakeholder buy-in, including both
public and private sector actors; and the value of cross-country learning. The Bank Group clearly
played an “honest broker” role between the public and private sectors in projects such as Treasury
Mobile Direct and ID-ETF.

In terms of GEMLOC’s programs of Peer Group Dialogues and bond market research were effective
at facilitating the exchange of ideas and experience. Countries frequently requested participation,
bringing their entire technical group to the conversation. Virtually all PGD sessions were well attended
by core technical persons in client countries; more than half the participants filled in the country-level
surveys requested in advance; the choice of topics was in-depth and sophisticated and went beyond
the early compilations of guides to bond market development undertaken hitherto by the Bank
Group;19 (iv) the method of delivery was self-evidently low-cost and convenient, allowing access to
a much broader audience; (v) Peer Group dialogues offered a quick vehicle for sharing and building
up peer networks across countries; and also (vi) allowed the World Bank Group to maintain an up-
to-date knowledge of countries’ issues in the area of debt market development, useful for guiding
subsequent technical assistance.

As regards the GEMLOC advisory services projects, outputs of the country programs were largely
achieved, though in some cases it is still too early to know final outcomes (as in the Brazil ID-
ETF), or the need for in-country agreement among different parties makes progress difficult on
the recommendations of the program (for example, Kazakhstan). External peer review comments



                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   23
were complimentary about topic selection and audience participation.20 Background notes
prepared for each Peer Group dialogue were typically of high quality. Yet the team could go beyond
raw compilations of countries’ answers, drawing conclusions, and providing accessible online
publications. Dialogue with other areas of the Bank Group could be increased. There was limited
communication between the GEMLOC work, for example, on cash management and target cash
buffers, and the Banks’ macro and budget management teams.

There were areas of the Bank Group GEMLOC program that were admittedly less successful:
eCollaborate was not a success, and the GEMX index was not widely adopted. Yet, it is argued that
these are the consequences of a high-risk and experimental approach toward program design.
The GEMX index could have geared itself better to market needs; its limited adoption suggests low
impact on investments in emerging market local sovereigns. Nevertheless its continued survival,
and the recent adoption of elements of its current methodology for other indexes such as the Asian
Bond Fund 2, may be regarded as a success and an incentive for contributing countries to improve
their performance parameters. Finally, the PIMCO fund did not succeed in attracting hoped-for large
volumes of funds, and closed in 2015. The fund has therefore not been effective when judged against
the criterion of sustainably increasing investments in this asset class. Yet for the period that it operated,
it had positive development benefits by providing resources to fund GEMLOC advisory services.

Although the delivery of GEMLOC programs was , its management of knowledge was less so, and
program is vulnerable because core funding has ceased. The amount and diversity of GEMLOC
activities were rich, and delivery was cost effective. Yet program documentation was frequently
incomplete, limiting the Bank Group’s systematic use of such documentation to build an institutional
memory and access lessons learned. The drying-up of PIMCO funding raises issues for sustainability.
Although SECO may be a new source, the multicountry aspect must be safeguarded. Pooling of
resources with the Debt Management Fund is also possible, possibly aided by a future rebranding
of the program toward the broader-based name of the Government Bond Market program. These
issues are taken up in greater depth in Chapter 7.

ESMID—Efficient Securities Markets Institutional Development
Program
ESMID, which began shortly after GEMLOC, also developed as a joint IFC and World Bank program,
intended to complement GEMLOC, through a focus on nongovernment bond markets to finance
priority sectors such as infrastructure, housing, and microfinance.21 Initially funded solely by SIDA,
it began operations in Africa in 2007 with a pilot program in East Africa (covering Kenya, Rwanda,
Tanzania, and Uganda). ESMID/SIDA expanded operations to Nigeria in 2009. Subsequently, ESMID
obtained funding from SECO for expansion to Latin America, where it focused on Colombia, Peru,
and other countries participating in the Integrated Latin American Market (MILA). ( Unlike GEMLOC,
which had no previous comprehensive evaluation, there are three large-scale external evaluations of
ESMID; two in East Africa and one in Latin America.22 Additionally, limited IEG evaluative material also
exists on select ESMID projects. IEG’s review builds upon these evaluations.

ESMID has dominated bond market development work at the Bank Group during the past five years
because of the volume of its funding, large-scale projects, and integrated approach, linking capital


24       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 2
market development to real sector funding needs.23 ESMID’s five core modules included: (i) legal
and regulatory assistance to ease issuance for corporate bonds, develop market structure, and
support securitization; (ii) deepening secondary markets through better bond market infrastructure,
transparency of trading information, and improved efficiency of clearing and settlement; (iii) building
capacity and providing training for all market participants, including licensing and certification
programs; (iv) promoting the regionalization of capital markets and facilitating cross-border issuance
and investments; and finally (v) providing transaction support for bond issuance, especially in the
context of infrastructure, housing, and priority sectors. Seven of the 14 ESMID projects reviewed
by IEG were with the East African Community (Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda), together
with one project focused on Nigeria.24 ESMID in Nigeria (2008, Project 562707, $1.13 million) was
managed under the ESMID East Africa program umbrella, with a similar design. The projects
comprise a combination of IFC and World Bank codes and their separation into component projects
appears to be for administrative reasons. They are therefore reviewed collectively here.

The concept for regional integration of the bond markets of the East African Community (EAC)
countries appropriately built upon current political will to enhance regional harmonization; it also
made sense for market development, and therefore had a high degree of relevance, as pointed out
by the external review of the first phase of the ESMID East Africa program (the Carana Corporation
midterm evaluation of 2009).25 Hitherto, each country maintained different requirements and systems
for bond issuances, making it difficult to access larger regional pools of capital. The extreme number
of processes lengthened the time to issue a bond, and the cost of issuance was high. Only a handful
of corporate bonds existed (between one and eight in the EAC countries). The joint Bank Group was
uniquely situated to help at this juncture, combining the policy expertise of the World Bank with the
transactional experience of IFC. ESMID East Africa initiated diagnostics of regional barriers, later also
discussed in a World Bank/IMF East Africa Regional FSAP.

Several program outputs were reported, largely in terms of numbers, workshops, or stakeholders,
but also with indications of specific reports and program action in some areas. The Carana report
mentions specific outputs for each component, notably diagnostic reports and roadmaps for
legislative reform and market strengthening, and a strategy for regional integration, and several
capacity-building events, reported to have been delivered at lower cost than hitherto, and to more
people. The report also pointed toward transactional support for issuance that was being extended
to at least six potential issuers, with an immediate pipeline of over $100 million in issuance. And in
terms of outcomes, the report indicated positive impact in Kenya: a reduction in the number of days
to process a bond issuance, and in the costs of issuance.26 A similar action path was followed in
Nigeria, where market-strengthening activities included the implementation of market-clearing and
settlement infrastructure for operating over-the-counter trading information and systems, as well as
post-trade transparency through daily publishing of settlement information.

The Carana evaluation was cautiously positive about program outcomes, concluding that “the most
significant input of the ESMID program, at this stage, was the bringing together of hitherto “silo-ed
and independently operating organizations” to work on common strategies for addressing the issues
of fragmentation of bond markets.” Overall, the Carana evaluation reports highly satisfactory results



                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   25
for both the legal and regulatory areas as well as for capacity building. However, lower ratings were
reported for regional integration and for strengthening the marketplace. Successful transaction
support had the lowest ratings, with doubts about the sustainability of these efforts. These fears were
eventually realized; none of the six identified transactions had come to the market by 2015.27

At the conclusion of the ESMID program in East Africa and Nigeria in 2013, a more definitive end-
of-program evaluation was conducted, which had a very positive overall message (Bourse/Genesis
2013), with, however, some cautions on sustainability. It noted the positive impact of the Bank Group
in acting as an independent coordinator, and reported agreement on a single framework for regional
bond issuance, together with new guidelines governing market making, book building, securitization,
asset-backed securities and over-the-counter bond trading, as well as the training of more than
2,000 market participants, the reduction in time taken to issue nongovernment bonds, and the
reduced issuance cost. Moreover, by this time, it reported that ESMID collaborated with issuers and
intermediaries to identify, structure, process, and bring US$101 million of demonstration transactions
to market in East Africa, and US$362 million in Nigeria. It cautioned, however, that positive outcomes
were skewed in favor of the countries where ESMID had a resident team, that buy-in among regional
regulators was difficult, and finally, that demonstration transactions had been frustrated by structural
macroeconomic factors and demand-side issues. It also pointed out that more needed to be done in
capacity building, as well as further time and cost reduction for bond issuance.

The Bank Group’s completion reports on ESMID East Africa broadly accepted the conclusions of the
Bourse Consult/Genesis Analytics report, claiming excellent output achievement and satisfactory
overall outcomes and impact. The Bank Group produced separate completion reports on the
ESMID East Africa program and on the ESMID Nigeria program in March 2014. Both reports pointed
toward achievements that included an indirect contribution to the tenfold increase in cumulative
nongovernment bond issuance between 2007 and 2013 in the EAC. Similar outcomes were achieved
in Nigeria. The reports cautioned as to the need for stakeholder buy-in and difficulties in achieving
regionalization when domestic interests are at stake. Finally, IEG also produced an evaluation note,
but only on the smaller Nigeria program (562707), which cautiously rates the project’s Development
Effectiveness as , pointing, in Nigeria, to shortcomings related to achievement of expected
nongovernment bond market growth, lower-than-expected pension investment in nongovernment
bond assets, and the need for further capacity building. The present evaluation, however, adds
evidence from the Nigerian government documenting impressive recent achievements in domestic
capital market development, explicitly acknowledging the contributions of IFC’s ESMID program.28

ESMID in Latin America
The five projects in the ESMID program for Latin America, officially launched in 2012, covered both
Colombia and Peru (ESMID LAC), adopted similar program goals to ESMID East Africa, and are also
discussed collectively here.29 There was a single external end-of-program evaluation (AFI September
2014) and a single internal IFC “Advisory Services Completion” document. Program goals paralleled
those of ESMID East Africa, with specific program targets in terms of market-ready transactions,
increased bond issuance, new regulations, and training.




26       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 2
The external program evaluator, AFI, concluded that core program objectives had been accomplished
but challenges were noted and echoed by the Bank Group’s team. AFI maintained that ESMID in
Latin America had provided assistance on the demand, supply, and regulatory fronts, increased
political buy-in, and helped with capacity building and dissemination—as affirmed by market
participants. Additionally, reforms resulted in greater investability by institutional investors, improved
financing conditions (that is, access, price, and terms) and reduced issuance time. Yet absorption
capacity and consensus building remained a challenge, together with continued competition
from banks and long lead times for transactions to come to market. There were difficulties related
to technical complexities and timing. Thus, an overall roadmap was prepared in Colombia but
implementation regulations in some areas, such as mutual fund investors, were not. Progress was
slow and painstaking. A transaction was achieved for a relatively straightforward bond issue—
Credifamilia—but the infrastructure bond issues remained pending.30 In terms of regionalization and
capacity building, internal events were organized by cross-country events, and coordination with
MILA proved more difficult. The internal IFC evaluation assessed that the impact of the project at a
broad level had not been achieved. The external evaluators and Bank Group staff concluded that
such further challenges could perhaps be tackled by the successor Bank Group Deep Dive initiative,
discussed further below.

IEG’s present evaluation concurs that program objectives were relevant in both regions. Program
design was ambitious, with its emphasis on going “from regulations to transactions.” ESMID also
foresaw the benefits of regional integration, moving away from market fragmentation and toward
deeper markets—a shortcoming of more ad hoc and country-focused initiatives such as those under
the FIRST programs.31 However, it also revealed the difficulties inherent in such an approach: long
lead times for legislative change, project finance, effecting behavior change, and building multi-
country consensus.

Private sector agents in these countries point out that the value added of the World Bank was in its
“honest broker” role and ability to bring together other needed areas of prior reforms required for
the market as a whole. Although it may be questioned whether a focus on corporate bonds and
individual transactions could distract from a focus on a conducive environment, such bottom-up
support could help to facilitate initial transactions. GEMLOC work had a greater focus on government
fiscal management and stability considerations, whereas ESMID has been driven by a financing for
development agenda. Nevertheless, attention to the broader environment—for example, between the
bond market and the banking sector—cannot be ignored, as Colombia, with its close bank-corporate
connections, suggests, and continued attention to structural issues is important.

Overall, both ESMID Africa and ESMID Latin America delivered a large number of outputs in each
of their components; yet these do not necessarily add up to impact, in part because of the long-
term nature of change in these areas. Numerous regulations and laws were drafted, many training
events were held, a number of reports and roadmaps were delivered, and a number of transactions
were facilitated. Yet these are not the best metrics of program impact, especially in such areas as
consensus on a regional common strategy, or expanded overall finance for developmental goals.
In East Africa, however, Bourse/Genesis (2013) were “optimistic that ESMID interventions have



                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   27
successfully created an enabling environment such that when markets targeted by the Program
do grow, some of the most important constraints to accessing, investing, and trading in securities
markets have already been identified and addressed. In other words, the Program has laid a
foundation for future development and growth of securities markets.”

Other Bank Group Interventions
IEG also notes bond market development work undertaken by other areas of the Bank Group,
notably a cluster of interventions undertaken by the Bank Group Macroeconomics anchor and by
the World BankTreasury.32 The focus is on establishing an asset-liability management framework to
help governments balance their financing, cost, and risk objectives. As part of this role, components
are sometimes included to deepen domestic public debt markets; in primary markets, for example,
auctions, issuance policies (including benchmarks, liability management operations), transparency
and predictability of issuance, and secondary market liquidity. IEG’s bond market portfolio identified
eight FABDM projects which included some government bond market development components,
across a spectrum of countries.

Available documentation is mixed and often scanty, but based on limited evidence, outputs and
outcomes seem largely positive. In principle, projects’ objectives and designs should be relevant
because they are based on a Needs Assessment, provided that subsequent reform plans were well
structured. It is not possible to assess this however, as the Needs Assessments or Reform Plans are
not available among project documents. Although full evaluations of the FABDM program have not
been undertaken, an independent external evaluation of the World Bank’s Debt Management Facility
(DMF) was recently undertaken, which recommended even closer links between the DMF and the
Capital Markets group programs.33 IEG observes that since this report, the Capital Markets group has
discussed the possibility of active funding support from the DMF. Overall, the DMF/FABDM cluster
of work illustrates evidence of close and productive collaboration across different areas of the World
Bank in the area of public debt market development, and IEG suggests that even closer links with
public debt management may be useful; for example, cash flow forecasting and the development of a
debt issuance calendar.

Finally, the preceding sections do not include the large array of World Bank work undertaken through
freestanding, typically country-specific projects. Such country work has been undertaken in the
form of World Bank–financed AAA, sometimes with support from donors (Japan, Ireland, the FIRST
program), through reimbursable advisory services (China, Egypt, Kazakhstan), and sometimes
supported by lending. Some countries supported by GEMLOC or ESMID also received World
Bank support though policy-based or technical support loans (Colombia, Kenya, and Morocco
are examples). Others independently undertook work in the areas of government (Albania, South
Africa) or corporate (Azerbaijan, India, and Turkey) bond market development. Some of these are
illustrated in the country case studies discussed below. In addition to the joint IFC/World Bank Capital
Markets department, IFC has also offered transactional support for bond market development, both
through the purchase of bonds issued by banks and corporations in client countries and by credit
enhancements offered to bond issuers, to improve their ratings for other investors. Such transactions
have been few, though there has been a recent acceleration (Appendix 2.2).



28       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 2
Looking Ahead: The Deep Dive Approach
The Deep Dive approach34 seeks to leverage resources across the sectoral areas of the Bank Group
and thereby improve the Bank Group’s ability to help countries develop local capital markets so as
to finance their large-scale strategic development needs, including infrastructure, housing, and small
and medium entperprises (SMEs). In the eyes of the Capital Markets Department, the Deep Dive
is the next step forward after programs such as ESMID, which, while far-reaching, were not cross-
sectoral. At present, however, given that the adoption of the Deep Dive approach is relatively recent,
it is too early to assess its effectiveness. The Deep Dive approach may be illustrated by considering
its implementation in Colombia, where it is helping Colombia build its bond markets to finance a $25
billion toll road program. It is believed that these infrastructure financing demands are too large to be
met by the Colombian government and local banks.35 Local bond markets are needed to mobilize
long-term financing from institutional investors, especially Colombia’s large pension funds and foreign
institutional investors. The project leverages advisory, investment, and Treasury resources from nine
Bank Group units and, in addition to advisory services to strengthen the public-private partnership
(PPP) framework, includes an IFC investment in the domestic infrastructure development bank,
and possibly a local debt fund, pension fund capacity building to invest in infrastructure bonds, and
transaction support for the 4G toll road highway financing.



Bond Market Development: Links to Country Strategies and
Sequencing over Time
IEG next examined three additional questions which could not be addressed by project-level reviews,
and required a perspective of overall country programs with regard to bond market development:
relevance and significance in the country program, interactions between lending and advisory
support, and links between the Bank Group’s interventions and country outcomes. Although it is not
possible to attribute changes in bond market behavior to World Bank interventions, associations may
be traced through a combination of knowledge of interventions and market movement. Details are
provided in Appendix 2.3.

Bond market development was not prominent in many country strategies, and the level of influence
of FSAPs was variable. In Morocco, the FSAP, as well as programs under FIRST and GEMLOC, were
influential in designing a work program, and enthusiastic FSAP and CAS support was observed in
Colombia; the latter escalated with the ESMID program. In Kenya too, recognition of bond market
development in CASs/CPSs increased in the later part of the review period, explicitly in both the
2010–13 and 2014–18 CPSs, reflecting the ESMID interventions. Its two country-specific FSAPs
provided good guidance on overall program design. By contrast, because Vietnam’s first FSAP was
concluded in 2014, it was only able to inform the latest project in the series, which it partially did.
Vietnam’s CASs, in the early years, did not mention World Bank work in this area. And in India, the
FSAPs of 2001 and 2013 both raised issues relevant to bond market functioning, which did not feed
closely into program design, or into Bank Group Country Strategies.




                                                           Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   29
Program designs were relevant to country objectives in most but not all cases. The Bank Group
used a variety of instruments to underpin its programs, and they typically provided valuable mutual
reinforcement. Colombia, Kenya, and Morocco had combinations of interventions including, in each,
a series of World Bank loans (especially development policy loans in Colombia and Morocco); large-
scale support from ESMID (Colombia and Kenya), as well as advisory assistance under GEMLOC
(Morocco), FIRST (Colombia, Morocco, and Vietnam), and the Debt Management Department
(Colombia). Such serial intervention, even if not strictly programmatic by design (and in the case
of Kenya, scattered across several projects and themes), enabled sustained and incremental
engagement. Two countries, India and Vietnam, had no bond market development programs at all
under GEMLOC or ESMID. Yet, Vietnam’s Bank Budget– and FIRST–supported interventions helped
to build sustained dialogue. In India, in contrast to the other countries, interventions were narrow
in focus with no reinforcement from lending. The World Bank’s early high-quality technical inputs
covered only a narrow spectrum of issues confronting the Indian bond market, raising questions
about the relevance of program design.

All five case study countries showed significant bond market development over the review period.
Though much of this progress was independent, there are some positive outcomes that can be
associated with Bank Group interventions in four out of five countries. Morocco’s program had a
clear positive effect on the government bond market’s structure. The World Bank’s interventions
in Kenya have shown some success in both the government and corporate bond markets, as well
as some support to transactions. Colombia already had a well-functioning government securities
market but challenges remain with corporate bonds and with the goals of transactional support set
by ESMID. Outcomes appear promising but are not definitive yet.36 The Bank Group’s interventions in
Vietnam had valuable outcomes in terms of the basic institutional framework, successfully setting the
stage for the deeper engagement that is now ongoing. However, in India, despite early promise and
high-quality Bank Group inputs, over time, the dialogue has been difficult to sustain.

Country case studies underscore client commitment as key to successful outcomes. Vietnam
and India provide interesting contrasts. Even the absence of a Vietnam FSAP before 2014 was not
an obstacle to a sustained and well-adapted Bank Group program, owing to strong client buy-
in. In India, the Bank Group team, though undertaking high-quality work and keen to respond to
government needs, was limited in the scope of its engagement, and thus unable to engage in critical
themes relating to the government bond market, or to address core underlying factors affecting
corporate bonds in the medium term.

There are valuable lessons that can be learned across countries’ experiences, and the Bank Group
should harness such opportunities. It is interesting that today, Kenya and India face similar “second-
generation” challenges with setting up a corporate debt market: the large and liquid banking sector
and its close links to domestic blue chips; the high rates on government debt that can crowd out
nongovernment issuers; the preference for private placement; and the poor corporate governance
at some potential issuers. Colombia’s early success with Treasury bonds could be a useful example
to other countries. There is considerable scope for the Bank Group, even beyond the Peer Group
dialogues, to juxtapose and share these experiences for the benefit of all its clients.



30       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 2
Box 2.2 | Local Bond Market Development and the Bank Group: Vietnam

    Relevance of Program Objectives and Design
    The Bank Group has had a continuous series of interventions to support bond market
    development since FY08, beginning with a Bond Market Development Roadmap in FY08,
    followed by a flagship bond markets project (FY09–14) that focused on both government
    and corporate bond markets at varying phases. The third, follow-on project, still under
    way today, is the FIRST-funded Vietnam Bond Markets Development project (2014), which
    focuses on current government bond market challenges. The focus is now more on the
    government bond market. Country client commitment was high, though the
    2004/07 Country Partnership Strategy and Progress Reports do not mention bond market
    development or the interventions. And because Vietnam’s first FSAP was concluded only
    in 2014, it was only able to inform the last project in this series. Engagement emerged as a
    pragmatic response to pressures in the equity markets, to absorb the high level of savings
    and help avoid a valuation bubble. Accordingly the program of work undertaken was also
    pragmatic, beginning with the creation of core institutions and setting of standardized
    market practices. Following the Roadmap, work began with support for the creation of
    an institutional platform, a Code of Conduct, and a Market Conventions handbook, now
    reflected in a government regulation on issuance of government bonds, methods of
    calculation of interest rates, etc. This was followed by the so-called Back Office Manual
    (BOM) which actually covers back, middle, and some front office functions. Beginning in
    2012, the project also helped the Vietnam Bond Market Association establish a treasury
    securities yield curve by creating a mandatory bidding process. The successor Vietnam
    Bond Markets Development project drew upon the 2014 FSAP and built programmatically
    upon the two preceding projects.

    Effectiveness: Program Outcomes
    IEG finds an increase in the volume of mid- to long-term corporate bond issuance that could
    be associated with, if not attributed to Bank Group interventions. Bonds with 5–9-year
    maturities rose from almost zero and peaked at $2.7 billion at April 2011, stabilizing
    at $1.4 billion at December 2013. Bonds with maturities of 10–14 years rose throughout,
    to a maximum of $1.6 billion as of December 2013. Yet the overall corporate bond market
    segment remains small.

    Although Vietnam’s government securities became more effective over the period reviewed,
    the areas of improvement, while needing attention, were not defined in the scope of the
    Bank Group intervention. Initially, there were a very large number of offerings per calendar
    quarter, but the average offering size was small. There were also a large


                                                         (Box continues on the following page.)




                                                       Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   31
Box 2.2 | Local Bond Market Development and the Bank Group: Vietnam (continued)

      number of tenors of debt on issue. Over the period reviewed, starting from 2007, Vietnam
      began to address pressing areas of needed improvement: public debt management and
      the distribution of tenors (consolidating its fragmented issuance pattern and evening out
      the range of maturities), and increasing the use of auction methods rather than direct
      placement at banks. However, although World Bank staff may have been engaged in
      dialogue with government authorities on these questions, these areas were not included in
      the scope of the ongoing Bank Group flagship project.

       Vietnam—Domestic Corporate and Government Bond Markets (2005–13)

       A. CUMULATIVE NET ISSUANCES OF CORPORATE                               B. CORPORATE BONDS OUTSTANDING—
              BONDS OUTSTANDING (Bn VND)                                                 BY TENORS

      150,000                                                             8
                                                                          6
      100,000
                                                              BILLION $




                                                                                                                        20+ Yrs

                                                                          4                                             15–19 Yrs

       50,000                                                                                                           10–14 Yrs
                                                                          2                                             5–9 Yrs

               0                                                          0
                                                                                                                        < 5 Yrs
                                                                          Se 05
                                                                          Ju 06




                                                                          Se 08
                                                                          Ju 09




                                                                          Se 11
                                                                          Ju 12
                                                                          De 08




                                                                          De 11
                                                                          M 07




                                                                          M 10




                                                                                13
              05

                     06

                          07

                               08

                                    09

                                          10

                                               11

                                                    12

                                                         13




                                                                             c-
                                                                             p-




                                                                             c-
                                                                             p-




                                                                             c-
                                                                             p-
                                                                               -




                                                                               -
                                                                            n-




                                                                            n-




                                                                            n-
              c-

                    c-

                          c-

                               c-

                                    c-

                                         c-

                                               c-

                                                    c-

                                                         c-




                                                                            ar




                                                                            ar
                                                                      De
         De

                   De

                        De

                             De

                                  De

                                       De

                                            De

                                                 De

                                                       De




                   C. GOVERNMENT BONDS—NUMBERS OF                                             D. GOVERNMENT BONDS—
                 TREASURIES ISSUANCES AND AVERAGE SIZE                                        AUCTION METHODOLOGIES
              80                                     60                        60

              60
                                                                 40            40
       US$m




              40
                                                                               20
              20

              0                                                      0          0
               1 2
               4 3
               3 3
               2 4
               1 5
               4 6
               3 6
               2 7
               1 8
               4 9
               3 9
               2 0
                   11




                                                                              Q 2002
                                                                              Q 2002
                                                                              Q 2003
                                                                              Q 2003
                                                                              Q 2004
                                                                              Q 2004
                                                                              Q 2005
                                                                              Q 2005
                                                                              Q 2006
                                                                              Q 2006
                                                                              Q 2007
                                                                              Q 2007
                                                                              Q 2008
                                                                              Q 2008
                                                                              Q 2009
                                                                              Q 2009
                                                                              Q 2010
                                                                                  20 0
                                                                                    11
              Q 200
              Q 200
              Q 200
              Q 200
              Q 200
              Q 200
              Q 200
              Q 200
              Q 200
              Q 200
              Q 200
              Q 201




                                                                                2 1
                20




                                                                              Q 20
          2




                                                                                2
                                                                                4
                                                                                2
                                                                                4
                                                                                2
                                                                                4
                                                                                2
                                                                               4
                                                                               2
                                                                               4
                                                                               2
                                                                               4
                                                                               2
                                                                               4
                                                                               2
                                                                               4
                                                                               2
                                                                               4
         Q




                                                                              Q




                    Number of Issuances                                             Number of Direct Placements
                    Unspecified                                                     Number of Auctions    Unspecified

      Sources: Vietnam Bond Market Association; IEG.




Finally, Bank Group information on countries’ domestic bond markets is insufficient for monitoring
market development. At present, coverage in FinDebt appears focused on offshore/dollar-
denominated issues, which limits its use as a monitoring tool. IEG’s country case studies revealed
that Bank Group information, available in its FinDebt database and drawn largely from Dealogic and
Datastream, grossly underreported local bond issues in its case study countries, compared with
information available from the countries themselves (Vietnam), and from Bloomberg. Appendix 2.4
provides a comparison of data for select countries during the past 15 years. In India, for example,




32        The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 2
FinDebt reports between one and three issues over the past five years compared to between 111 and
165 in Bloomberg. Bloomberg, too, appears to have some gaps, and information from local sources
would be ideal. Deeper exploration of this issue is desirable.



Building Bond Markets Through World Bank and IFC Treasury
Operations
IBRD and IFC, and other multilateral development banks, have been active in the area of issuing
bonds in “non-core” currencies, including currencies of their client countries, to meet their funding
requirements. Although the bulk of such local currency issues have been offshore, and have been
swapped back to U.S. dollars, a few have been onshore issues in domestic debt markets.37 Local
currency issues, even offshore, can support client countries’ financing requirements, matching the
currency of liabilities and assets.38 Undertaking such bond issuance also supports local financial
market development through their helping to smooth the steps required for such issuance. They
strengthen confidence in the stability and safety of the countries’ domestic bond markets, attracting
foreign issuers and investors, and aiding the development of new asset classes. They can reduce
funding costs and diversify the funding base. Highly rated bonds issued by IFIs can encourage
foreign investors to enter local markets, with the initial decoupling of credit risk and currency risk.

IFIs’ local currency domestic bond issues offer additional potential contributions to local financial
market development. In addition to the extension of maturities, and potentially, a better-defined
yield curve, reduced risk of maturity mismatches, and a diversified investor base, especially for
early issues, IFIs can help remove policy and regulatory impediments to such issues and help
create a conducive market infrastructure. Other challenges include the investor base, clearance and
settlement arrangements and, often, an inadequately developed currency and interest rate swap
market (Hoschka 2005b). MDB onshore bond issues also seek exemption from domestic taxes and
ratings, and require quasi sovereign risk weightings for capital adequacy, as well as reserve eligibility,
for domestic banks. MDBs also face carrying costs when issuing bonds in domestic markets
because of mismatch between cash flow requirements of underlying projects and returns that can be
obtained from interim investments in domestic financial instruments such as treasury bills. Thus their
ability to issue bonds in these markets on a consistent basis is constrained. Given these tradeoffs,
IEG examines the extent to which IFC and IBRD local currency bonds have contributed to capital
market development in client countries.

The primary objective of IBRD and IFC treasury operations is to mobilize resources on the best
available terms in the marketplace. Additionally, since 2013, IFC has explicitly adopted the strategy of
helping its member countries develop local capital markets through a specially created department
within its investment and treasury operations.39

During 2004–15, the Bank Group raised US$43.9 billion through non-core currency bonds in 29
currencies (Figure 2.2 and Figure 2.3). Five currencies accounted for 80 percent of non-core issues
for both IBRD and IFC. These are countries with open capital accounts and large debt markets that



                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   33
Box 2.3 | I
          BRD and IFC Risk Management Tools for Clients: Deepening Domestic
          Capital Markets

	     Both IBRD and IFC Treasuries offer their clients a range of hedging products and
      derivatives solutions, integral to IBRD sovereign loans as well as to IFC investments. IBRD
      also offers interest rate and currency swaps in relation to eligible borrowers’ non-IBRD debt,
      and IFC offers transaction support for clients’ derivatives-related business which does not
      directly involve an IFC investment project. Although these activities lie outside
      the scope of the present evaluation, IEG notes the importance of these risk management
      and mitigation tools that help to identify “gaps” in emerging markets for hedging risk; notably
      interest rate risk, currency risk, and risk from commodity price fluctuations. Beyond specific
      transactions, borrowers benefit from IBRD and IFC’s transaction execution experience and
      knowledge of derivative pricing methods. Clients build their knowledge and institutional
      capacity for using derivative instruments, and increase their familiarity with standard
      international documentation. Better market capacity to mitigate the relevant risks helps
      lenders and borrowers to better distribute risk across domestic banking and capital market
      sectors, and enhances the liquidity of and depth of domestic capital markets.

      Sources: IBRD and IFC Treasury departments, IEG.




facilitate issuance in international markets through Eurobonds (offshore bonds), where the proceeds
can be swapped back to U.S. dollars.40 Arguably, local fiscal deficits in some of these countries
contribute to high nominal interest rates, so that Bank Group bonds denominated in their currencies
are attractive to investors, who want currency exposure but not the credit risk associated with below-
investment-grade debt instruments. As a result, the borrowing cost for the Bank Group in these
currencies can sometimes be lower than issuance in core currency countries or countries with better
macroeconomic conditions and more developed domestic financial markets. Market demand for
these exotic currencies was very high precrisis as the theory of decoupling was widely discussed,
but IBRD and IFC experienced some decline in demand following the crisis. There was some revival
as quantitative easing (QE) in the United States and other countries during 2008–12 depressed
their interest rates. Demand for these currencies also varies according to the economic and political
conditions in these countries.

IBRD lends only to governments and has limited pricing options because there is no lending rate
differentiation among IBRD members, and it does not take interest rate or currency risks. Its clients
rarely have local currency needs because sovereigns can always raise funds locally. IBRD non-core
currency bond issuance during FY05–14 ranged from a high of 23 percent in 2009 to just 4 percent




34       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 2
FIGURE 2.2              | Bank Group Bond Issuance—Total and Non-Core Currencies
                          (Year and Currency)
                                                a. BANK GROUP BOND ISSUANCE (2005–14)
               60,000


               50,000
 US$ BILLION




               40,000


               30,000


               20,000


               10,000


                    0
                         2005   2006     2007     2008    2009     2010       2011         2012    2013       2014




                                       b. NON-CORE CURRENCY BOND ISSUANCE BY BANK GROUP, FY04–14
               15,000



               10,000
 US$ BILLION




                5,000



                   0
                          ZAR      BRL          TRY       MXN        RUB             INR          CNY        Others

                                                         IBRD        IFC

Sources: IBRD, IFC.




in 2014. Its borrowing program is anchored in a few benchmark issues in core currencies and a large
number of smaller transactions (around 300 per year).

IBRD’s Treasury Department also shares the objective of helping develop local capital markets in
its member countries; it has been creative and introduced several notable innovations in emerging
market countries through its medium-term note program (Box 2.4), despite the constraint that,
because its main client is the sovereign, it has limited ability to borrow competitively in local markets.
These included first-time issues on domestic markets, in local currencies (for example, in Colombia,
Romania, and Uruguay), as well as other innovations including long-dated local currency offshore
bonds (Turkish Lira), Sharia-compliant bonds (in Malaysian ringgit), and bond funds in emerging
market currencies.



                                                                 Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group      35
FIGURE 2.3               | Bank Group Bond Issuance—Total Issuance and Non-Core Currencies
                          (Percent total issuance)

                                           A. IBRD NON-CORE CURRENCY BOND ISSUANCE PROGRAM, FY05–14

              60,000                                                                                                           25.0
                                                           23.2

              50,000                                                                                                           20.0
                                                   20.1
US$ MILLION




                                                                               16.5                          15.9
              40,000




                                                                                                                                      PERCENT
                            13.7                                                             15.0                              15.0
              30,000
                                                                                                                               10.0
              20,000                 9.1
                                                                        6.3                           7.4
                                                                                                                                5.0
              10,000                                                                                                     4.3

                   0                                                                                                            0.0
                          2005       2006      2007        2008      2009      2010       2011      2012     2013     2014

                                                   Total Bond Issuance (US$ million)

                                                   Non-core Currencies Issuance (US$ million)
                                                      % total IBRD Bond Issuance



                                            B. IFC NON-CORE CURRENCY BOND ISSUANCE PROGRAM, FY05–14

              20,000                                                                                                           50.0
                                               43.0
                                                                                                                               40.0
US$ MILLION




              15,000




                                                                                                                                      PERCENT
                                                                                                                               30.0
              10,000      22.5                                                     20.7
                                                                                                               17.3            20.0
                                        16.3                 10.9                           15.5
               5,000                                                                                                    17.3
                                                                       12.8                                                    10.0
                                                                                                       4.6
                  0                                                                                                             0.0
                          2005      2006       2007        2008     2009       2010       2011      2012     2013     2014

                                                   Total Bond Issuance (US$ million)

                                                   Non-core Currencies Issuance (US$ million)
                                                   % total IFC Bond Issuance
Sources: IBRD, IFC.




IFC has more use for local currency raised through onshore bond issues for its project financing. It
can take limited currency risk, on its balance sheet, within clearly defined prudential limits. Moreover,
it has more flexibility in pricing its loans and more risk-taking capacity, given its mandate of financing
the private sector. However, because of the limited demand for these non-core currencies, among
offshore investors and for IFC’s own project financing needs in the context of onshore issues, it is
generally difficult to achieve economy of scale. Most of these transactions are necessarily small
compared to benchmark issues, and illiquid. Much of the purchase of IFC’s bonds was in the offshore
market by buy-to-hold institutions or retail investors (for example, the Uridashi in Japan), in search of
higher yields combined with AAA ratings.



36                     The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 2
Box 2.4 | IBRD Treasury Bond Issues and Local Capital Market Development

    Colombian peso—March 2004. The World Bank’s first Colombian peso bonds
    (Col$535.6 billion) had a 6.5-year maturity. The coupon offered a spread of 4.40 percent over
    the Colombian consumer price index (CPI). This bond issue was a milestone for the World
    Bank because it was placed exclusively in a domestic market in Latin America, and listed on a
    Latin American stock exchange, the Bolsa de Valores de Colombia.

    Malaysian ringgit—April 2005. The World Bank launched the first Islamic debt
    issue of RM 760 million (US$200 million equivalent), the largest ringgit issuance by
    a supranational organization at the time of issuance. The bonds were structured under Sharia
    principles, priced at a profit rate per annum of 3.58 percent. The issue was oversubscribed
    by a diverse group of domestic and international investors. Proceeds from the bond issuance
    were swapped back into U.S. dollars.

    Romanian lei—August 2006. The 3-year, 6.5 percent World Bank issue was the first
    supranational issue in Romania, issued under local law and domestic clearing systems.

    Emerging Market Bond Fund: The “World Supporter” Fund—June 2007.
    The professionally managed fund allowed its Japanese investors to purchase units
    comprising World Bank bonds in a variety of emerging market currencies, such as Brazilian
    real, Botswana pula, Chilean peso, Chinese renminbi, Colombian peso, Egyptian pound, the
    Euro, Ghanaian cedi, Hungarian forint, Indian rupee, Korean won, Malaysian ringgit, Mexican
    peso, Nigerian naira, Polish zloty, Romanian leu, Russian ruble, South African rand, Turkish
    lira, U.S. dollar, and Zambia kwacha. It provided the opportunity to participate in a diversified
    emerging market investment portfolio. The fund managers donate a portion of the fees from
    investors to IDA.

    Uruguayan peso—May 2008. IBRD became the first foreign issuer to issue a public
    bond in Uruguayan pesos. The proceeds were passed on to the Uruguayan Government.
    This was the first time the World Bank provided local currency financing to the government of
    a member country—because this transaction was issued for the purpose of a back­to-back
    disbursement of a specific loan, in this case the First Programmatic Reform Implementation
    Development Policy Loan (PRIDPL 1), approved in May 2007.

    Turkish lira 10-year global bond issue—January 2007. Thomson-Reuters’
    International Financing Review named the World Bank’s TL 500 million, 13.625 percent global
    bond issue the best Non-Core Currency Bond of the year. This bond was the first-ever global
    benchmark transaction in Turkish lira, with a maturity five years longer than the longest Turkish
    government domestic bond. It attracted more than 30 North American and European

                                                          (Box continues on the following page.)




                                                        Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   37
Box 2.4 | IBRD Treasury Bond Issues and Local Capital Market Development
          (continued)

      institutional investors and was five times larger than the average amount raised at launch in
      any previous Turkish lira euro bond.

      World Bank Emerging Markets Bond Fund—June 2012. The fund received the
      “Most Innovative Product” award and was presented with the Best of the Best Country
      Awards in 2012 by Asia Asset Management. The fund is the first global emerging market
      currency bond fund in Hong Kong SAR, China with a China theme. At least 85 percent
      of its assets are invested in World Bank debt securities denominated in the currencies of
      China’s trading partners in emerging markets and commodity-rich countries.

      Source: IBRD Treasury.




The pattern of IFC’s non-core currency bond issuance during 2005–14 was similar to IBRD
(Figure 2.2, Figure 2.3, and Appendix Figure A2.1). During FY05–14, IFC raised US$12.1 billion
through non-core currency bonds, peaking at 43 percent of total issuance in 2007 and contracting
sharply to 4.6 percent in 2012 for reasons discussed earlier. Similar to IBRD, IFC swaps its offshore
borrowings into U.S. dollars. However, IFC has more flexibility than IBRD because of its mandate
of exposure to private sector credit risk through investment operations in client countries, which
can also involve local currency risk. In 2013, an explicit decision was made by IFC management
to increase IFC’s role in the capital markets of its member countries, especially through its local
currency bond issuance program, local currency derivatives, and structured products, to reduce
clients’ reliance on cross-border funding (IFC Road Map FY13–15). A new IFC unit was created for
this purpose. Examples of IFC’s recent bond issuance activities and their contribution to capital
market development are discussed in Box 2.5 and Appendix Figure A2.1. As the examples illustrate,
a considerable part of the proceeds were swapped back to U.S. dollars–about two-thirds (in Nigeria)
to three-quarters (in Russia), while the rest were put into Treasury bonds awaiting project-level
disbursement. The bonds offered AAA-rated investments for local investors, and proceeds from
the sale were sometimes used to make local currency loans to domestic financial institutions (for
example, the Dominican Republic).

In India, IFC made offshore and onshore issues. In October 2013, it reached an agreement with the
Government of India (GOI) to issue rupee bonds off shore up to US$1.0 billion (Phase 1). Under this
program, IFC issued six offshore “Masala bonds” totaling US$1.0 billion with maturities of three, five,
and seven years, that successfully attracted a broad range of investors globally. Following the success
of Phase I, IFC began a second phase of offshore Masala bond issuance, announcing a US$2 billion
program. In November 2014, IFC issued a 10-year, Rs 10 billion bond (equivalent to US$163 million) in
offshore markets to support infrastructure development. By end-April 2016, IFC had issued Rs 110 billion


38       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 2
Box 2.5 | IFC Treasury Bond Issues and Local Capital Market Development

    Nigeria—February 2013. In February 2013, IFC issued the first local currency bond by
    a nonresident issuer in Nigeria raising N12 billion (US$76.3 million). Out of this amount,
    US$25 million was invested in government bonds and the rest was swapped into U.S.
    dollars. IFC worked with the Securities and Exchange Commission of Nigeria to launch this
    long-term local currency bond program in the country, under IFC’s Pan-African Medium­
    Term Note Program that allowed IFC to issue a series of local currency bonds totaling up to
    US$1 billion, to raise long-term local currency funding for the private sector in the region and
    deepen domestic capital markets.

    Dominican Republic—December 2012. IFC issued a RD$390 million bond (about
    US$10 million) to support the development of capital markets in the Dominican Republic and
    increase the availability of local currency financing for the private sector. The bond carried a
    coupon of 10.5 percent, with a five-year maturity and bullet repayment. IFC’s bond, known
    as the Taino bond, was the first internationally rated AAA bond that was offered to investors
    in the Dominican Republic. It was also the first IFC bond in Latin America and the Caribbean
    whose proceeds are directly linked to private sector investments in the country. Major
    investors in the bond issue were domestic pension funds and other institutional investors.
    Proceeds from the bond were used to make long-term local currency loans to domestic
    financial institutions (Fondesa and La Nacional) and to support micro enterprises and low-
    cost housing. It took IFC almost three years to complete the transaction.

    Russian Federation—November 2012. In 2012 IFC received approval from the
    Russian Federal Service for Financial Markets to raise up to US$730 million equivalent in the
    domestic market. As a part of this program, IFC launched its first Volga bond in November
    2012, raising
    Rub 13 billion (about US$410 million) for private sector development. The bond had a
    maturity of five years, and IFC claimed it was the first inflation-linked corporate bond issued
    in Russia. The bond offered AAA credit for institutional investors such as pension funds, and
    aims to encourage greater investor participation in the markets. Out of US$410 million raised
    from the bond issue, US$310 million was swapped into U.S. dollars and about a quarter, or
    US$100 million, was placed in a pre-fund pool that could be disbursed for Russian projects
    in the future. The interpretation of the inflation index has, however, been problematic, and
    greater investor participation has not been encouraged.

    Source: IFC Treasury.




                                                        Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   39
offshore (approx. US$1. 7 billion) in seven tranches with tenors ranging from three to 15 years, thus
establishing the first “AAA” offshore rupee yield curve.41 These Masala bonds were listed on the London
Stock Exchange and were the longest-dated bonds in the offshore rupee markets.42 Most investors in this
bond issue were fund managers looking for exposure in Indian rupees without the credit risks. Proceeds
were swapped back into U.S. dollars, and funds became available to support private sector projects
in India, including infrastructure bonds. IFC invested Rs 65 billion of Masala Bond proceeds in Indian
corporate bonds and was able to borrow at about 200 basis points below comparable Government of
India bonds.43

Under Phase II, IFC also received approval to issue onshore rupee bonds—Maharaja Bonds. In
September 2014, IFC launched its onshore rupee program of Rs 6 billion (US$100 million) in four
different tranches. The first two transactions were two domestic bond issues of Rs 1.5 billion each
(5- and 10-year) and were listed on the National Stock Exchange. These were targeted at overseas
investors and IFC was able to price below the comparable government of India benchmark by
about 50 basis points. The remaining two tranches, with longer maturities of 13 and 20 years, were
structured as Separately Tradable Redeemable Principal Parts (STRPP) to avoid carrying cost.
IFC paid 20–30 basis points over comparable government of India benchmarks. The proceeds of
the Maharaja Bond program are intended for IFC’s infrastructure projects in India and are hence
structured to match the nature of loans to such projects.

Evaluative Comments: Contributions of Bank Group Treasury
Operations to Client Capital Market Development
In terms of the of local currency capital market development for the respective Treasury departments
of IBRD and IFC, it must be recognized first of all that the primary objective of both Treasury
Departments is to raise funds for their respective institutions on the most cost-effective basis.
Treasury operations policies are conservative and, in principle, neither institution takes exchange
risks. Beyond this, IBRD lends only to governments, who have no need to borrow money in local
currencies because they already have ready access to such funding. Thus to local currency
capital market development in terms of its local currency bond issues. In contrast, IFC’s Treasury
Department to local currency capital market development, and it has a distinct business model,
different from IBRD. With the modification in its mandate since 2013, IFC is expected to play a more
active role in assisting member countries in developing local currency bond markets, through its client
solutions department.44 Its operations involve taking risks, and therefore, assisting clients to mitigate
foreign currency borrowing risks is clearly associated with its business model.

In terms of the relevance of design, IBRD’s Treasury Department instruments are generally market
driven. Its funding policies are based on conventional practice in global financial markets, especially
developed countries, where it sources most of its funds. IBRD has been contributing to its primary
objective through the issuance of non-core currency bonds when favorable in terms of least-cost
risk-adjusted resource mobilization. It has also brought innovation: for example, introducing new
instruments (as in the Malaysian ringgit Sharia-compliant bond); extending maturities (as in Turkish
lira); or paving the way for supranationals and offshore entities to issue debt onshore (as in Colombia
and Romania).45



40       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 2
IFC, because of the difference in its mandate as well as its local private investments, has the ability,
and a business reason, to play a more active role in helping member countries in developing their
local capital markets. IFC also has the ability to adopt differential pricing policies and can bear
some carrying cost of borrowing in domestic markets, within prudent limits. For both IBRD and IFC,
however, it is difficult to issue bonds in local currencies that are significantly below sovereign, except
in some exceptional cases. The ability of IFC to actually contribute in this area is generally constrained
by country conditions, funding needs for private sector projects, the cost of funding in such countries,
and their charge on its balance sheet.46

Effectiveness
Because IBRD’s Treasury Department did not have a mandate to help member countries to
develop their capital markets, its effectiveness cannot be evaluated against this yardstick, per se.
It is, however, clear that IBRD has been a pioneer in introducing new and innovative instruments
for member countries (Box 1.4). Yet, it would be difficult to claim that they helped member
countries grow their local currency bond markets, made a major contribution in developing market
infrastructures, or created a yield curve. Almost all such bonds issued by IBRD are registered
offshore and swapped into U.S. dollars or euros. The absolute volume of bonds issued by IBRD and
other MDBs combined is small in comparison to the size of major emerging markets. IBRD’s offshore
issues have, however, been valuable in sensitizing a broad range of investors to the potential of
investing in these currencies and markets.

IFC’s Indian rupee program, especially its offshore Masala bonds, can be considered a success
because it has been able to scale up to US$1.7 billion. IFC’s successful issuance also influenced
the Reserve Bank of India’s decision to permit domestic Indian entities to access the offshore
Masala market. The impact of the onshore Maharaja Bonds is small, however, given its total size
of INR6 billion (US$100 million) (Box 2.5). The ability of IFC to penetrate India’s domestic bond
market is challenged by cost because it has to pay a spread over sovereign. Mismatch of cash flows
between funding requirements of actual projects and IFC borrowing creates a carrying cost. In other
countries, IFC’s local currency bond activities will also be constrained by prevailing macro and market
conditions, issue cost, balance sheet charges, and the need for transparency to local players. Nigeria
is an example of likely macroeconomic constraints. The size of the bond issued in the Dominican
Republic (the Taino Bond) was only US$10 million and it appears to have been costly and time-
consuming; however, its proceeds were used to finance a loan to IFC projects. IFC’s bond issue in
Russia introduced a potentially novel product, an inflation-linked bond, but its novelty made it difficult
for the market to understand and it remains controversial.47

Among other IEG case-study countries, IFC issued a single local currency bond, onshore, in
Morocco in 2005, with a face value of MAD1 billion. IFC and IBRD both made local currency issues
in Colombia.48 As in Nigeria, proceeds in Morocco were swapped back to U.S. dollars. According to
market participants, the Morocco issue had limited impact on maturity, regulatory infrastructure, or
pricing of subsequent bond issues. IFC also issued locally in Colombian pesos (COP) in 2002 (and
IBRD followed with a local issue in 2004) but neither followed with repeat issues.49 Colombia’s yield
curve does not seem to have benefited perceptibly from the issuance of Bank Group Treasury bonds



                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   41
because it already issued its own bonds with long maturities. Currently, IFC is planning to issue up to
$500 million worth of local currency bonds through a streamlined issuance framework for qualified
institutional investors (the so-called Segundo Mercado). This could potentially attract other new
issuers.




Box 2.6 | IFC Treasury Bond Issues in Indian Rupees: Impact on Capital Market
          Development

      IFC’s $3 billion offshore “Masala” bond issuance program leveraged its expertise and
      reputation to attract foreign investors to Indian rupee–denominated bond issues, allowing
      investors balancing their exposure to currency risk with the AAA rating of IFC’s credit risk.
      The issue signaled confidence in the Indian economy and brought in a new and diverse
      range of investors as well as additional and cheaper funding for development projects, at
      rates that were lower than domestic borrowing by up to 100–200 bps. Its series of bonds
      of different maturities helped create an AAA rupee yield curve in the international offshore
      markets. A major benefit has been the demonstration effect that prompted India’s central
      bank (RBI) to issue guidelines permitting other Indian entities to issue offshore bonds. In
      November 2015, the Indian Railway Finance Corporation (IRFC), was preparing an offshore
      rupee-denominated bond issue, aimed at raising US$200–300 million, also to be listed on
      the London stock exchange—and avoiding currency mismatch. The proceeds of IFC’s bond
      issues were kept in local currency to fund IFC’s local currency investments in banks and
      infrastructure projects, including a US$100 million equivalent infrastructure bond issued by
      Axis Bank and a US$50 million Green Bond issued by YES Bank, mainly for the renewable
      energy sector. IFC’s contributions to rupee supranational bond issues have been of a
      significant scale during 2013 to 2015, compared to other supranational issuers.

      IFC’s onshore “Maharaja” bond                                     SUPRANATIONAL BOND ISSUANCE
                                                                          IN INDIAN RUPEES, BILLIONS
      issues were smaller, raising                      200

      approximately US$100 million. Their                           IBRD
      main influence has been to introduce              150         IFC
                                                                    EBRD
      new product types, given their
                                                                    EIB
      innovative structure ranging from                 100         IDB
      5- and 10-year bullet bonds to 13- and                        Nordic Investment Bank
                                                                    ADB
      20-year separately tradable                        50
      redeemable principal parts (STRPPs),
      to attract different investors to India’s
                                                           0
      capital markets. Again, proceeds of
                                                           04

                                                                 05

                                                                      06

                                                                           07

                                                                                08

                                                                                      09

                                                                                             10

                                                                                                  11

                                                                                                         12

                                                                                                          13

                                                                                                          14

                                                                                                          15
                                                          20

                                                               20

                                                                     20

                                                                          20

                                                                               20

                                                                                      20

                                                                                           20

                                                                                                20

                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                       20




      bonds issued under this structure will            Note: ADB = Asian Development Bank; EBRD = European Bank for
      be used for infrastructure investments            Reconstruction and Development; EIB = European Investment Bank;
                                                        IDB = Inter-American Development Bank.




42         The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 2
Box 2.6 | IFC Treasury Bond Issues in Indian Rupees: Impact on Capital Market
          Development (continued)

      in India.a The impact on the yield curve, however, was marginal. The proceeds of the offshore
      and onshore bond issues represent nearly the entire IFC annual commitment for India, but are
      very small in scale compared to large Indian corporate bond issuers. The bond issue gives
      IFC an opportunity to tap the demand for quality local currency issues, but from a capital
      market development perspective, the amounts are small compared to the regular issuers in
      the corporate bond market in India (World Bank 2006).

      India’s Largest Corporate Bond Issuers: 2011–15 (Rupees billion)

                                                                  2011	 2012	 2013	2014	2015 YTD

         Power Finance Corp Ltd	                                      292	         226	         388	         321	            313

         Rural Electrification Corp Ltd	                              163	         161	         227	         318	166

         Housing Development Finance Corp Ltd	                        229	         257	         279	         253	            182

         LIC Housing Finance Ltd	                                     115	         115	         166	225	                     103

         Export-Import Bank of India	                                 124	         107	         108	         119	             19

         IBRD	                                                           2	2	 2	21	                                           22

         IFC	                                                           —	 —	30	58	                                           21

         Top 10 total	                                              3,384	 1,999	1,619	1,875	                             1,401

         All corporate rupee bond issues	                           4,634	       4,151	       3,255	      4,497	          3,087

         Note: Data for 2015 are as of August 18, 2015.


      Sources: IFC Treasury, IEG, Bloomberg.

      a. Infrastructure is widely defined by regulators in India and covers a spectrum of sectors including, for example. low-income
      housing.




Offshore issues, when undertaken on a repeat basis and across a range of maturities, help in
developing a yield curve in the currency concerned, diversifying the investor base, and bringing
newcomers into the market by separating currency risk from credit risk. In India, regular offshore
issues, in a range of maturities, by IFC, provided a signal of confidence in the country and established
an AAA-rated benchmark. Onshore issues, especially initially, have had a demonstration effect, in
ironing out regulatory environment needs for future issuers, identifying necessary documentation
and infrastructure in clearance and settlement arrangements. They can also “jumpstart” the
domestic market’s tolerance for longer-dated issues, or crowd in other corporate issuers and



                                                                           Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group             43
institutional investors. However, unless issues are of a sufficient size and frequency, lasting impact
on the domestic market or domestic yield curve is difficult to achieve. Such size and frequency are
constrained by the size and nature of IFC’s operations in the country concerned and its own risk
parameters and capital charges. Such onshore issuance can be expensive and time-consuming,
and this must be weighed against potential market-specific benefits. Holding local currency debt
instruments in emerging market countries also poses interest rate risks from mismatch of duration. It
may be more cost-effective for IFC to focus its efforts in few countries so that more tangible results
could be achieved on a cost-effective basis. Yet such programs, too, must be careful about rating
agencies’ measures of IFC capital utilization, in the event of concentration.50

IEG’s review of the experience of the other MDBs that are active in terms of local currency issues,
primarily EBRD and ADB, suggests that more systematic programs (as opposed to one-off issues)
and better integration of such programs within a broader mantle of both operational and advisory
work, could be more effective at developing local markets (Appendix 2.5). EBRD has focused on
local currency bond issues to support a broader program of local currency lending and support for
the development of market indices. Since 2010 it has more formally tried to link such local capital
and financial markets activities to its linked diagnostic and advisory work. Six countries were targeted
in the latter, after commitments to broad-based financial reform. At ADB, in addition to supporting
policy and advisory work underpinned by its role as the secretariat for the ASEAN+3 group, it also
established a targeted local currency issue program for five regional currencies.

Finally, as underscored by the experience of ADB, it should also be recognized that issuance of
bonds by MDBs by themselves do not help create a viable local capital market unless a country is
fully committed to a broad range of reforms including security market regulations, taxation, exchange
controls, market infrastructure, investor base, and market intermediaries. This function is better
performed by the joint efforts of the Bank Group through policy advice and development policy
operations. When most of these conditions are in place, together with investor confidence, local
currency bonds by MDBs are no longer required. Meanwhile, selective interventions by Bank Group
Treasury Departments can, however, add value



Bond Markets—A Summary of Findings
The Bank Group has adopted major innovative and large-scale programs for bond market
development, jointly housed under the World Bank and IFC, and highly leveraged by unconventional
funding and donor support. Its flagship GEMLOC program for government bonds was successful
at strengthening government bond markets, notably through the low-cost and effective advisory
support of its Peer Group dialogues. GEMLOC’s highly original second and third pillars, the GEMX
index and the PIMCO-managed fund for emerging market sovereign bonds, sought to increase
the attractiveness of this asset class. Though less successful, they still served useful purposes.
ESMID aimed to complement GEMLOC through its focus on corporate and project bonds, offering
integrated solutions, from addressing market barriers to bringing transactions to market. Its legal
and regulatory agenda has been the most successful, with partial success in terms of transactions.


44       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 2
Although the ESMID program was unusually broad in a number of regards, it is a question whether
a final purposive focus on individual transactions could distract from broader initiatives and prior
reforms required for the market as a whole. Arguably, a conducive environment would itself facilitate
transactions. Additional Bank Group support is evident at the country level, often reinforced by
programmatic lending and typically, though not invariably, underpinned, where available, by FSAP
guidance on design. In some countries, lack of comprehensive dialogue and sustained engagement
limited effectiveness.

Both IFC and IBRD Treasuries issued local currency bonds, mostly offshore, largely for funding
purposes, but also, in the case of IFC, with the development of local bond markets as one objective.
IFC’s issuance of onshore bonds was linked to its business needs (local private investment), its
capacity for currency risk, and its mandate, since 2013, of local capital market support. Both
Treasuries have undertaken some innovative transactions. Programmatic issuance is valuable and
can help build a yield curve and establish an AAA-rated benchmark within countries. Its impact
in domestic markets depends on relative scale. However, positive demonstration effects have
been claimed in some countries. Experience in other MDBs shows impact can be increased not
only through programmatic engagement but also, as in EBRD and ADB, though more systematic
integration of an issuance program with advisory work.

E ndnotes

1
     mphasized at the outset of the evaluation period in the post-Asian-Crisis environment, the need for domestic resource
    E
    mobilization for heavily donor-reliant IDA countries that are about to graduate is increasingly recognized today.
    Papaiannou and others (2010) and Anderson, Silva, and Velandia-Rubiano (2010) are recent reaffirmations of the need
    for developing local bond markets. Even prior to the financial crisis, this was emphasized the G8 (2007) Action Plan for
    Developing Local Bond Markets in Emerging Market Economies, underpinned by the Bank for International Settlements
    (2007). It was reiterated after the crisis, with more broad-based support, in the G20 (2011) Action Plan.

2
    Appendix 2.1 reviews Bank Group core partnerships and analytical contributions for bond market development.

3
    Compared to 115 bond market interventions listed in the Approach Paper.

4
     EMLOC: Global Emerging Markets Local Currency Bond Program, launched at the World Bank in 2008; ESMID:
    G
    Efficient Securities Markets Institutional Development program; and FABDM: Financial Advisory and Debt Management
    Program, under the World Bank’s Treasury and Debt Management departments.

5
    S
     ECO: Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs; SIDA: Swedish International Development Agency. SECO and
    SIDA have also supported additional programs in the bond market development area.

6
     SMID projects are here notionally attached to IFC as their budget entries are mapped to IFC. To avoid double
    E
    counting, main ESMID projects are classified here as IFC projects, and the supporting projects are classified as World
    Bank projects, because they frequently relied on region-based World Bank staff.

7
     frica and Latin America were significant beneficiaries, in terms of numbers of projects. In terms of value, the Africa
    A
    region has been the single largest recipient of funds, at just over half the total (52.4 percent). This is essentially owing to
    the few but very large-value ESMID projects in East Africa.

8
    I
    n addition to the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) and the Swedish International Development
    Cooperation Agency (SIDA), external funds under the FIRST program were also significant for World Bank projects
    reviewed here, as well as support from bilateral donors and a small number of reimbursable advisory services (see




                                                                        Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group        45
     Chapter 7). GEMLOC and reimbursable advisory services are not funded by donors; they are self-funding, earned by
     the programs in question, independent of network budget outlays.

9
     nitially in the Finance and Private Sector Development Global Capital Markets Practice, later in the Finance
     I
     and Markets Global Practice. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/FINANCIALSECTOR/Resources/Brochure_
     GEMLOC_10-20-2008.pdf . Given the practice of completion reports for IFC advisory services, most GEMLOC
     advisory projects have completion reports, even though these have World Bank project IDs. These enable at least a
     review of the project’s achievements, though there is no prior independent evaluation of these projects.

10
     Projects P106935, P108952, P115512, P108953, and P112316.

11
     See GEMLOC Advisory Services Survey: Key Priorities for Debt Market Development. (6/2009).

12
     Completion Summary: FY14 GEMLOC ASP Peer Group Dialogue (P147198; May 2014).

13
     W
      orld Bank. Completion Summary (P133209). (April 2013), and Concept Note Review Minutes for Issuer Driven ETF
     (P147208). March 2014. As of September 2015, the proposed ID-ETF had not been launched in Brazil due to decision-
     making lags.

14
     n Costa Rica, which is faced with a similar problem of fragmentation of debt on issue between the Treasury and the
     I
     central bank, GEMLOC provided detailed guidance on unifying the public debt market.

15
     G
      EMLOC Kazakhstan: Government Securities Market Development Issues (P148390). As explained by the task team,
     the departure of key official sponsors, as well as a central bank decision to merge pension funds, together with a lack
     of clarity on investment regulations for the new pension funds, contributed to the withdrawal.

16
     Based on IEG discussions with market participants.

17
      he Asian Bond Fund 2 Initiative. Chan, Eric, et. al, BIS July 2011. The goal of this initiative is to enhance the
     T
     development of the local currency bond markets in eight Asian countries: China; Hong Kong SAR, China; Indonesia;
     Korea; Malaysia; Philippines; Singapore; and Thailand.

18
      ee GEMLOC Investability Indicators: CRISIL (2008) and GEMLOC Investability Indicator Methodology. Copal Amba.
     S
     May 2014.

19
     D
      etailed in the Approach Paper for the present evaluation. These include, for example, Harwood (2000) on the
     benefits of bond markets, the World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) (2001) first guide to developing
     government bond markets; the series of annual conferences on government debt markets jointly undertaken with the
     Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD), the 12-country World Bank/IMF pilot program
     on debt management and public bond market development (World Bank (2007 and 2007a), and, most recently, the
     OECD, Bank Group, and IMF jointly prepared diagnostic framework and action plan for local currency bond market
     development (IMF 2013).

20
      eer reviews were conducted on some of the GEMLOC Peer Group Dialogues (for example, for a cluster under
     P
     P147198, on electronic trading platforms and on target cash buffers. Comments pointed toward the relevance of topic
     selection, the wide range of country participants, and the depth of the discussion.

21
     http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/RegProjects_Ext_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/ESMID_Home/.

22
      arana Corporation, (2009); Bourse Consult & Genesis Analytics (2013) and Analistas Financieros Internacionales
     C
     (AFI) (2014).

23
      he evolution of funding of ESMID is discussed in Chapter 8. In November 2013, additional funding was made
     T
     available to ESMID East Africa by SIDA, amounting to around US$1.4 million. Recently, according to the Capital
     Markets team, funding from SECO has been extended by $15 million (2015).

24
      rojects 545164, P121995, P124057, P129763, 600053, P143456 and P149828, and Project 562707 (2008,
     P
     $1.13 million) focused solely on Nigeria.




46            The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 2
25
      he Treaty for Establishment of the East African Community entered into force on July 27, 2000 and included Kenya,
     T
     Tanzania and Uganda. With the accession of Rwanda in June 2007, commitments toward regional integration were
     formalized, and the ESMID Program was both relevant and timely in its start in 2007 because it was able to integrate
     bond market harmonization into the move toward regional harmonization.

26
      pecific reports are mentioned in the Bank Group’s completion report, including a market model report and a gap
     S
     analysis for all the East African Community countries, a legal and regulatory report covering also costs of issuance and
     securitization, and proposing regulatory changes, a review of Kenya’s investment guidelines, a review of secondary
     bond market structure for Rwanda and Tanzania, a regional bond issuance framework, trade reporting guidelines for
     Kenya, and an East African Community regionalization strategy and plan report.

27
      airobi Water and Sewage company, Kenya airports, City of Kigali Bus, Housing Finance Co., Faulu Kenya, and the
     N
     Uganda Water Corporation. Subsequent to the midterm evaluation, however, a number of other transactions were
     identified, with four receiving support from ESMID and eventually coming to market and raising US$99 million by 2015.

28
     I
     EG’s Evaluation Note of 562707 (March 31, 2015) refers to the following article: http://www.africanbondmarkets.org/
     en/news-events/african-bond-market-review/article/building-a-vibrant-domestic-bond-market-in-nigeria-61665/

29
     Projects P125844, P129766, P143049, P149833 and 578507.

30
      fter the ESMID period, however, a first closure, on the Pacifica 3 project, a part of the 4G toll highway program was
     A
     realized in February 2016.

31
     See Chapters 6 and 8.

32 
     The Financial Advisory and Banking-Debt Management Department (FABDM) of the World Bank’s Treasury Department
     works closely, however, with the Public Debt Management (PDM) group under the World Bank’s Macroeconomic Global
     Practice—formerly a part of the PREM group. Historically the focus of the Public Debt Management Group had been on
     low-income and IDA countries, largely financed by the multidonor Debt Management Facility (DMF) under the Public Debt
     Management group, while FABDM focused largely on IBRD countries. FABDM also implements the Government Debt
     and Risk Management (GDRM) program, initially funded by SECO, which is a programmatic medium-term approach to
     supporting middle-income countries in implementing debt management reforms.

33
      valuation of the World Bank Debt Management Facility (DMF) for Low-Income countries (LICs). Universalia, April
     E
     2014: “…developing the local currency bond market is a strategy that LICs should undertake over the longer term in
     order to broaden their portfolio of debt instruments and to establish a more complete yield curve. This would help
     clients better manage their risk and cost options and provide a benchmark for the nascent corporate bond market. A
     module on local currency bond markets could be developed for inclusion in DMF training programs. The World Bank
     already provides services under its GEMLOC program to emerging-market clients, and might consider extending such
     services to its low-income clients.”

34
      ee capital market instruments to mobilize institutional investors to infrastructure and small and medium enterprise
     S
     financing in Emerging Market Economies. Report for the G20. World Bank, IMF and OECD (2015). See also: A
     Multipronged Integrated Approach to the Development of Securities Markets: The Deep Dive. World Bank Report for
     the G20 Working Group for Investment and Infrastructure. August 2014, Jakarta.

35
     nterestingly, however, the recent IMF Article IV consultation for Colombia (June 2015) reports that simulations
     I
     undertaken within Colombia suggest that the costs of such a program could be shouldered by its banking sector.

36
      lthough the recent closure of a part of the deal for Colombia’s 4G (fourth generation) toll highways has been an
     A
     important step.

37
      olff-Hammacher (2007), Garcia and Dalla (2005), EBRD (2013). bonds are registered abroad and denominated
     W
     in local currency but actual settlement is generally in U.S. dollars. These are cleared through international clearing
     systems such as Euroclear bonds are registered in the country of issuance and subject to local regulations including
     taxation and exchange controls.




                                                                      Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group      47
38
      or example, IFC uses proceeds of local currency offshore bond issues to lend to clients in the onshore market
     F
     matching liabilities (for example, Masala bonds) and assets (for example, Indian rupee investments), sometimes at
     rates superior to what is feasible in the swap market.

39
      lthough IBRD Treasury shares the objective of supporting local capital market development, its practical ability to
     A
     borrow competitively in local markets is limited by the sovereign nature of its clients.

40
     t is true that local currency onshore issues can also be immediately swapped back into dollars, in which case their
     I
     proceeds cannot be used for local currency financing of investment. In case of large-volume issues in small countries,
     potentially destabilizing effects on the local currency must be cautioned. Many of IFC’s local onshore issues were
     swapped in the early years of this evaluation period, but most of the later ones were at least partially, if not entirely,
     retained in local currencies and used for investments.

41
     I
     ncluding the first “Green Masala” bond, which was used to fund the purchase of a green onshore Indian rupee bond
     issued by Yes Bank, a Masala Uridashi bond targeting Japanese retail investors and, most recently, a 15-year Masala
     bond (the longest-tenor Masala bond to date). These Masala bonds (excluding the Uridashi) were all listed on the
     London Stock Exchange. IFC also issued a three-and-a-half year Rs16 billion bond (US$250 million equivalent) under
     Phase II. As of April 30 2016, IFC issued Rs110 billion offshore (approximately $1.73 billion) in seven tranches with
     tenors ranging from three to 15 years, thus establishing the first “AAA” offshore rupee yield curve. IFC invested
     Rs65 billion of Masala bond proceeds in Indian corporate bonds.

42
     T
      hey were not, however, the first Indian rupee listings in the London exchange; EBRD’s offshore rupee bonds of 2007
     and 2011 had also been listed in London.

43
      et such programs are not without risk to the countries’ currency. The Reserve Bank of India has had concerns about
     Y
     potential volatility of unregulated offshore currency movements (nondeliverable forwards), and has allowed investors
     to hedge such currency risk. In the long term, the key to success for the Masala bonds would be a relatively stable
     exchange rate and continued stability of economic indicators.

44
     IFC Treasury Local Currency and Capital Markets Development Program: Impact Evaluation Briefing, April 2015.

45
      lthough the extension of maturities is generally considered beneficial, there is a caveat: to the extent that the investor
     A
     base consists predominantly of banks, with short-term liabilities, longer maturities can also create vulnerabilities.

46
      ultilateral development banks may have an advantage when there are distortions in the domestic market, for
     M
     example, owing to factors such as fiscal deficits, exchange controls, tax policies, or inefficient market infrastructure.

47
     T
      he return on the bond was not linked to the consumer price index (CPI) but to a customized index called the NES
     Russian Inflation Target Index, which was linked to a basket of commodities. The index sponsor stopped maintaining
     the index in December 2014 and no substitute index has replaced the customized index. Bondholders complained
     because no index-linked coupon was paid, although the CPI was clearly positive. The National Pension Authority
     changed its investment guidelines, eliminating investments in international financial institutions. Other market
     participants believe this change may be linked to the IFC issue, though there is no clear evidence for this. As of
     January 2016, IFC offered to buy back one of the outstanding bonds at a price well below par (88.08 percent) which
     was accepted by the majority of the investors. The situation with the other two bonds, which are still outstanding,
     remains unclear.

48
     n Kenya, the Capital Markets Authority reports discussions with IFC for a local currency bond issue in 2009; however,
     I
     necessary approvals were not obtained.

49
     IBRD subsequently issued 27 Colombian peso–denominated bonds in Luxembourg.

50
     S
      tandard & Poor’s noted in their 2015 report on IFC that the decline in their risk-adjusted capital ratio “reflects
     the larger emerging markets sovereign exposures as part of the treasury portfolio, resulting in a single-name
     concentration that is $6 billion higher in 2014 (a 64 percent year-over-year increase).” This concentration risk, largely in
     India, was contrasted with other multilateral development banks, where it arose from purpose-related lending.




48            Results and Performance of the World Bank Group 2015 | Chapter 2
      3
                 highlights




 Instruments:    1   The Bank Group extended limited support to

    Public and       the development of public equities markets

Private Equity       over the evaluation period. IFC’s support

                     to intermediaries and infrastructure has

                     declined. World Bank support, mostly legal or

                     regulatory, was largely in the context of FSAP

                     follow-up or demand-driven and ad hoc.




                 2
                     By contrast. IFC’s role in private equity

                     accelerated in the 2000s, following the setting

                     up of its dedicated funds management

                     department, and over time it moved toward

                     more frontier markets.




                 3
                     As the private equity industry has matured in

                     client countries, IFC’s role as a fund provider

                     has diminished, though it continues to play

                     a catalytic role supporting first-time fund

                     managers and, especially, in setting high

                     environmental, social, and governance

                     standards.




                            Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   49
                                          4
                                                    Yet direct impact on the development of

                                                    public securities markets is negligible and,

                                                    most of the time, was not an objective. IPO

                                                    exits are not a preferred strategy and are rare.

                                                    Private equity development can at best have

                                                    an indirect and long-term impact on capital

                                                    market development.




x   The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 3
Eq u i t i e s , o r s to c ks a n d s h a r e s , which are claims on companies, constitute the

second most important category of securities instruments. Although limited explicit attention has

been paid to the development of public stock markets at the Bank Group of late, there are World

Bank research efforts in this area, and the World Bank has provided assistance on regulation and

market development in some of its interventions.1 The Bank Group paid early attention to building

equities markets, which gained importance in the context of the “equitization” of state enterprises

from the former Soviet Union (Appendix 3.1). Although this agenda has receded, there is new

interest in market finance for small firms. Bank Group interventions on equities markets today focus

especially on regulation and development, in accordance with its public sector mandate (Chapter 6).

Interventions are selective and demand-driven, and only sometimes in the context of a broader vision

of market development. IEG’s findings suggest that contributions, where made, appear to have been

of good quality, as witnessed by their usefulness to clients, even if narrow (India, Kenya). Common

themes appear in several countries: for example, demutualization in three of the five countries. Some

interventions are in progress (Morocco) despite political difficulties, and in others, the World Bank

appears to have been a relatively minor player (Colombia).


More surprising, IFC’s early investments in infrastructure for public stock markets also declined,
with diminishing support for equitization, even as its interest in private equity increased (Appendix
Tables A3.1 and A3.2). Since its beginning, IFC invested in 102 projects related to capital markets
intermediaries and market infrastructure (Appendix Table A3.1). All but five precede the evaluation
period. IEG’s review below therefore focuses on IFC contributions toward the development of private
equity, prominent in the evaluation period, and with some potential for exits to the public market.



Encouraging Private Equity—IFC
IFC gradually shifted its focus from public stock markets to private equity funds, as investors’ comfort
with emerging market investments increased, thus remaining at the “frontier.”2 Private equity, often
for young and small enterprises, accounted for nearly 90 percent of new IFC funds during 2004–14.3
Fund managers provide valuable mentoring to investee companies; who, if successful, can make
initial public offerings (IPOs) on the public stock market.

Private Equity Funds in IFC—An Overview
Although IFC committed a significant volume of investment to its emerging private equity funds, as
the largest emerging market “fund of funds,” IFC’s role has been small in terms of global volume.



                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   51
Box 3.1 | World Bank Engagement in Stock Market Development—Select Countries

     Kenya and Vietnam both had technical assistance that included elements of support
     to public stock markets. Although support for the development of the public stock
     market was not a primary focus of the Bank Group in Kenya, there were quite a
     few elements in larger financial sector operations that had objectives related to the
     development of the public equity market. Kenya, like Colombia (an ESMID country),
     had regional integration as an objective, together with consolidation of regional market
     infrastructure, such as securities settlement and depositories. Kenya’s financial sector
     Technical Assistance project engaged with the Capital Markets Authority (CMA) to
     support various relevant initiatives including risk-based supervision and demutualization
     of the national stock exchange. The successor World Bank analytic and advisory
     activities (AAA), which started in 2014—Strengthening and Deepening of Capital Markets
     (P151870)—had a frontal focus on capital markets, with the objective of developing a
     robust regulatory framework and institutional arrangements, enhancing market liquidity,
     strengthening investor protection, and deepening market products and services. The
     primary counterpart is the CMA. Proposals for adding market liquidity, for example, are
     detailed and include such areas as securities borrowing and lending, increased free float,
     market-maker roles, etc. Some positive outcomes are observed: the final announcement
     of demutualization of the Nairobi Stock Exchange in July 2014 and the implementation of
     risk-based supervision, which will have sustainable benefits.

     The Bank Group did not engage in interventions in Vietnam during the period under review
     that directly aimed at developing the public stock market. Yet the general advisory project
     VN-Accelerating Capital Markets (088804) delivered several documents relating to stock
     markets, including a report on listing processes, suggestions for cross-listing, efforts to
     link equitization and state-owned enterprise privatization to listings, together with manuals
     on surveillance and a report on clearance, settlement, and depository arrangements.
     Many appear to be linked to the process of converting state-owned enterprises to publicly
     owned ones.

     Morocco’s Development policy loans of 2005, 2010, and 2014 each picked up a varying
     number of elements of securities market regulation and structure; the first of these to enhance
     the supervisory powers of the regulator, the second to support demutualization of the
     Casablanca stock exchange (not implemented due to broker resistance); and development
     policy loan 2014, which includes provisions for a new, independent market. It remains to be
     seen whether the political reality of vested interests will enable their achievement.

     The Bank Group had limited but useful contributions for equity market development in
     India, in the early years of the period under evaluation. Following the FSAP in 2001,




52      The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 3
Box 3.1 | World Bank Engagement in Stock Market Development—Select Countries
           (continued)

      the World Bank advised on issues of integrity in the securities market, including
      demutualization of the securities exchanges. The World Bank also worked on brokers’
      capitalization prudential norms, in the wake of a scam, and offered some advice
      on commodities trading, clearance and settlement, and derivatives. With regard to
      the work on demutualization, the government had already received findings from
      its internal committees, yet the World Bank’s role was significant: it helped validate
      the government’s thinking and helped in the selection of the right model for India.
      The decade since the reforms were put in place (in 2007) shows that the results were
      sustainable. There has been little dialogue on stock market–related issues since.

      Following the recent ESMID emphasis on regional capital market integration, the World
      Bank included support to the Integrated Latin American Market (MILA) initiative in its
      agenda in Colombia. This initiative, intended to integrate the capital markets of Chile,
      Colombia, Mexico, and Peru, predated the ESMID Latin America and the Caribbean
      program, and the Bank Group has not been an active participant. The Inter-American
      Development Bank and the Development Bank for Latin America (CAF) have been more
      involved in promoting and supporting the MILA initiative through support to the regulators
      of the four countries.

      Source: IEG. Encouraging Private Equity—IFC




During 2004–14, IFC represented 1 percent of global capital for emerging market private equity fund
investments. Yet, given that IFC’s average share in these funds was about 12 percent, the total value of
these funds, in which IFC was a significant minority investor, was 8.5 times higher. IFC helped first-time
managers demonstrate performance and build experience, and helped to shape the fund industry as
a convenor, creating the first performance benchmark for emerging market private equity. IFC also
launched the Emerging Markets Private Equity Association (EMPEA), the leading industry organization.4
IFC may also have played a countercyclical and frontier role; its share of global commitments increased
to 2 percent in 2009–10 in the wake of the crisis, later dropping back to 1 percent.

The financial performance of IFC investments in private equity funds has been mixed, which
constrains them from attracting new investment. Of the funds originating during 2004–09, 44 percent
had negative returns.5 IFC’s average mobilization rate was 8:1, reflecting a lower average mobilization
rate with small funds (less than $100 million), which account for a large numeric share in IFC’s
portfolio, despite lower overheads in larger funds. An alternative metric of capital mobilization is the
extent to which domestic investors were attracted to the fund. For smaller investments, the share



                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   53
of international investors has declined from 61 percent (2000–05) to 41 percent (2010–14). But this
growth has not been universal, as two of the five case study countries show. Despite IFC’s active role
in private equity in Morocco, the industry depends on external capital, possibly because of regulatory
constraints that local investors face. Similarly, the private equity market in India has experienced no




Box 3.2 | IFC’s Investments in Private Equity: An Overview

      IFC investments in funds began in the 1970s, and grew significantly during the
      1980s, with a total of $236 million committed in 34 funds (and fund management
      companies), of which $206 million was in public equity funds, which provided a
      means for foreign investors to buy publicly listed equities in IFC client countries. Fund
      investment activity surged during the 1990s when a total of 157 new funds (and fund
      management companies) were committed and the focus switched to private equity
      funds, which accounted for 90 of the new funds, and for $1.0 billion in investment,
      compared to $200 million for portfolio funds. Also notable was the large number
      of investments in fund management companies (38), which are the legal entities
      representing the general partners. IFC set up a funds department in 2001 and activity
      surged. A total of 153 funds were committed during 2000–10, of which 127 were
      private equity funds, reflecting the focus of the new department. The amounts invested
      also increased, totaling $3.4 billion, of which $2.9 billion was committed in private equity
      funds. However the growth of new investments slowed during 2010–14, reflecting in
      part the volatile global economic environment, but activity remained high, with a total of
      121 new funds committed during the period; of these 110 were private equity funds.




                   	                                                            2000–03         2004–08	2009–14


                   Total No. of IFC Funds	                                        31	                86	             126

                   No. of Private Equity (PE) Funds	                              25	                73	             111

                   Total Orig. Commitment all funds (US$ m)	                      334	               1510	           3663

                   Total Original Commitment PE funds (US$ m)	                    285	               1268	           3152

                 40


                 20


                  0
                          0

                                 1

                                        2

                                                3

                                                      4

                                                             5

                                                                    6

                                                                           7

                                                                                  8

                                                                                         9

                                                                                                0

                                                                                                           1

                                                                                                               2

                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                         14
                           0

                                  0

                                         0

                                                0

                                                       0

                                                              0

                                                                     0

                                                                            0

                                                                                   0

                                                                                          0

                                                                                                 1

                                                                                                        1

                                                                                                                1

                                                                                                                       1
                        FY

                               FY

                                      FY

                                             FY

                                                    FY

                                                           FY

                                                                  FY

                                                                         FY

                                                                                FY

                                                                                       FY

                                                                                              FY

                                                                                                     FY

                                                                                                             FY

                                                                                                                    FY

                                                                                                                      FY




                                             Total No. of IFC Funds             No. of Private Equity Funds




54       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 3
Box 3.2 | IFC’s Investments in Private Equity: An Overview (continued)

      Growth was accompanied by regional diversification toward newer emerging markets.
      In the 1980s, investments in the East Asia and the Pacific region represented more than
      half the number of private equity fund investments and 74 percent of IFC’s committed
      amount. In the current decade, the East Asia and the Pacific private equity portfolio
      dropped to 21 percent of fund investments (by count and 22 percent by committed
      amount) in the current decade; Sub-Saharan Africa increased to 20 percent.




growth in the share of local capital. IFC has, however, made a positive contribution to improving the
governance structure of emerging market private equity funds. Preventing unethical fund manager
behavior and aligning their incentives with the interests of investors helps attract capital. IFC’s legal
matrix of standards for governance are now widely accepted in client countries’ private equity
markets. In addition, IFC is on the advisory committee of about half its funds (120) and has a board
seat in an additional 32.

Based on 28 available IEG-approved Expended Project Supervision Report (XPSR) ratings, only
40 percent of IFC’s private equity funds had an overall development outcome rating of mostly
successful or better, though market impact and support to investee companies scored better. Looking
at project business success (PBS), smaller funds had lower median returns—just 0.8 percent per
year. Nearly half of these had negative returns and there was a wide band of variation. As fund size
increased, the median return rose too, up to 7.1 percent for funds in the range $100–250 million and as
high as 10.9 percent for funds in the range $250–500 million. Overall, less than a quarter of funds (and
none of the smallest funds) had PBS ratings of excellent or satisfactory. The poorer performance of the
smallest funds likely reflects more risky investees and less experienced fund managers. On the other
hand, the private sector development rating (PSD), reflecting market impact and development support
to investee companies, was considerably better, at 54 percent rated high or satisfactory. However in
this dimension too, smaller funds performed more weakly. The PSD rating decreases to 14 percent for
the smallest funds, but increases to 80 percent for funds in the range $100–250 million and 60 percent
for funds in the range $250–500 million. Expanded Project Supervision Reports (XPSRs) assessed
IFC’s role to be excellent or satisfactory in 65 percent of the funds.

A purposive IEG desk review of the Board papers of 45 private equity fund investments for the
present evaluation showed that at the time of their approval about 40 percent of these investments
claimed to play an important role in developing capital markets. A third pointed to an important
anticipated role, and the remaining third made no explicit mention of capital markets development
in approval documents. IEG also explored the extent to which the private equity funds led to the
development of local fund managers and found that the fund manager was not locally based in



                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   55
Box 3.3 | IFC and PE Development in Nigeria

      IFC started its private equity activities in Nigeria with the CAPE Fund, which was
      launched in 1998 and was the first purely Nigeria-focused private equity fund. That fund was
      managed by ACA, a set of local fund managers with no prior experience managing
      a private equity fund, and was able to raise $35 million and achieved a gross internal rate
      of return of 46 percent. Although it is difficult to attribute the success of the private equity
      market in Nigeria specifically to CAPE, the success of that fund had a demonstration effect: it
      contributed positively to the ability of ACA to launch four follow-on funds, each progressively
      larger, attracting both international and local investors. It also led the way
      for other local and international fund managers to start private equity funds based in Nigeria.
      There are now nine private equity funds based in Lagos. In addition, two of the large
      international private equity managers have established offices in Lagos. Besides developing
      the private equity industry in Nigeria, the CAPE funds have impacted local capital markets
      through a series of successful investee company exits from the fund. Although most have
      been in the form of private sales, ACA has taken two investees public. The series of CAPE
      funds raised $646 million in funding.

      Today there are more than 200 private equity funds targeting Africa, with increasingly
      sophisticated investment strategies, varying from generalist to more sector- or region­specific
      funds. Increasingly, these managers are also basing themselves in offices on the continent,
      and moving away from the fly-in-fly-out model that was more typical of private equity firms
      historically.

      Sources: IEG, and “African Consumers: Driving the African Private Equity Opportunity,” FMO-Fairview.




57 percent of sample projects. And first-time funds for IFC represented 51 percent of the total.
Beyond project approval, an analysis of the Development Outcome Tracking System (DOTS)
monitoring indicators of these projects showed that in the sample, 42 percent of the projects self-
report a significant impact on capital markets development. Another 31 percent of the projects
reported at least some level of capital markets development. However, 16 percent of the projects
had no monitoring related to capital markets development, and for another 11 projects, responses
suggested that it was too early to tell.

Private Equity Funds—Evidence from IEG Country Case Studies
IFC played an initial and catalytic role as a first-time investor in the private equity industry in several
countries, but over time, its role in private equity has diminished. Other investors, including domestic
investors, have entered the market. Even though IFC was a niche player in terms of total capital,
observers remarked that often—but not always—its partnerships were catalytic both in attracting
funds and in bringing best practice to fund management.



56        The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 3
Contribution to securities market development was at best an ancillary objective, sometimes alluded
to at the inception but rarely followed up in practice. It is difficult to trace impact from private equity
to capital markets more broadly. Core objectives mentioned were more focused on access to finance
for growing firms, advising such firms, and developing the private equity industry itself. Although
initial public offerings (IPOs) may be a preferred strategy, they are not seen as a likely exit mechanism
because they are not available in most markets. Private sales are the norm. IFC itself claims that it
sees its role as a capital provider in developing countries, noting that the lack of risk capital hinders
economic growth and thwarts entrepreneurship. At best the goal of its private equity business was
to help companies grow, develop better corporate governance, and create jobs—aims that could be
seen as indirectly related to capital market development.




Box 3.4 | IFC and Private Equity Development—Select Countries

      As a first-time investor in Colombia, IFC’s entry was quick, timely, and catalytic.
      After a 2007 regulatory change stimulated new growth in the domestic private equity
      industry, permitting pension funds to invest in private equity, IFC was involved in the
      first domestic fund that started after the change (Tribeca Fund 1); the first, also, to raise
      assets from pension funds. Later IFC became a limited partner in three other funds,
      including an infrastructure fund. In Kenya, too, IFC was on the mark, and with the
      opening of its Nairobi office, was able to move the country from offshore to onshore
      private equity investment from 2007. IFC was also the first development financing
      institution and foreign investor to support a private equity fund in Morocco in 2000. In
      Vietnam, IFC’s first investment (in the series of VEIL funds) was with Dragon Capital, a
      first-time manager both in terms of its corporate history and the private equity industry in
      Vietnam. Given this record, IFC could be viewed as making a groundbreaking investment
      decision. Yet, in India, IFC’s initial entry seems to have lagged that of other investors.
      Between 2001 and 2004, a number of large international private equity players entered
      India (including Carlyle, Blackstone, Warburg Pincus, Tiger Global Management, and
      Barings) and allegedly made spectacular returns. IEG’s entry later in the decade missed
      this opportunity. However, IFC’s return to the Indian private equity market around 2008
      has been praised as demonstrating willingness to play a countercyclical role.

      Over time, IFC’s role has diminished. In Colombia, IFC’s total investments of $35 million
      are small relative to the sector as a whole, where investments totaled $3.4 billion of capital
      raised as of February 2013, across 32 funds, and with a further 15 in the process of
      fundraising. In Kenya, when IFC invested US$25 million in a new US$1.1 billion Helios fund,
      IFC only took a 2 percent share of the company. World Bank interlocutors commented that
      IFC’s visibility is now less than that of USAID, the African Development Bank, and the

                                                              (Box continues on the following page.)




                                                            Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   57
Box 3.4 | IFC and Private Equity Development—Select Countries (continued)

      Department for International Development, which have increased their engagement in the
      market. In India, from 2004 to 2015, IFC made investments in 30 private equity funds for
      nearly US$544 million in aggregate and in four fund management companies for
      US$1 million in aggregate. Yet in comparison, from 2005 to 2014, venture capital and private
      equity investors invested US$107.2 billion in India. As of end-2014, there were 436 active
      funds in India, including about 220 new funds. Therefore IFC today is a niche player.

      IFC’s partnerships were often catalytic, attracting funds and raising the standards of
      fund management. Observers in India remarked that IFC has often played the role of an
      anchor investor in several of the funds in which it has invested. In Kenya, its investment in the
      Kibo II fund was viewed as a catalytic stamp of approval, given the perceived risk of investing
      in Africa funds, and IFC’s brand name as the largest investor in emerging markets private
      equity. IFC’s involvement with Tribeca in Colombia contributed both to its ability
      to raise assets from domestic pension funds and to use international best practices in its
      documentation and legal structure. However, IFC’s investment in Ashmore, Colombia, was
      not viewed as transformative, because other multilateral donors (CAF) were concurrently
      investing, as were the big pension funds. IFC’s investment with VI Group in Vietnam, in
      2008, for VI Fund I, was also an investment with a first-time fund management team. IEG’s
      mission findings suggest that IFC’s involvement was catalytic in helping VI Group close
      its first offering. Almost all nine fund managers that IEG met with in India were first-time
      fund managers, and all except one were local. IFC’s contributions to improved corporate
      governance standards and better environmental and social oversight were often noted.




Private Equity—A Summary of Findings
Private equity has grown significantly in IFC client countries since the turn of the millennium, and
IFC has often played a pioneering role as a provider of risk capital, willing to engage with first-time
fund managers, and introducing structural, governance, social, and environmental standards. Its
prominent role in frontier countries, with first-time managers and smaller firms, may have come at the
expense of some tradeoff in returns. As the private equity industry matured, IFC receded as a fund
provider. It retains an important catalytic role, though this does not transfer to a direct impact on the
development of public securities markets. Private equity has a negligible role in this regard, with, at
best, an indirect and long-term impact on capital market development. IPO exits are not available
in many markets and are rare. Yet, private equity venture capital are likely to be the most promising
vehicles for supporting new and small firms, and given this objective, IFC’s moves were in the right


58       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 3
direction. Given IFC’s record of adapting its lines of business as markets change, it could explore
moves beyond both public stock markets and private equity, perhaps toward new and innovative
financing methods for small businesses that lie in “Fintech,” B2B, and crowdfunding initiatives.

E ndnotes

1
    See Chapter 6 Appendix 6.1.

2
    FC’s Emerging Markets Database and emerging market stock indices effectively introduced the emerging market
    I
    asset category to investors. The indices were first published in 1981, presenting monthly prices on the most active
    stocks in 10 markets, with a history of prices back to 1975. Additions and refinements to the indices continued until, at
    the time of the transfer of the indices to Standard & Poor’s in 2000, the main indices covered a total of 33 countries,
    with an additional 18 covered by a set of frontier indices. As a corollary, the term “emerging markets” was coined (Van
    Agtmael 2007).

3
    In private equity funds, a set of investors (known as the limited partners) provide capital in the form of equity to a
    fund manager (known as the general partner) to invest in target (investee) companies that are privately held and have
    not issued public equity. The nature of those investee companies determines the nature of the fund, which could be
    restricted by geography, sector, or strategy.

4
    FC committed US$5.4 billion in 280 private equity funds during 2000–15, making it the largest emerging market “fund
    I
    of funds.” In its convening role, IFC, together with Cambridge Associates, also holds an annual Global Conference on
    private equity, currently in its 18th year.

5
    U
     sing December 2014 equity valuations. The use of results only for funds originated during 2004–09 reflects the need
    to accept that returns for active equity investments less than five years into their life are often not indicative of their final
    return. This is especially true in the case of private equity funds, where it would be preferable to use returns for closed
    funds only, which is typically after about 10 years. Calculating returns prior to close implies using interim valuations for
    investments not yet liquidated, which is susceptible to a variety of errors. The 44 percent with negative returns is similar
    to the results achieved for IFC direct equity investments, although the results for private equity funds have historically
    been less volatile than direct equity investments, with far fewer having extremely negative outcomes.




                                                                         Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group         59
       4
                 highlights




 Instruments:    1         IFC has offered occasional transaction support

   Mortgage-               for the development of mortgage-backed

       Backed              securities, and in a few cases, notably Colombia

Securities and             and Russia, where country conditions permitted,

Market-Based               has strongly supported the development of

      Housing              secondary market mortgage instruments.

      Finance

                 2
                           In a subset of countries, such as Brazil, Egypt,

                           Ghana, Nigeria, and Tanzania, the Bank Group

                           supported the use of mortgage liquidity

                           facilities, which can be considered a first step

                           toward the use of “capital market” instruments,

                           at a primary market stage, as the intermediary

                           institution funds itself on the market. The Bank

                           Group has also been attempting the introduction

                           of covered bonds (in, for example, Brazil, India,

                           and Morocco).




                 3         Yet in most of these countries, markets were

                           not ready for this. Market conditions limited

                           the extent to which countries could set up

                           such capital market–related mortgage finance

                           instruments.




  x
  60             The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 4
        4
              Given the level of development of client

              countries’ economies, Bank Group support to

              housing finance typically focused primarily on

              banks.




        5
              The Bank Group was often able to make a

              significant upstream contribution, especially in

              the form of supporting the development of an

Results and      Performance
        appropriate                           of the
                    legal and regulatory framework  for

        World        Bank Group 2015
        such instruments, as well as detailed advisory

              work on design, which could ultimately be useful.
                                An Independent Evaluation




                                                        Careful observation and
                                                        analysis of program data
                                                        and the many issues
                                                        impacting program
                                                        efficacy reveal what
                                                        works as well as what
                                                        could work better. The
                                                        knowledge gleaned is
                                                        valuable to all who strive
                                                        to ensure that World
                                                        Bank goals are met and
                                                        surpassed.




                        Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group       61
A third major category of securities instruments are asset-backed securities (ABS), pooled bundles

of claims on underlying assets. Mortgage-backed securities (MBS) for housing finance represent

claims on underlying mortgages; ABS can be claims on other underlying financial receivables.1 The

Bank Group, especially IFC, supported the phased development of ABS and MBS in many countries,

especially in the context of housing finance, which forms the focus of this section.




Developing Market-Based Finance for Housing
IEG recognizes that the development of market-based financing instruments was rarely a focus of
housing interventions. Second, IEG recognizes that although mortgage securitization per se may have
been rare, the Bank Group may have supported countries in their initial steps toward the use of market-
based financing. Upstream interventions that could indirectly help support a sound housing finance
market also include the establishment of a sound legal and regulatory structure. More directly, and
closer to the use of capital markets, would be moves toward the establishment of mortgage liquidity
facilities that intermediate between primary mortgage companies and bond markets, or instruments
such as covered bonds or mortgage-backed bonds. In some instances, the Bank Group was directly




Box 4.1 | IFC’s Securitization Transactions

      IFC made about 13 identifiable transactions involving securitization during the
      review period. Banks and microfinance institutions accounted for six; secondary mortgage
      institutions accounted for some of the remainder, notably in Russia. IFC played a role in
      the start of the asset-backed securities market in that country, with the development of
      an international market for securities tied to Russian mortgages and auto loans. A large
      number of asset-backed securities transactions in Mexico, totaling $103 million, involved local
      currency issues of debt instruments by small and medium enterprises which were purchased
      by Mexican institutional investors. Another innovative set of projects in the region
      was in El Salvador, where securitization of remittances through diversified payment receipts
      totaled $50 million. In Chile, the securitization by an agribusiness company of receivables
      from farmers was done in local currency. And in Turkey, a country where issuances grew
      after 2008, they took the form of diversified payment receipts, securitizing expected flows of
      remittances to investors. IFC played an important role in this market when market liquidity
      constraints during the crisis made investors reluctant to continue investing




62       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 4
involved in the development of mortgage-backed securities. IEG’s review below covers 112 projects
in 23 countries (Appendix 4.1). It clusters projects by country to permit the tracing of interventions and
outcomes over time, against the evolution of country and sector conditions. It also reviews pertinent
interventions preceding the formal review period. Country-level interventions are discussed in three
groups, based on their levels of success with the use of market-based instruments: those where
the Bank Group contributed specifically to the development of securitization and secondary market
development; those where partial steps were taken in the direction of market-based housing finance,
notably through mortgage liquidity facilities; and those where specific new capital market instrument–
related products have been introduced, such as covered bonds. Each case demonstrates the need for
long-term engagement and interlinkages between interventions, and for reviewing the entire sequence
to achieve the right perspective.




Box 4.2 | Housing Finance and Capital Market Development

      Capital markets can allow housing finance companies to securitize mortgages that
      they originate, expanding the investor base and potentially lowering the cost and increasing
      the ease of funding. As early as 1998, IFC, IBRD, and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) held
      a joint workshop on this topic (Watanabe 1998). The use of mortgage-backed securities in
      emerging markets is summarized in Chiquier, Hassler, and Lea (2004), who also provide case
      studies of their use in several emerging markets. Globalization and its profound implications
      for housing finance are described in BIS (2006). Zanforlin and Espinosa (2008) track and
      highlight the key legislative and institutional reforms leading to the development of primary and
      secondary mortgage markets in Mexico, including the use of mortgage-backed securities.
      Chiquier and Lee (2009) provide a complete overview of housing finance in emerging markets,
      including a discussion of mortgage securities. Hassler and Walley (2012) review the experience
      with housing liquidity facilities, which intermediate between primary mortgage companies and
      bond markets and have been effective in emerging markets where mortgage-backed securities
      are not well developed. This rich technical experience and research are reflected in a large and
      diverse portfolio of Bank Group lending, investments, and advisory work in this area.

      Bank Group housing finance interventions could be upstream (building a suitable legal
      framework), or downstream, depending on country circumstances. Upstream support
      would include broad-based advisory support for mortgage security–related instruments or
      institutions. The Bank Group could support the development of an enabling environment for
      housing finance overall (for example, improving credit underwriting, regulating originators,
      improving disclosure, sound home appraisal, insurance products related to mortgage
      lending, provisions for mortgage insurance). These could involve the drafting of laws and
      regulations, such as better disclosure standards for risk mitigation, risk-based capital
                                                              (Box continues on the following page.)




                                                            Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   63
Box 4.2 | Housing Finance and Capital Market Development (continued)

     requirements, or laws establishing the separation (bankruptcy remoteness) of a special
     purpose vehicle (SPV). Often there can be beneficial tax treatment to mortgage bonds,
     for example, tax exemption on interest payments; government payment guarantees to
     securitized low-income home loans, etc.

     In a pre-capital market, traditional commercial bank–financed phase, Bank Group interventions
     could also be focused on institutional support, initially supporting deposit-funded mortgage
     institutions (commercial banks, savings and loans, building societies, contractual savings
     schemes) (that is, non-capital market institutions), coupled with providing mortgage loans.

     More sophisticated, and more relevant for capital markets, would be Bank Group support for
     non-deposit-taking specialized mortgage institutions (mortgage banks) that fund themselves
     with securities they issue (mortgage bonds or covered bonds); or the development of such
     instruments. Mortgage bonds are issuer obligations against a mortgage collateral pool; hence
     they stay on the issuers’ balance sheets, but can get favorable terms compared to general
     obligation bonds. Investors have a prior claim against the collateral in the event of issuer
     bankruptcy. Liquidity facilities make collateralized loans to primary market lenders funded
     through bond issuance in domestic capital markets. They can also purchase loans with full
     recourse. Sometimes some government presence gives an implicit guarantee (Cagamas
     Malaysia or Jordan MRC—some central bank ownership). Some liquidity facilities fail to develop,
     leading on some occasions to an unfortunate move toward more complex structures.

     Support for the development of a secondary mortgage market could include sales or
     servicing of mortgage securities backed by specific pools of mortgages, to conduits or SPVs,
     that transfer the risks and ownership of mortgage loans to a third party. They may
     be originated by a variety of lenders. They may be sold to specialized institutions called
     conduits, or through special SPVs that buy mortgage-backed securities. They could also
     include pass-throughs (undivided security interests) or pay-throughs, which are structured
     finance instruments synchronized from the security. Pass-throughs or pay-throughs are
     mortgage-backed securities where funds are collected by banks or another servicing
     intermediary who collects the monthly payments from issuers, and, after deducting a fee,
     remits them through to the holders of the pass-through security. Depending on the details of
     their structures, these are known as “pass-through certificates” or “pay-through securities.”
     A limited number of Bank Group interventions (especially at IFC) focused on supporting
     the development and use of structured finance mortgage instruments. These could offer a
     range of credit enhancements (public, private, by international financial institutions) and take
     different forms: partial mortgage insurance, security payment guarantees, “top loss” or first­
     loss mortgage insurance (subordination or overcollateralization).




64      The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 4
Secondary Markets: Securitization, Mortgage Insurance, and
Covered Bonds
Colombia presents perhaps the best case of IFC support for the development of mortgage
securitization, and its most relevant interventions were for the formation and growth of Titularizadora
Colombiana (TC), the Colombian Home Mortgage Corporation (CHMC), the first and only specialized
securitization company in Colombia. Well-capitalized and successful, it is a large-scale capital market
player that issues about a quarter of all private debt in the country. TC has enabled the recognition
and acceptance of the legal and regulatory framework for a healthy mortgage market: standardized
underwriting practices, strict qualification for mortgages it purchases, clear accounting rules for
banks and investors, and defined foreclosure processes. It serves a network of commercial banks
and other depository institutions funding mortgage loans.

IFC’s contributions to the development of housing finance securities and capital market development
in Colombia spanned other associated institutions, notably, Davivienda, the Grupo Bolivar, and
Bancolombia. IFC’s initial US$3 million investment in Davivienda in 1997 had mortgage securitization
development as a clear objective.2 Davivienda had a significant stake in Titularizadora Colombiana
(CHMC), in which IFC made its follow-up investment in 2001. Later, IFC’s 2007 investment in Banco
Davivienda contributed to strengthening its capital base and enabled Davivienda’s IPO in 2010 on
the local stock exchange. Significant because it was the first IPO in the local Colombian market after
the financial crisis of 2008, it was 12 times oversubscribed. The relevance of the design of IFC’s
interventions is evident in its broad-based span over all relevant market participants, its building of
ancillary regulations together with instruments, and its long-term and patient partnership. Most of all,
IFC went into a market which was ready, in terms of prudent macroeconomic management, a well-
developed public bond market, and sound financial regulatory infrastructure.

In term of results, the sustained development of CHMC, the huge increase in issuance, and the
clearly defined overall framework for securitization are testimony to the very positive outcomes of
IFC’s interventions. Moreover, the 2012 FSAP report indicated that “housing finance is at present
developing on a broadly sound framework of prudential regulation and public incentives, and that
securitization practices are sound.” The Development Outcome Tracking System (DOTS) reported
that the project was successful on a number of fronts, including rates of return and numbers of
mortgage-backed securities issued. It also cited the overall increased standardization of mortgage
lending and increased funding for origination of new loans. Today securitized mortgages represent
a quarter of the country’s mortgage portfolio, the highest in Latin America. Market participants have
validated the high impact of this IFC investment operation.

The Bank Group’s 26 interventions in Mexico’s housing sector during the review period spanned
a broad spectrum of areas related to housing finance, and included, inter alia, support for MBS.
World Bank interventions focused primarily on low-income housing support, urban land markets
and property registries, subsidy design and implementation. They also included support for the
restructuring of a housing fund Fondo de Operacion y Financiamiento Bancario a la Vivienda (FOVI).3
The government undertook to transform FOVI into a second-tier bank and mortgage liquidity facility,
Sociedad Hipotecaria Federal (SHF), the Federal Mortgage Corporation, which became the primary
source of support for the development of MBS until 2008. The World Bank also supported the

                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   65
Box 4.3 | IFC and Mortgage Securitization in Colombia

      In 2001, IFC provided support to Colombia’s main mortgage banks for the creation of
      CHMC—Titularizadora Colombiana. IFC’s initial investment was US$140 million, including:
      (i) an equity investment of up to US$40 million, for up to 20 percent of the equity capital
      of CHMC; and (ii) a local currency guarantee facility (LCGF) up to US$100 million, with a
      maturity of up to 15 years, to support CHMC’s funding and securitization programs during its
      first years of operation. Its later investment of US$35 million supported the issue of
      a subordinated bond, which qualified for Tier II capital under Colombian legislation. IFC
      provided equity of US$10 million and a local currency guarantee of up to US$25 million
      to this issue in order to extend the maturity of the bonds and facilitate the first issue of
      subordinated debt by a Colombian financial institution. Another investment in 2004 helped
      structure a guarantee for the issuance of a subordinated bond, and in 2008 IFC provided
      high-level technical assistance to further help develop the secondary market for CHMC’s
      mortgage-backed securities. In 2014, IFC sold its equity stake in TC on favorable terms.
      It still participates in the operations of TC by providing a partial guarantee for some of its
      mortgage-backed security tranches.

      IFC’s 2007 investment in Banco Davivienda (through IFC’s Capitalization Fund, managed by
      IFC Asset Management Company) was a combination of direct equity and a subordinated
      loan and did not have any capital markets features. However its contribution to the
      strengthening of Banco Davivienda’s capital base enabled its 2010 IPO. Control
      of the bank did not change, though, because Grupo Bolivar retained its majority control.
      Further, IFC didn’t exit its ownership position in this transaction because management
      wanted to retain IFC’s backing. IFC later exited through a put option to existing owners.




development of the framework for creating a market for covered bonds.

Mortgage refinancing and securitization, which began under FOVI, expanded under the provision of
housing credit through SHF refinancing of mortgage lending by non-bank financial intermediaries called
Sofoles, and was also supported by two subsequent World Bank development policy loans.4 Sofoles
also packaged loans into MBS sold on local financial markets, where private pension funds were the
main buyers. Well-structured packages were launched, and securitization mobilized US$4.3 billion in
financing from 2004 to 2008, equivalent to nearly all of SHF/Sofol mortgage funding over that period.
The intervention was timely; the country was emerging from the Tequila crisis in which the banks had
left the mortgage market and the Sofoles became the main source of housing finance.

IFC’s strategy during the evaluation period was focused squarely on supporting the Sofoles


66       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 4
(14 of their 16 projects). Partly owing to portfolio issues, poor regulation, and the effects of
the U.S. subprime and global crises, these institutions largely collapsed after 2008, including
several IFC clients.5 Securitization of mortgage loans did not represent an important share of the
private securities market (18.6 percent) in June 2008. It also represented a small portion of the
outstanding mortgage credit portfolio (7.4 percent in June 2008); therefore the MBS market in
Mexico remains small.

Although IFC was unable to predict the global financial crisis and the ultimate closing of a number
of institutions, its involvement had a positive impact in the early 2000s on the legal and regulatory
framework and development of the securitization markets for these institutions. Nevertheless it can
be questioned whether such a large concentration and continuation of this strategy until 2010 were
wise. Following the 2008–09 global financial crisis, demand for these instruments in Mexico has
declined, as has private penetration of the country’s housing finance market. Securitization appears
no longer to be an option, because institutional investors are shying away from these products.
However, the acceptance of covered bonds looks more promising and may signal the way forward
for the Bank Group.

IFC’s interventions for mortgage securitization in Russia also illustrate strongly relevant design:
sustained partnership through all stages of the development of housing finance, broad scope, and
a combination of technical assistance and investment. IFC helped strengthen primary mortgage
practices which later culminated in the issuance of ABS on the secondary market. IFC played a
role in the start of the ABS market in that country, with the development of an international market
for securities tied to Russian mortgages as well as auto loans. The three IFC technical assistance
interventions prepared the way for IFC’s investment project that supported the first mortgage-
backed securitization transaction in Russia. Admittedly these were U.S. dollar-denominated
securitizations based on an offshore entity.6 Yet it signaled IFC’s support to securitization at a
time when the market was in early stages of development and was followed by a steady series of
subsequent securitizations, including onshore securitizations, which suggest sustained impact.

In India, although conventional securitization is limited by regulatory issues, IFC has provided
innovatively designed support toward the development of MBS recognized in the local market, with
positive though somewhat limited outcomes, though there could have been better engagement on
the overall framework for securitization. Practitioners note a lack of legal clarity, unclear accounting
treatment, and high incidence of stamp duties making transactions unviable, coupled with a lack
of understanding of the instrument among investors, originators, and, until recently, even rating
agencies. The Bank Group has had little headway in discussion of these issues with the regulator,
the central bank. IFC provided creative support for new products adapted to the market context
for the present securitization model, through the offer of credit enhancements required on the
securitizations, with mortgage guarantees, primarily through the India Mortgage Guarantee
Corporation (IMGC), beginning in 2003 and closing in 2012.7 IMGC has recently concluded
securitization transactions that include the mortgage guarantee with four different lenders, starting
with the Dewan Housing Finance Corporation (DHFL) in 2013, (an IFC Investment Company). IFC also
provided loan support to DHFL, which leveraged these funds to itself become active on the domestic



                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   67
capital market.

Although outside the review period, IFC’s most significant support to market-based housing finance
in India was to the Housing Development Finance Corporation (HDFC), now a substantial issuer of
corporate bonds on local and external markets. HDFC has been the chief promoter of a competitive
housing sector in India, and the initiator of the shift from directed credit to market-oriented housing
finance. It has since entered into joint ventures and supported housing finance companies in several
emerging markets. IFC is also helping to explore the covered bond option for India, with the PNB
Housing Finance Company, together with the National Housing Bank. PNB Housing Finance is
trying to launch the first issuance of covered bonds in India, and trying to clarify the conditions
necessary for a “true sale” for the structure and the tax implications of the product. IFC has helped
PNB Housing Finance by putting them in touch with similar clients dealing with covered bonds, as
in Turkey, and introducing them to the rating agency, Moody’s, who have rated 70 percent of the
covered bonds in Europe.

IFC had less obvious influence in Brazil, a market with established securitization instruments,
despite early support for the development of its CRIs (mortgage-backed securities). Over the
review period, however, IFC’s engagement with the securitization process in Brazil diminished. IFC
continued its support of the Companhia Brasileira de Securitização (Cibrasec) with a rights issue in
2005, and attempted two further rights issues in 2012 and 2013, but the latter were cancelled for
regulatory reasons. Cibrasec is still an ongoing enterprise and playing a key role in the secondary
market for mortgages in Brazil. IFC also disbursed equity commitments of US$1.5 million to another
securitization company, Rio Bravo Securizadora (RBSec) in 2005. In 2008, IFC’s investment in RBSec
was swapped for an investment in RB Realty Capital, a successor organization. In November 2008,
in the midst of the crisis, IFC exercised its put against the sponsor and suffered a negative internal
rate of return. A subsequent commitment, for a credit-linked guarantee with RBSec, was cancelled in
2015 because the loan from the local lender never closed.8 Overall, the impact of IFC on the growth
of the securitization market in Brazil during the period under review has been small.

More recently, the World Bank, with funding from FIRST, has launched a project to introduce
mortgage-covered bonds (MCB) in Brazil, which has had good traction. This project is expected
to complement the existing securitization framework supported by IFC over the past 10 years.
Workshops held to discuss its substantial report drew a wide audience, including federal financial
market stakeholders, major private lenders, and the Brazilian legal/financial community. A covered
bond framework was outlined by Brazil in October 2014, and then passed by parliament, and
authorities are now drafting secondary regulations. It is likely that the World Bank will be involved in
the further development of this product in Brazil.

In Morocco, the World Bank provided support for securitization through its development policy loan
of 2010, which included as a condition the enactment of a decree implementing amendments to
securitization laws that would expand the range of securitizable assets. Implementation support
would be provided by CIH, the state-owned housing finance company, which has been active
in securitizing mortgages that it originates through a company called Maghreb Titrisation. This



68       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 4
was paralleled by a FIRST project (2011) that included activities to produce draft regulations on
securitization. The FIRST project included support for development of draft laws and regulations for
the use of these instruments. In 2011 the World Bank provided FIRST-funded technical assistance
to promote the sound development of a legal and regulatory framework for the issuance of covered
bonds in Morocco. This product was deemed to be useful in helping Moroccan banks manage
liquidity and interest rate risk related to their expanding mortgage portfolios, and helping domestic
institutional investors diversity their assets with a new class of low-risk private bond markets. A draft
law was provided to the General Secretariat of the Government in March 2013, and workshops were
held to strengthen the stakeholders’ understanding. There is anticipated to be further work by the
World Bank in this area in the future.

Primary Market Instruments: Liquidity Facilities 9
In both Nigeria and Ghana, Bank Group country strategies mention the need to support housing
finance, and each had a preceding FSAP where prior diagnostic engagement in housing finance and
capital markets were evident. Macroeconomic conditions in Nigeria, however, were volatile throughout,
and though initially stable, increased in volatility in Ghana, making it relatively difficult to introduce long-
dated housing finance instruments. In both markets, the World Bank helped set up a mortgage liquidity
facility: the Nigerian Mortgage Refinance Corporation (NMRC), and Ghana Home Loans (GHL). It is
too early to determine outcomes in Nigeria, because NMRC issued its first corporate bond on October
1, 2015. Although reflecting some good practice from interventions in other countries, some design
elements, such as the government guarantee, were points of dispute between the World Bank and IFC,
because they would have preferred to keep the government at “arm’s length.” The World Bank’s set-up
of Ghana Home Loans in 2006, a liquidity facility intended to be financed by the issue of corporate
bonds, seems in retrospect to be premature. Market conditions were arguably not ripe. There was only
one outstanding local currency corporate bond, and no benchmark for the pricing of corporate bonds;
and institutional investors were scarce. Thus GHL was not able to develop market-based funding and
its resources have been provided largely by external donors and shareholders.10

Between 2004 and 2010, four of the eight housing finance projects in Egypt pertained to the
establishment of the Egyptian Mortgage Refinance Company (EMRC); a liquidity facility for both
banks and nonbank lenders. Three of the interventions were by IFC and one by the World Bank.11
EMRC funding was, however, very dependent on a World Bank loan provided in 2007, which closed
in 2011. EMRC achieved some initial goals, reflected in an increase of primary mortgage loans,
together with the establishment of sound operational processes and significant refinancing of
subsidized mortgage loans for low-income households. However, EMRC was not able to perform
its principal function as the centralized issuer of corporate bonds to mobilize long-term funding from
domestic capital markets. Apart from a deterioration of macroeconomic conditions and a sharp
hike in interest rates, new government programs undermine this objective: a Central Bank of Egypt
Mortgage Initiative (CBEMI) which is currently providing subsidized mortgage funds to banks and
is in direct competition with EMRC. A recent IEG Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR)
of the project (June 2015) faults the World Bank for introducing the mortgage liquidity facility when
supporting capital market conditions were not met, and downgrades project performance.12



                                                             Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   69
The World Bank’s two lending projects in Tanzania were also related to setting up a mortgage
refinance company, the Tanzania Mortgage Refinance Company (TMRC). The Mortgage Finance
Act of 2008, developed with the support of the World Bank, led to the establishment of the TMRC in
early 2010.13 TMRC is a secondary or wholesale mortgage liquidity facility created as a private sector
institution owned by the banks with the sole purpose of helping banks to do mortgage lending by
refinancing their mortgage portfolios. Although mortgage loans’ average duration has increased since
the creation of the TMRC, from 5–10 years to 15–20 years, because of the market conditions and
lack of portfolio, TMRC has not yet issued any corporate bonds up to this time; however, it is still early
to draw conclusions.



Housing Finance and Capital Markets - A Summary of Findings
Given the level of development of client countries’ economies, Bank Group support to housing
finance focused primarily on banks. In a subset of countries, such as Egypt, Ghana, Nigeria, and
Tanzania, the Bank Group supported the use of mortgage liquidity facilities, which issue their own
bonds to provide financing to banks, and in Brazil, India, and Morocco, is supporting the introduction
of covered bonds. These can be considered a first step toward the use of market-based financing
instruments. In a few countries, including, notably, Brazil, Colombia, Russia, and, to some extent, in
India, the Bank Group also supported the development of secondary market mortgage instruments
and MBS.

Overall, the Bank Group, and especially IFC, were very influential, and indeed pivotal, in developing
the MBS model in a handful of countries, notably Colombia and Russia, where its interventions were
well-designed, mutually reinforcing, progressive, and sustained. Its contributions in India have been
innovative and noteworthy in a difficult environment, but there has been limited engagement on
core underlying obstacles. IFC’s recent investments to support securitization in Brazil made limited
headway. Meanwhile the Bank Group has been increasingly involved, in a number of countries, in
introducing other new housing finance capital market–related instruments, notably covered bonds,
with some success.14 In both the areas of mortgage liquidity facilities and covered bonds, there is a
case for distilling cross-country lessons, for application with future clients.

In several Bank Group client countries (examples are Egypt, Ghana, Peru, Tanzania) markets
were not ready for the introduction of market-based mortgage finance instruments. The reasons
typically included a poor macroeconomic environment (for example, Ghana); or a premature model
of intervention, where existing market infrastructure could not support such instruments (Egypt,
Peru, Tanzania); or lack of government or sponsor commitment (for example, Egypt). Yet the Bank
Group was able to make significant upstream contributions by supporting the development of an
appropriate legal and regulatory framework for such instruments, as well as providing detailed
advisory work on design, which could ultimately be useful. Securitization, or secondary market
instruments, are not the first choice for developing capital markets in many Bank Group client
countries. Liquidity facilities and products such as covered bonds may be more efficient and viable
options; however, these, too, need to be carefully screened for market readiness, the macroeconomic


70       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 4
environment, and the financial sector and institutional setting.

E ndnotes

1
     Under Basel II, securitization of mortgages reduced capital charges on banks’ balance sheets.

2
     T
      he initial IFC investment helped some savings and loan institutions to transform into banks and continue to access
     long-term finance at attractive conditions through securitizations, and also complemented a sizeable World Bank
     Financial and Private Sector Development financial sector adjustment loan, which was used to pay for the savings and
     loan restructuring and clean-up, and to rebuild the foundations of a sounder housing finance system.

3
      und for Housing Operations and Finance (FOVI) Restructuring Project, for which the World Bank approved a loan of
     F
     US$500 million on March 4, 1999. The loan was closed on June 30, 2005, and was rated Moderately Satisfactory in an
     IEG Project Performance Assessment Report of 2010.

4
     S
      ociedades Financieras de Objeto Limitado: limited-purpose, non-deposit-taking nonbank financial institutions with
     activities in a variety of sectors, including mortgages. A large part of their funding was through public development
     banks. They grew rapidly after the 1995 Tequila crisis, when banks stopped lending, but collapsed with the U.S.
     subprime and global crises.

5
     I
     FC investment clients Hipotecaria Credito y Casa SA collapsed because of soaring bad loans and mounting
     refinancing difficulties, while Metrofinanciera SA, a major lender to builders, restructured under prepackaged
     bankruptcy protection after defaulting. IFC client Su Casita and its group obtained equity and warehouse lines of
     credit but eventually filed for bankruptcy. During this time, commercial banks started to regain their market share in
     mortgages, some of them by acquiring the most successful Sofoles (such as IFC client HipNat). The total collapse of
     the Sofoles was only avoided by the intervention of Sociedad Hipotecaria Federal ( SHF), the development bank that
     had initially nurtured the growth of the mortgage Sofoles, by providing emergency credit lines and credit enhancements
     which allowed a small number of them to survive.

6
     IFC’s counterpart was a state-owned bank with implicit state support that helped the rating that this paper received.
     

7
      ortgage guarantees, as they are known in India, for regulatory reasons (or mortgage insurance in most other parts of
     M
     the world) compensate lending institutions or housing finance companies for losses that may arise when a homeowner
     defaults on a mortgage loan. Mortgage guarantees enable people to get home loans with a lower down payment, and
     also make it easier for lenders to offer home buyers loans with improved terms.

8
      uring the period when the loan was being negotiated, the original pricing and structure became unattractive to RBSec
     D
     because it was able to obtain cheaper funding with less onerous underwriting standards.

9
      dditional countries are discussed in IEG’s parallel paper on Bank Group support to Housing Finance (April 2016),
     A
     which mentions a successful project in Jordan (where the Bank Group contributed importantly to institution building).

10
      his loan, sponsored by the World Bank’s Sustainable Development department, emphasized the housing aspects,
     T
     with less attention to financial sector development issues. However, the institution is now planning to issue a first
     mortgage-backed security in 2016 in U.S. dollars, in which they have obtained help from the IFC securitization team.

11
      rojects 25052 (IFC), 548566 (IFC), 554071 (IFC) and 93470 (World Bank). IFC conducted the first technical
     P
     assistance program (548566) in 2006 with funding from the PEP-Mena trust funds.

12
     http://ieg.worldbank.org/Data/reports/Egypt_Mortgage_Finance_PPAR.pdf

13
     http://siteresources.worldbank.org/FINANCIALSECTOR/Resources/GHFC_2021_Rished_Bade.pdf

14
      ther countries where work on covered bonds has been undertaken or is ongoing include Turkey, Poland, Azerbaijan,
     O
     Mexico, Peru, in addition to Brazil, Morocco, and India. Work is now under way in South Africa (EFO).




                                                                     Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group         71
       5
                 highlights




    Investors:   1         In principle, institutional investors’ funds can

Insurance and              be a powerful vehicle for investment in capital

Pension Funds              markets instruments, and Bank Group strategies

                           on insurance and pensions strongly affirm

                           support for this role.




                 2         Yet this role has not been a strong element of

                           Bank Group operations in the areas of insurance

                           and pensions. Most interventions have a product

                           focus or risk-management focus, and fund

                           management or asset allocation have not been

                           elements of their design.




                 3
                           FSAPs have provided significant indirect and

                           upstream support for strengthening the regulatory

                           environment, but the inclusion of institutional

                           investors in FSAPs has markedly declined.




                 4
                           Pension interventions focus, understandably, on

                           issues of social coverage and fiscal sustainability,

                           possibly reflecting the dominance of public

                           pensions in many client countries. Strengthened

                           regulation and development have provided

                           indirect upstream support.



  x
  72             The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 5
5   A core focus in insurance interventions has

    been on the design and rollout of new insurance

    products; regulatory issues related to the rollout

    of IAIS II also received considerable attention.




6
    Downstream attention to asset management or

    investment has been negligible.




7
    New frameworks of risk-based supervision imply

    that assets (investments) and liabilities must

    be reviewed together by supervisors, and may

    herald greater attention to asset management.




8   IFC advisory services were also product

    development–focused, usually for specific micro

    insurance products, highlighting expansion of

    access.


                                               Careful observation and


9
    IFC investments provided direct support    toprogram data
                                      analysis of
                                               and the many issues
    insurance companies, and thus, upstream    support
                                    impacting program
                                               efficacy reveal what
    for capital markets through leveraged fund
                                      works as well as what
                                               could work better. The
    accumulation. They could, in principle,      support
                                            also gleaned
                                       knowledge         is
                                               valuable to all who strive
                                           that World
                                 to ensure though
    asset management at these companies,
                                               Bank goals are met and
                                       surpassed.
    there is limited information on whether this occurred.



               Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group        73
                                  10
                                                 Evidence from IEG field visits suggests that in

                                                 many, though not all, countries, much valuable

                                                 diagnostic work undertaken through the FSAP

                                                 program was rarely operationalized, though

                                                 exceptions exist.




                                    11           There is new impetus in a few countries,

                                                 especially in the wake of the ESMID program,

                                                 to refocus on the accumulation and investment

                                                 aspects of contractual savings, for infrastructure

                                                 finance.




                                  12             There is scope for further World Bank support

                                                 toward translating accumulated assets into

                                                 securities as well as other investments. This

                                                 should be a core element of an integrated capital

                                                 market development agenda.




74   The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 5
M ov i n g fr o m t h e i s s u e r s i d e of securities instruments to the demand side of capital

markets, some of the largest investors in securities instruments are institutions such as insurance

and pension funds. These institutions accumulate large sums of money, through insurance premiums

(especially life insurance) or pension deposits. Such investors need to hold long-dated assets such as

capital markets instruments to match their long-term payouts.1 The Bank Group is active in the areas

of both insurance and pensions.2 IEG’s review focuses on identifying and assessing interventions

that may have influenced the development of capital markets through contributions to the regulatory

and legal environment; support for growth of investible funds; and investment allocations including

improvements of the returns on investment. While institutional investors have long shaped capital

markets in advanced countries, their role has been more modest in many developing markets,

owing to a range of factors: the shortage of tradable, liquid securities on the supply side, restrictive

prevailing regulations, and a prudential environment not conducive to the development of such

sectors.3 The design of accumulation also matters. Pooled multi-pillar pension systems, which

include employer and employee contributions and draw them into a common fund, provide larger

volumes of accumulation than individual accounts.4 Regulations also affect investment, sometimes

prohibiting or setting quantitative limits on investments in certain asset classes, including securities

or real estate; or they mandate certain levels of holdings in government securities, with a view to

safeguarding investors, but thereby also reducing yields.


The primary objective of operational interventions in these areas remains, not surprisingly, to build
strong insurance or pensions sectors. Thus insurance interventions tended to focus, appropriately,
on support to regulators or to institutions in the market that could help offer safe and effective
coverage in a range of economic activities.5 Pension interventions have as their first goal the
provision of old age security in a sound and affordable framework. For largely public pillar and
unfunded pensions, fiscal sustainability has been a focus. Asset management, if included, was an
ancillary activity, to raise returns rather than contribute to capital market development. IEG’s review
looks first at the relevance of Bank Group upstream interventions through a better regulatory and
prudential environment or better-designed accumulation; as well as downstream support to better
asset management and better-managed investment in capital market securities. Among relevant
interventions, IEG reviews effectiveness, subject to the caveats that support for capital market
development was at best a secondary or even implicit objective; the small number of interventions
with a significant focus in this area, and sometimes limited information, especially, evaluative material.




                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   75
Box 5.1 | Pensions and Insurance: Knowledge Products on Linkages with
          Capital Markets

     The World Bank has long been an advocate of the need for multi-pillar pension systems,
     which include employer- and employee-funded pillars that can provide accumulations
     for capital markets investment, as its flagship reports demonstrate (James (1994) and
     Palacios (1994)). Vittas (1996) and Vittas (1999) described links between pension system
     reform and capital market development. Yermo (2004) argued that capital market
     development in Latin America had been driven largely by pension regulation. Rudolph and
     Rocha (2007) assessed links between the Colombian funded pension system and its capital
     market, and Rudolph and Rocha (2007) conducted a similar analysis for Poland. The World
     Bank‘s stress on second pillars during the late 1990s and 2000s was motivated not only
     toward diversifying pension systems but also to fast-tracking simultaneous pension fund
     development and capital market development. Holzman (2009) focused on pension systems
     in Central and Eastern Europe, noting challenges owing to a combination of an ageing
     population and the still relatively undeveloped capital markets.

     But the development of second pillars was a mixed story. Some early reforms were
     reversed, and where preserved, despite rapid pension asset growth, asset composition
     was sometimes disappointing, with short investment horizons and limited contributions
     to capital market development, as found by Raddatz and Schmukler (2008). They also
     looked closely at the investment portfolios of pension fund managers in Chile so as to
     understand how the development of those funds affected the capital markets, and found
     that fund managers were not investing as expected and that there was room for additional
     reform to change manager incentives to promote capital market development (Appendix
     5.1). World Bank activities related to pension systems are documented and summarized
     by Dorfman and Palacios (2012).

     Today, difficulties faced by second-pillar schemes are being re-examined, with an
     emphasis on new, more corporate-based third pillars. Hinz (2010) examined pension fund
     financial allocations and returns in detail, expanding the sample to improve understanding
     of defined-contribution pension systems. Stewart (2014) pursued this theme by looking
     at alternative approaches that could adjust incentives for pension fund managers toward
     longer-dated investments that could help meeet retiree needs.

     The insurance industry can also play an important role in the development of capital
     markets, especially life insurance, which accumulates large pools of capital that need to
     be invested for long periods of time. But insurance can play other roles as well. For




76      The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 5
Box 5.1 | Pensions and Insurance: Knowledge Products on Linkages with
          Capital Markets (continued)

        example, Pollner (1999) explained the potential role of multilateral development banks
        in the development of pooled insurance coverage supported by liquidity and credit
        enhancements, as well as hazard-indexed bonds that would allow risk to be securitized.
        Lester (2014) provided an overview of World Bank insurance interventions for growth and
        poverty reduction; however, there is no specific discussion of capital market linkages.




The Bank Group and Institutional Investors: Contributions to Capital
Market Development
FSAPs: Diagnostics and Core Principles Assessments
Apart from Bank Group operational contributions, the World Bank undertook diagnostic and advisory
reviews of pensions and insurance as part of the FSAP process (Table 5.1). Such country-level
assessments were highly relevant, because they mapped out regulatory and institutional needs
and identified risks. Over the review period FSAPs included about 36 technical notes and annexes
on pensions, and 42 in insurance. There were an additional 10 Core Principles assessments on
insurance standards. However, over time, both pensions and insurance FSAP annexes declined. In



TABLE 5.1     | FSAP Specialized Reviews of Pensions and Insurance: 2001–15

          	                               Pensions	Insurance

                                                                                                                  Reviews of
                       Total No. of     Select                         Total No. of    Select       Technical
                                                        Tech. Notes                                               Insurance
                         reports        Issues                           reports       Issues        Notes
                                                                                                                  Standards

  2001–03	                11	              9	                    2	        10	           9	           1	                 7

  2004–07	14	 2	                                                 12	 17	1	16	                                            2

  2008–10	9	 0	                                                  9	        10	0	10	                                      0

  2011–14	2	 0	                                                  2	        5	 0	5	                                       1

  2015	                   0	 0	                                  0	        0	 0	0	                                       0

  Total
                         36	 11	                                 25	      42	 10	32	                                 10
  2001–15

Source: IEG, FSAP program database.

Note: IAIS=International Association of Insurance Supervisors.




                                                                       Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group       77
the eight years from 2001 to 2007 there were 25 FSAP annexes on pensions and 27 on insurance,
compared to only 11 and 15 respectively in the following eight years from 2008 to 2015. There was an
even more marked decline in IAIS assessments, from nine to only one.

Yet, the IEG FSAP evaluation (2006) stated that only a third of detailed FSAP reviews had a fully
integrated discussion of insurance issues and capital markets and investment. IEG finds that this
remains partially true perhaps because of structural divisions between topic areas. A number of
FSAPs did discuss the need to expand the insurance and pension sectors, and to diversify asset
holdings (which would help develop capital markets), but did not integrate this with a discussion of
available investment instruments.

Operational Support for the Pensions Sector
By far the largest number of World Bank pensions interventions reviewed (32 out of 40) were
on the advisory side (non-lending technical assistance and AAA; see Table 5.2) Apart from the
financial sector area, there have also been significant contributions to World Bank pensions work
from the social protection and human development networks. A large segment of pensions are
usually under public management with the government (Pillar 1); several pension projects are thus
also in the macroeconomic thematic area.6 Projects were clustered in the Europe and Central
Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean regions. One likely reason for the preponderance of
Latin American countries is that these countries had more diversified pension systems, with larger
private Pillar 2 and Pillar 3 components.7 A few of the interventions were first-generation reviews
of the pension system, describing the main features of a country’s pension system, pointing out
issues, and suggesting options for reforms.

About half, especially in Europe and Central Asia, discussed existing multi-pillar systems, or made
recommendations for the extension of the second and third pillars, and were thus directly relevant
for asset accumulation for capital markets investments. These included, in Europe and Central
Asia, two multicountry studies as well as Albania, the Caucasus, Kazakhstan, and Russia. In Latin
America, these included Brazil and Colombia, together with a number of smaller countries (Costa
Rica, Guyana, Trinidad and Tobago, and a regional Latin America and the Caribbean study).
Recommendations were also made for the initiation of multi-pillar systems in Mali and Niger, where
there was no reference to an existing private or voluntary pillar. A majority were referred to as priority
tasks in the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) FSAP. Most were demand-driven—initiated at the
request of the borrower’s ministry of finance or pension supervisor.

From the perspective of relevance for capital market development, five analytic and advisory activities
explicitly dealt with investment allocation policies and a further three discussed investments in the
context of risk-based capital allocation (Table 5.3). Most of the assistance lay in a second cluster
of 16 advisory interventions that had some upstream relevance to the capital market development
theme, in three broad aspects: the accumulation and adequacy of pension funds; the regulation and
supervision of pension funds; and third, especially after the global crisis, risk management including
the use of risk-based supervision for pension funds. Eight advisory interventions had no discernible
relevance to capital market development.



78       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 5
TABLE 5.2    | IEG’s Portfolio Review of World Bank Pensions Interventions—
               Capital Markets (2004–15)

                                                                                                                WB
  	IFC AS	IFC Inv.	                                                                            WB AAA                      Total
                                                                                                              Len­ding

  IEG Approach Paper: Insurance+Pensions	                               6	           22	          82	           22	         132

  Of Which: Pensions 	                                                   	            	           34	            6	          40

  Omitted: Focus on health insurance, social protection, severance pay	                            1

  Omitted: Outside the relevant period	                                                            1

  Added: Additional projects (transfer from other portfolio areas )	                                            +2

  Present Review: Pensions interventions	                                                         32	            8	         40

Note: AS = advisory services; AAA = analytic and advisory activities.




Table 5.3    |W
               orld Bank Pensions Interventions—Relevance for Capital Market
              Development (2004–14)

                                                                                  WB AAA           WB Lending             Total

  IEG Review of Pensions and Capital Market Support                                   32                  8                40

   Of which: Negligible relevance                                                      8                  2                10

   Partial Upstream relevance (fund accumulation, legal/regulatory)                   16                  4                20

   Direct Relevance (asset management and investment)                                  8                  2                10




Determining the effectiveness of these AAA from the perspective of contributions to capital market
development is difficult, as this was typically not an explicit objective. IEG’s review finds that, looking
only at the subset of eight projects of “direct relevance,” which mentioned investment allocations, all
except the project in Colombia, which is under way, have delivered their final outputs. One case in
which impact is also discernible is in Brazil, where the 2006 AAA initiated a series of engagements
on pension reform that spanned several years and included draft legislation on pension reform.
Engagements in Brazil included two development policy loans, further diagnostic work under the
umbrella of FSAPS, and most recently (2013) the second phase of a programmatic nonlending
technical assistance for pension reform.

The eight World Bank lending operations in the area of pensions that were reviewed included four
with direct relevance, and one had very positive results. These included two in Brazil with direct
references to asset accumulation and allocation, an operation in Hungary that was cancelled, and
a small capacity-building exercise in Bhutan that drew attention to the need to look at investment


                                                                        Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group           79
Box 5.2 | Pensions: World Bank AAA, Lending, and Capital Market Development

     World Bank Country-Level Advisory Work in Pensions (32 interventions)
     Pensions advisory work of some relevance includes Albania, the Caucasus, Indonesia, and the
     Russian Federation, as well as reimbursable advisory services in Bahrain. Two explicitly included
     assistance for private pension fund formulation (Colombia, West Bank and Gaza); and a regional
     study in Latin America, as well as assistance in individual countries in the
     region, looked at issues of competition in the pension fund sector. Another theme of indirect
     relevance was the regulation and supervision of pension funds (seven interventions). And
     especially after the global crisis, risk management, including the use of risk-based supervision,
     rose in importance. Eight advisory projects looked at investment policies. These included five
     that looked specifically at asset management, (including two in Brazil, one in Colombia and two
     regional studies in Latin America), and another three interventions that looked at optimal asset
     allocation and capital trade-offs in the context of risk-based supervision (Albania is
     one example). As regards the remainder, capacity building was a frequent theme (Colombia, Fiji,
     Guyana, Hungary, Indonesia, Mali, Trinidad and Tobago, and the West Bank and Gaza).

     World Bank Lending to Support Pensions (8 projects)
     The two core pension development policy loans of relevance were, first, the 2005 Brazil Fiscal
     and Social Reform loan, which, though clearly focused on fiscal sustainability, also made note
     of the need to increase asset accumulation; one of its key indicators was
     an increase in the assets of voluntary pension plans. In terms of outcomes, the central
     government successfully implemented the envisaged reforms, and pension assets rose
     significantly. The second operation of interest, another development policy loan to Brazil (Rio
     Grande do Sul Fiscal Sustainability Development Policy Loan (2008)), included discussions of
     a voluntary private pillar in a multi-pillar pension system. It made direct reference to pension
     asset management, and included an indicator on returns achieved. It was well designed,
     highly relevant to the borrower, demand driven, and supported by the country partnership
     strategy. However, its efficacy was limited. The state government did not implement its overall
                                                                   for improvement in investment
     package of reforms. Pension assets did not rise, and the hoped­
     management did not materialize.

     Other loans or grants included two with no discernible relevance for capital market
     development: IDF financed capacity-building grants (Sri Lanka, Bhutan); and an Asia­Europe
     Meeting (ASEM) trust fund financed technical assistance in the Philippines.
     One technical assistance loan to Serbia aimed to improve the efficiency of pension
     administration and revenue collection. Although the loan to Hungary was relevant, it was
     cancelled. An operation in Ghana incorporated reforms of regulation and supervision in the
     pensions sector, as part of a package of nonbank financial sector reforms.




80      The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 5
policies. Although one operation in Brazil had a lot of traction and positive results, in the case of the
second, the implementing agency lost its momentum and outcomes were poor. Of the remaining
four, two had some relevance because they focused on regulation and supervision, and two had
no relevance. One recent exception, however, is a Morocco policy-based loan, in which, among its
various components, there was a an explicit focus on pension reforms that would help to ensure
continued institutional demand for capital markets securities. With this exception, World Bank
pensions loans or non-lending technical assistance that paid attention to the role of pension funds
as institutional investors were infrequent. Perhaps because of the strong focus of most of these
operations on fiscal or social issues, there was less attention to possible benefits from the linkages
between pension funds and capital market development (Table 5.3).8

IEG’s Pension Reform evaluation similarly noted that although capital market development was
explicitly included as one element of the secondary goals of pension reform, diversification of pension
funds’ investments was not achieved (IEG 2006). This goal was to be supported by the design of
multi-pillar, funded, defined-contribution pension schemes. The report’s findings show that in many
cases pension investments remained concentrated in government securities markets, under tight
investment guidelines—possibly reflecting macroeconomic constraints.

Operational Support for Insurance
World Bank advisory services accounted for 48 out of 64 of its insurance interventions but most (26
out of 48) had negligible relevance in terms of contributing to the development of capital markets.
Thirteen dealt with specialized insurance (Appendix 5.2). Another four had very limited focus in
insurance. Many insurance elements were embedded in multi-sector financial crisis risk mitigation,
especially for deposit insurance. In principle, and within appropriate risk parameters reflecting the
purpose of the funds and the volume of resources under management, the resources mobilized
in specialized insurance schemes could be invested in long-term assets in local or regional capital
markets. However, the management of these assets was typically not alluded to. None of these
programs funded large-scale accumulation, for example, as under life insurance or general property/
casualty insurance, and asset management would be fragmented.

The remaining 22 World Bank advisory interventions exhibited high quality at entry and a high level
of technical competence. However, there were no advisory interventions in insurance that directly
discussed the management or allocation of assets, or the nature of instruments they should be
invested in. The focus was largely on helping governments or insurance supervisors to reform the
legal and regulatory framework, or conduct capacity-building programs that involved preparation
for the introduction of risk-based supervision, as envisaged under the IAIS Solvency II regime. In
principle, this eventually implies looking at the nature of assets held, and how they match liabilities.
Eight of these programs referred to an FSAP and followed up on its recommendations.9

In contrast to the World Bank, IFC advisory services in insurance usually involved practical feasibility
studies of new products or development of new tools. Its insurance interventions mostly took the form of
investments or loans. Only six out of 28 IFC interventions were advisory. IFC’s insurance advisory work
seemed to be closely linked to its work on access to finance (life insurance for low-income persons in
partnership with microfinance, in Brazil; small and medium enterprise insurance in the Pacific Islands),


                                                           Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   81
and aimed at creating or expanding markets for specific private insurers. There was no discussion of
fund accumulation, building a regulatory framework, or investments in capital markets instruments.

Of the 16 World Bank lending operations in the insurance sector, few were relevant to the present
theme. Only four had a modest “upstream” focus on the structural strengthening and reform of the
insurance sector. Many (six out of 16) focused on specific and highly specialized types of product
insured, which often posed unique challenges in terms of estimation and mitigation of risk. Close to a
third (five) provided protection for catastrophic risks involving earthquakes and cyclones; one focused
on political risk insurance in a trade facilitation loan. The World Bank typically served as an intermediary
in the purchase of insurance or re-insurance coverage from major international insurers. There was no
upstream or downstream relevance for capital market development. Six budget support loans were
also included, which often had minor or negligible insurance components. If included, they often had a
specialized product focus, sometimes in combination with fiscal or social objectives. When projects with
no capital market implications are removed, four development policy loans remain, including three financial
sector operations in Egypt, from 2006 to 2010, and one multi-sector development policy loan in Serbia.
These contributed indirectly via improving the overall regulatory framework and strengthening insurance
institutions.10 Yet, these operations did not mention the allocation or management of accumulated assets,
let alone their investment in capital markets instruments. In principle, the resources mobilized in specialized
insurance schemes could be invested in long-term assets in local or regional capital markets. However, the
management of these assets was typically not alluded to. In some cases there was a presumption that for
liquidity purposes, the insurance assets would be invested in short-term bank deposits.

Efficacy of these four projects was mixed. One development policy loan in Egypt envisaged reforms
of state-owned insurers and introduction of risk-based capital, but they were not implemented,
however; in another, insurance-related reforms were implemented as planned. In the third operation
in Egypt, no relevant targets were set. In Serbia, according to the Implementation Completion Results
Review, insurance industry reform targets were met.11

IFC has been more active in providing financial support to insurance companies than in conducting
advisory services. During the review period (2004–14), IEG’s portfolio of IFC insurance products
includes 23 equity investments made by IFC in insurance companies. However, 11 were rights
issues, and are therefore reviewed together with their parent projects. As may be expected by their
respective mandates, there is a marked difference in the nature of the lending operations of the World
Bank and the investment operations of IFC. IFC’s investments in private insurers were direct attempts
to support the development of individual insurance companies and to strengthen their financial
position, management, and corporate governance. IFC also attempted to expand the coverage of
insurance, and to launch new insurance products, including in greenfield companies.

IFC’s investments helped expand insurance availability, especially for life, health, and retirement insurance,
(six projects), expanded reinsurance facilities (three projects), and supported broad-spectrum insurance
companies serving the poor (one project). Almost all expanded insurance availability and aligned with
prevailing country partnership strategies. Reviewed in terms of their potential contribution to capital
market development, in the metrics of the present evaluation, the projects (except for two that failed or
closed) all show upstream relevance, because they contributed to the leverage of capital and thus the


82        The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 5
accumulation phase of insurance assets. It is also possible that they helped with downstream relevance,
through strengthened asset management. However, there is no reported information on the investments
of these companies, or the management of their funds.

Outcomes are reported relative to stated objectives of the projects, and results are mixed. Financial
results in two are reported to be satisfactory or better. In another four, results were mostly achieved.
Available documents report a deepening of capital markets, and of capacity of investee companies
and local regulators. However, three projects faced difficulties. In one, the regulatory environment
deteriorated; in another, the investee company showed improvements, but progress was less than
expected; in the third case, the international partner abandoned the local market and repurchased
IFC’s investment before any results were achieved.12

In sum, more than half the World Bank advisory interventions, and all IFC’s advisory services, had
negligible relation to capital market development, though many appeared useful and innovative in
bringing new products to the insurance markets of client countries (Table 5.4). There was upstream
support through the strengthening of the regulatory environment and soundness of insurance systems
(22 advisory projects at the World Bank) and directly through expanded and leveraged assets (nine IFC
investments). Although prima facie likely to have been undertaken, there is no documented evidence of


TABLE 5.4    | IEG’s Portfolio Review of Bank Group Insurance Interventions and Capital
               Markets (2004–15)

                                                                                                IFC     IFC      WB         WB
                                                                                                                                          Total
                                                                                                AS      Inv.     AAA      Lending

  IEG Approach Paper: Insurance	                                                                 6	      22	      48	        16	           92

   Of which:

   Negligible relevance (Specialized products: political risk; catastrophic
   risk; agr/crop index insurance; mortality tables, unemployment                                6	               13	6
   insurance, consumer protection)

   Negligible relevance: negligible focus on insurance in multi-sector DPLs,
                                                                                                                   4	5
  non-lending technical assistance, or broad-spectrum financial sector

   Negligible relevance: Different focus/miscoded	                                                                 9	         1

   Negligible relevance: failed/closed projects	                                                          2

   Upstream Relevance: (legal/regulatory; asset accumulation)	                                            9	      22	         4

   Direct/downstream relevance: asset management and allocation	                                                  (7)*

   Omitted: IFC: (Rights issues)	                                                                        11

* Also included in projects with upstream relevance. Indirect or downstream relevance in the context of risk-based capital allocations.

Note: AAA=analytic and advisory activities; AS=advisory services; DPL=development policy loan.




                                                                              Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group               83
interest in the asset allocation or asset management of the insurance sector. IFC had the opportunity to
review individual companies’ investments, as part of their management contribution. On the World Bank
side, changed regulatory requirements under IAIS II required a move toward risk-based systems, with
implications for investments. However, there was no explicit discussion of this issue.

Gaps between Diagnostics and Country Programs
IEG’s field visits addressed additional questions on the Bank Group’s role with respect to institutional
investors and capital market development that could not be answered through a desk-based review
of individual operations, especially: the interaction between the World Bank’s FSAP-related diagnostic
work on insurance and pensions (including issues pertaining to assets under management), and
the extent to which they were translated into Bank Group operational or advisory work; as well as
additional evidence on outcomes.

FSAPs typically did highlight the links between contractual savings institutions and the development
of long-term financial instruments, but it was only in a small number of cases that these observations
were picked up in country work programs, as India illustrates. Thus, the 2001 India FSAP noted that
improving the pension and contractual saving system would increase the demand for long-term
financial instruments, and it also pointed out that a reduction in obligatory holdings of large volumes
of government debt would stimulate the capital market.13 The parallel 2001 Country Assistance
Strategy (CAS) mentioned that the World Bank would work with the government in selected areas of
capital markets supervision and regulation, including improving the pension system. The 2005 CAS
reaffirmed that the World Bank would accelerate pension system reforms, which would expand the
institutional base for long-term savings instruments. However, a proposed 2008 technical assistance
project that was intended to include the pensions area was dropped (P113834) and there was no
further discussion of insurance or pension reforms in the 2009 or 2013 CASs.

Similarly, in Kenya there was a significant amount of substantive analysis on contractual savings under
the FSAP programs of 2004 and 2010, including recommendations on asset management, but with
limited follow-up until recently.14 Thus, there were minimal references to pensions reform in the 2004–09
CAS. In the wake of the ESMID program (see Chapter 2), this issue has increased in prominence. The
2010–13 CAS noted the need for furthering regulatory reform and developing local securities markets,
including pension and insurance funds, for supporting key economic and social development needs,
and this is now reflected in the concurrent Infrastructure Finance Project as well as the Financial
Sector Support Project.15 IFC has also funded some work with the pensions supervisor for developing
modernized pension investment guidelines and regulations that would be suitable for the risk-based
supervisory approach and would allow more flexible investment by pension fund managers in broader
asset classes to achieve greater portfolio diversification. So far, however, there is little evidence of a
change in the level of diversification of funds under management (Figure 5.1), though given the
relatively recent recognition of these issues, it is still early to know outcomes.

Because Vietnam’s first FSAP was issued in 2014, there was no scope for the FSAP program to guide
the development of insurance and pensions. None of the CASs or CPSs mention pension reform,
and there was no discussion of asset management, likely reflecting the absence of private pension
funds in Vietnam. References to insurance do not look at the overall industry or the role of insurance


84       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 5
FIGURE 5.1    | Institutional Investor Portfolio Diversification in Kenya:
                Insurance and Pensions

        A. KENYA INSURANCE PORTFOLIO, 2007–13                            B. KENYA PENSIONS PORTFOLIO, 2006–12
100%                                                          100%




 50%                                                            50%




  0%                                                             0%
   2007     2008      2009   2010   2011    2012      2013        2006     2007    2008      2009   2010    2011    2012

                 Deposits     Government Securities     Other Debt Securities     Equities     Other Investments

Sources: IBRD, IFC.




funds as pools of investible assets. Yet, the Bank Group supported an IAIS-style Core Principles self-
assessment during this period; however, with the specific aim of compliance with standards relevant
to its pending accession to the World Trade Organization.

Fiscal imbalances in Morocco’s pay-as-you-go pension system, though recognized in its 2003
FSAP, were not addressed in the World Bank’s work program until the 2014 development policy
loan, however, because of more pressing issues in the banking sector. This operation also clearly
mentions phased reform of the pension industry through a parametric reform of the contributions and
benefits structure. When the loan closed at the end of the year, the related conditions—namely, the
incorporation of the reform blueprint in the Budget Law—were accomplished, and a Concept Note for
a follow-up operation addressing the next phase of reform is under preparation. Although there were
no Bank Group interventions in the insurance industry during the period of the evaluation, diagnostic
engagements on allowable investments have been undertaken.16

The greatest evidence of sustained support, at least partially relevant to capital market development,
and with some discernible results, was observed in Colombia. There was long and virtually
continuous World Bank support to Colombia for pension reform, embedded in a number of different
and complementary vehicles (FSAP diagnostics, FIRST technical assistance and the development
policy loan program, despite difficulties in achieving political consensus. Moreover, the dialogue
included efforts to mobilize pension fund investments for investment in longer-dated financial
instruments, with specific engagement on the issue of investment guidelines, mostly recently to allow
investment in project bonds. These efforts are linked to the Bank Group’s Deep Dive Initiative and the
Programmatic Approach for Sound Financial Sector Development.

There were achievements in terms of reform, though attribution to World Bank interventions is difficult.
The composition of pension funds and insurance companies’ portfolios now exhibits reasonable levels
of diversification (including across bonds and equities) and sovereign bond holdings (at a third of
their total portfolio) are significantly lower than at banks where sovereign bonds represent more than


                                                                  Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group      85
Box 5.3 | Institutional Investors: Bank Group Support in Colombia

      Starting from assistance for the preparation of the Financial Sector Reform Law
      in 2006, three follow-up advisory interventions covered pension reform issues over this
      period. These were complemented by the Latin American regional study on pensions, which
      provided background country-specific and cross-country technical papers.
      One advisory intervention was still ongoing as of end-FY15. Advisory inputs were
      complemented by operational support through development policy loans approved in 2008
      and 2010, which touched upon pension and insurance reforms. In 2010, significant reforms
      were carried out,with subsequent changes allowing institutional investors to broaden their
      investments options and better adapt to contributors’ risk appetites.

      Remaining design flaws in the system were identified in the 2012 FSAP: an overgenerous
      pay-as-you-go system, and the competing nature of the pay-as-you-go and funded
      schemes, the requirement to pay pensions at least equal to the high minimum wage, and
      quantitative (that is, with upper limits for investments in a particular asset class) rather than
      prudential (risk-based) investment limits, complicating the ability of institutional investors
      to diversify risks or buy certain assets. World Bank dialogue included efforts to mobilize
      pension fund investments for investment in longer-dated and infrastructure investments,
      including capital markets instruments, and a FIRST-supported technical assistance program,
      helped amend investment guidelines to allow for long-dated infrastructure investments.
      Starting from 2014, institutional investors’ ability to invest in certain infrastructure projects,
      including though capital market instruments, was eased.




50 percent. Moreover, there has been a declining trend in portfolio concentration. There is scope for
further diversification. The exposure of pension funds to non-Government fixed-income instruments, at
11 percent, is still well below the 60 percent set by the prudential cap. Yet there are practical limits to
diversification, because non-sovereign instruments are illiquid, and there would be a tradeoff between
diversification, on the one hand, and loss of liquidity on the other.

IFC’s activities in Colombia’s insurance sector have been limited to an investment in the holding
company of Seguros Bolivar in 2007; the World Bank was not active in this sector. IFC’s main
additionality in this transaction was support to a longstanding client on a Bank Group-wide effort to
promote transparency and prepare its subsidiaries for eventual public offerings. The transaction was
very successful and led eventually to the IPO of Davivienda Bank, one of the key holdings. These
IPOs, together with improvements in corporate governance, clearly constitute capital market support,
as confirmed by several market participants, despite possible questions of a negative impact on
competition.


86       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 5
Institutional Investors and Capital Markets—A Summary of Findings
With one possible exception, IEG case study evidence also shows that limited systematic
attention was paid, in operational work, to the asset management of insurance or pension funds.
FSAP programs provided high-quality diagnostics and good recommendations that were rarely
operationalized. Country strategies in these countries also made little reference to contractual savings
in the context of capital market development, though Colombia is an exception, and the Morocco
program has also made efforts to reflect this issue. Knowledge work in Bank Group operations
at the country level was significantly focused, in the case of insurance, on needed new products,
and in both areas of contractual savings—on risk management as well as, for pensions, on fiscal
sustainability—through which indirect support has been provided.

World Bank research at the global level on second-pillar pension reforms during the late 1990s and early
2000s was motivated not only toward diversifying pension systems but also to fast-tracking the parallel
development of pension funds and capital markets; these concerns were not reflected in operations.
During the following decade, World Bank research tracked the mixed performance of these second pillars
and is now searching for better incentives for funds to maximize returns. But concerns about investments
and returns was, surprisingly, not mirrored in operations, though the rate of return should be a primary
concern of insurance and pensions, even if not from the optic of capital market development.

There has been little change in this respect since the World Bank Pension Reform evaluation (IEG 2006),
where capital market development was explicitly included as one element of the secondary goals of
pension reform, to be supported by the design of multi-pillar, funded, and defined-contribution pension
schemes. In terms of findings, the report showed that diversification of pension funds’ investments was
not achieved, and in many cases pension investments remained concentrated in government securities
markets, under tight investment guidelines, possibly reflecting macroeconomic constraints.

These results serve to illustrate that the links between institutional investors and capital market
development may be taken for granted, and that there has been negligible direct effort at the Bank
Group to ensure that such links actually operate, by looking at asset management issues. They do
not have any reflection on the quality of interventions in these sectors, which are not evaluated. The
analysis also suggests a divergence between the “public” incentive for capital market development,
and “private” concerns about liquidity, returns, and risk aversion, which needs to be recognized
explicitly. However, asset management is an implicit element of all funded insurance and pension
schemes, and better returns can only improve sustainability. Moreover, in a risk-based capital
framework, greater attention to the nature of the portfolio of assets held would be a part of an overall
review of soundness. If capital market development is an institutional objective, greater thought could
be given to harnessing the insurance and pensions agenda to support it.

E ndnotes

1
    Provided the design and regulatory environment are conducive. See Appendix A6.1 for a more in-depth discussion.

2
    I
    nstitutional investors can also include hedge funds, mutual funds, and sovereign wealth funds; World Bank
    contributions in these areas are not reviewed here.




                                                                   Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group    87
3
     n its 2007 strategy for the financial sector the Bank Group focused on the supply of securities: “The growth of funds
     I
     in the hands of institutional investors (mutual funds, pension funds, insurance companies) is generally outstripping
     local economies’ ability to supply suitable assets.” More recently (2015) the World Bank focused on savers as well
     as eventual investment in infrastructure: “enable households to have access to diversified savings and investment
     instruments, to buffer the poor against the risks …and to finance investments in infrastructure and housing.”(Non-Bank
     Financial Sector Institutions Service Line, Financial and Private Sector Development Network.)

4
     D
      iscussed in Appendix 5.1: for example, the difference between Chile and Malaysia. These issues have also been
     discussed in World Bank (2015) on Long-Term Growth.

5
     Insurance products such as annuities are in fact similar to pensions.

6
      ccording to its mission statement the pension team works with client countries to (i) deliver pension
     A
     reforms; (ii) develop better data and new solutions and (iii) disseminate new knowledge. The aim is to improve
     the outcomes of a pension system, including efficiency, sustainability, security, coverage (inclusion), and
     adequacy that mark out a robust pension system. World Bank (2015), Putting Pensions to Work, Financial
     and Private Sector Development Network. http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/
     EXTFINANCIALSECTOR/0,,contentMDK:22400080~menuPK:6620578~pagePK:210058~piPK:210062~the
     SitePK:282885,00.html

7
      here were three regional projects and five country-level projects in Europe and Central Asia, one regional and nine
     T
     country-level projects in Latin America and the Caribbean. In addition there were four in Africa, five in East Asia, three in
     the Middle East and North Africa, and just one in South Asia.

8
     Morocco Capital Market Development and SME Finance development policy loan of April 2014 (P147257).

9
     Documentation was not available in two cases, and was poor for another two.

10
     A
      s requested by management of the Bank Group (dated March 13, 2015), operations with no clear implications
     for capital markets should not be included. In its comments on IEG’s approach paper, Bank Group management
     underscored the importance of “limiting coverage of pensions, insurance, and housing to the extent these entities are
     operating in the capital markets in their capacity as issuers/investors, and not looking at the development of these
     businesses in general.” In observance of this request, IEG further eliminated from coverage any operations that did not
     directly or indirectly attempt to influence the development of capital markets through one of the following objectives:
     (i) contributions to the regulatory and legal environment; (ii) support for growth of investible funds; and
     (iii) improvements of the returns on investment, including corporate governance or operational efficiency.

11
     T
      he Implementation Completion and Results Review reports outcomes as highly successful. There was a decrease of
     the state share in the insurance sector from 67 percent in insurance premiums written in 2006 to less than 30 percent
     in 2010. Life and non-life insurance business lines were separated by 2011.

12
      ocumented results were available for only six of these investments, including two extended project supervision
     D
     reports, two evaluative notes, and six final reports in the development outcomes tracking system.

13
      oreover, public ownership has been a defining feature of the insurance system: about 69 percent of insurance
     M
     premiums and 80 percent of insurance assets are accounted for by public insurers, with one large public company
     dominating life insurance, limiting the development of a competitive industry.

14
      pecialized technical notes were prepared on both the insurance and pensions sectors in 2004, and again on the
     S
     pension sector in 2010, together with an International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) Core Principles
     assessment in 2010. The FSAPs (notably in 2004), inter alia, did address issues pertaining to asset management and
     investment. Detailed recommendations for insurance included a review of investment regulations so as to align them
     with international standards. On pensions, the FSAP suggested separating the asset manager from the investment
     advisor to limit problems of conflicts of interest. It also commented on investment limits, asked for maturity and
     liquidity matching requirements, and for concentration (individual issuer) limits.




88            The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 5
15
      ne of the Project Development Objectives results indicators of the Kenya Financial Sector Support Program Loan
     O
     of 2015 is “long-term assets held by pension funds.” The objective was to unlock regulatory barriers to investment
     diversification into more capital markets instruments. The ESMID program worked with the Retirement Benefits
     Authority to revise investment guidelines and to provide training on alternative investment options. ESMID is currently
     supporting the Insurance Regulatory Authority in Kenya on a similar initiative, and, also, the authorities in Tanzania
     and Uganda. Similarly, in Nigeria, work with the pension regulator, PenCom, was a significant and core part of the
     project which supported revision of investment guidelines and capacity building for pension fund administrators.
     Yet continued limited asset allocation to infrastructure-related investments appears to reflect a lack of attractively
     packaged products.

16
      hese engagements will take time to bear fruit because the new independent insurance and pension supervisor has
     T
     just become operational (Feb 2016).




                                                                     Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group      89
       6
                  highlights




Capital Market    1         The variety of World Bank support for capital

 Infrastructure             market regulation and development was

                            usually relevant to country objectives, though

                            design could sometimes be better adapted to

                            developing countries.




                  2
                            Project outputs were found by IEG to be of good

                            quality in more than half of the cases reviewed.

                            Task team leader self-evaluations were uniformly

                            more complimentary.




                  3
                            Outcomes of the capital markets regulation and

                            development interventions are more difficult to

                            assess because of inevitable time lags; better World

                            Bank monitoring of long-term changes is desirable.




                  4         The present country-driven approach to projects

                            could be complemented by a more strategic

                            cross-country focus, especially in view of

                            common dimensions and elements.




                  5         More focus on knowledge sharing and more

                            knowledge building on common themes are

                            desirable.



  x
  90              The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 6
        6    Finally, there are prominent gaps in information

             and record-keeping, especially closer to the

             final stages of projects, that need attention if

             knowledge-based services are to be supported.




        7
             In the payments and securities settlement area,

             the World Bank contributed significantly at the

             global level to the formulation, implementation,

Results and     Performance
        and dissemination                    of
                          of standards, and to    the
                                               country

        World       Bank Group 2015
        assessment against standards. It played a

             unique role in reflecting emerging-market
                                  An Independent Evaluation
             perspectives to standards setters, helping to

             make standards globally applicable.




        8    The World Bank supported the building

             of institutions that bring together regional

             regulators in the payments area and enabling the

             emergence of dialogue, diagnostic work, and
                                               Careful observation and
             systems enhancement.              analysis of program data
                                               and the many issues
                                               impacting program
                                               efficacy reveal what


        9
                                               works as well at
             The World Bank’s payments interventions              the
                                                               as what
                                               could work better. The
             level of individual countries usually focused
                                               knowledge        on the
                                                            gleaned is
                                               valuable to all who strive
             overall payments system, many withto ensure  that World
                                                      emphasis
                                               Bank goals are met and
             on large-value and real-time grosssurpassed.
                                                    settlement.



                        Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   91
                                  10
                                                 Securities clearance, settlement, and depository

                                                 arrangements were sometimes included in

                                                 overall systems, sometimes in conjunction with

                                                 liquidity management rather than securities

                                                 market development, reflecting the nascent

                                                 state of capital markets in many client countries.




                                    11
                                                 Most country interventions were of good quality

                                                 and made reference to international standards.

                                                 Systems installation was often but not always

                                                 achieved. Advisory services were often paid for,

                                                 though evidence on adoption is variable.




92   The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 6
W e l l- f u n c t i o n i n g ca pi ta l m a r k e t s require sound market infrastructure to attract

the confidence of investors.1 This includes the soft aspects, such as sound legal and regulatory

frameworks and institutions, good corporate governance of listed companies, the protection of

creditor rights, and sound rating agencies. They also require hard infrastructure, such as trading

systems, settlement and clearance mechanisms, and securities depositories. This chapter first

selectively evaluates the role of the Bank Group in securities market regulation. Next, it summarizes

IEG’s evaluation of Bank Group contributions toward improving corporate governance, which are

detailed in Appendix 6.2 and summarized in this chapter. Finally, the chapter examines the Bank

Group’s role in securities clearance and settlement. Areas of capital markets infrastructure, such as

insolvency and creditor rights, or rating agencies, are not in the scope of the evaluation.




Establishing Sound Legal and Regulatory Frameworks
Capital market development and capital market regulation are inherently intertwined. In some
respects the regulatory structure develops in tandem with the market’s development. In others, it
must be in place as a precondition to market development. A significant number of the projects
identified in IEG’s portfolio of Bank Group capital markets projects are not focused on specific market
segments, but look at overall capital market development, often with a focus on legal and regulatory
issues. IEG’s Approach Paper identified some 86 projects in this category. Twenty-nine of these,
clustered in 10 countries, are reviewed here (see Appendix Table 6.1).2 Interventions varied in scope
and depth, and many were externally financed. Nine were initiated in 2008 or earlier; the remainder
were initiated from 2009 and later, and some are ongoing. In size and scope, they ranged from limited
technical assistance efforts costing $7,000 (CMPGL Nigeria III, P127365, 2011) to comprehensive
Capital Market Development Strategies entailing grants of more than $2.15 million.3 The bulk of the
sampled projects (17 out of 29) were below $200,000, and 25 were for technical assistance. Thirteen
were financed by the financial sector advisory service trust fund, FIRST.4 Another three were financed
by GEMLOC (see chapter 2) and 10 were financed directly through the World Bank’s own budget.5
The review is largely desk-based, though information is supplemented through country case studies
for three of the nine countries: Colombia, Morocco, and Vietnam. Although a number of documents
were unavailable (as Table 6.1 illustrates), sufficient information was provided on each project to
enable a basic review. Other relevant documents examined included Country Partnership/Assistance
Strategy Reports and related FSAPs including relevant annexes.

Focus and Objectives of the Sampled Interventions
Of the 29 projects reviewed here, 20 addressed legal and regulatory reform or regulatory capacity
development, though some focused on capacity building and a few dealt with special topics. Nine



                                                         Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   93
TABLE 6.1   | Capital Markets Regulation and Development: Availability of
              Documentation (29 Projects)

                        Detailed                                                          TTL’s project     Previous
                        initiating                        Interim                          completion       external
                      memoranda          Regular         reports/             Final       report/grant    validation or
                      or concept       supervision      consultant         outcome/        monitoring     independent
                           notes          reports        reports         project report      report          review

  Number of
  interventions
  (out of 29)	                17	           14	               8	                19	            23	             1


Sources: World Bank and IEG.

Note: TTL=task team leader.




included the preparation of overall capital market development strategies. There was some overlap.
Thus, Costa Rica (2014, P132213) combined an overall capital market development strategy with
the preparation of amendments to the securities law as well as the drafting of regulations in several
specific areas. Pakistan (2005, P096372) aimed primarily at building capacity among securities
markets regulators but also included a review of regulations and regulatory procedures. Finally, a third
group included discrete country-specific tasks (for example, Azerbaijan (2012, P125462) undertook
broad capital market development, but also included improving national financial literacy and the
Azerpost system (Box 6.1).

Common themes emerged across projects in seemingly dissimilar countries. Thus, countries as
diverse as Costa Rica, Nigeria, and Sri Lanka received assistance concerning demutualization of
the national stock exchange. Projects on securitization, including covered bonds and asset-backed
securities, were undertaken in Costa Rica, Morocco, and Sri Lanka. The West Bank and Gaza and
Vietnam, despite dramatically different levels of market development, obtained assistance to improve
regulatory capacity for risk-based supervision.

Relevance of the Interventions
The selected projects appeared to have relevance to the recipient countries, because their selection
was determined collaboratively by the Bank Group task team leader (TTL) and client country staff.
Yet, there was limited mention of these projects in countries’ strategies (CAS/CPS), an indication of
relevance to the World Bank country program (Table 6.2). The two projects conducted in Pakistan
were among the largest, by funding, among the 29 projects reviewed, and yet neither project was
discussed in their two contemporaneous Pakistan CPS Reports.6 Project preparation documents,
however, do sometimes allude to underlying country strategies. Thus the proposal for the second
project in Sri Lanka mentions that “the activity is strongly aligned with the priorities set out in the
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) (2012-2016).” A review of the CAS/CPS referred to finds some
reference, though not in depth. Occasional broad references were sometimes found, however, to the
overall program of capital development projects; the Nigeria CPS (2014) is an example.




94          The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 6
Box 6.1 | Examples of Select Capital Market Regulation and Development
          Interventions

      1. Supporting the Development of Overall Capital Market Development
      Strategies

      Azerbaijan: Capital Market Development (P121468, 2010) and Financial Sector
      Modernization (P125462, 2011). The project prepared a comprehensive capital
      market development strategy, including a five-year implementation action plan.
      Project consultants were responsible for providing a critical analysis of current
      market conditions within Azerbaijan, preparing a necessary reform agenda, and
      proposing the action plan.

      2. Legal and Regulatory Reform and Capacity Building

      Nigeria: Enhancing the Capacity of the SEC (P126659, 2011): The project
      was designed to enhance the capacity of Nigeria’s Securities and Exchange
      Commission (SEC) to more effectively oversee and monitor the nation’s capital
      market institutions and participants, including the Nigeria Stock Exchange (NSE), to
      improve transparency and reduce market abuse. An important component
      of the project examined the planned demutualization of the NSE, including
      providing the SEC with recommendations on policy and regulatory aspects of the
      demutualization and developing guidelines for improving corporate governance at
      the NSE.

      3. Projects Supporting Specific Aspects of Capital Market Development

      Colombia Money Market Development (P105418, 2004) supported the
      development of a strong, well-regulated and stable Colombian money market built
      around reforms in the primary and secondary market for government Treasury bills.
      The project assisted in the design and implementation of an automated facility
      for borrowing and lending securities and changes in accounting treatment for
      functionally similar but legally distinct financial products.




This “bottom-up” approach raises larger issues of relevance at a programmatic and World Bank-
wide level. In some cases, though individual interventions were well designed and executed (as, for
example, in the capital market development projects in Azerbaijan and Costa Rica) given the very
small size of each country’s economy, from a global perspective, one could question the long-term
objective of the development of a self-standing capital market.




                                                       Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   95
TABLE 6.2     | Capital Markets Regulation and Development: Project Relevance—
                CAS/CPS Context

                                            CAS/CPS                CAS/CPS with             Availability        Number of          Number of
                       Reviews            with specific          general mention             of final           reports of         reports of
                     undertaken           mention of            of a capital market          project             superior/          average
                     of relevant           identified              development               reports               good            or generic
                      CAS/CPS               projects                 program                (Yes/No)              quality            quality

  Number
  of
  projects
  (out of 29)	             29	                   2	                      28	                     19*	                10	                 4


Sources: World Bank and IEG.

Note: *The final reports in four projects could not be reviewed as English translations were not available, and in a fifth, the report was not
available. CAS=Country Assistance Strategy; CPS=Country Partnership Strategy.




The analysis also raises the question of whether, to the extent that the focus of some of the projects
was similar, the network may also benefit from more explicitly sharing the mode of analysis and
approach, and perhaps resource pooling. For example, three out of 10 countries studied had projects
that entailed the demutualization of the national stock exchange. Even if the projects could not be
collectively undertaken on an ex ante basis, for example, because of differences in timing, efforts
could be made to collectively capture the lessons for use in the next country where demutualization
may be requested. For example, in November 2011, a report was completed and a workshop held
in Nigeria on the stock exchange demutualization issue. The report is a very strong and objective
analysis of a complex question. It would have been beneficial to provide this report to the two other
projects examining the same issue. The Sri Lanka project (P126528) began in 2011 and the Costa
Rica project (P132213) began in 2012.

IEG reviewed the relevance of project design in terms of, first, the linkages between the project as
conceived and executed, and the underlying FSAP’s diagnostic and prioritization (Table 6.3). Thirteen
projects in the sample were financed by FIRST, which had the explicit objective of funding projects
suggested in the country’s FSAP or Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC). Given
this explicit programmatic linkage it is not surprising that five of the seven FIRST project proposals in
countries that had an FSAP within five years referred to the FSAP. Two other FIRST-funded projects
referred to an FSAP older than five years (Azerbaijan P121468 and Costa Rica P132213).

Over time, the links to underlying FSAPs appears to have increased (Table 1.3) in FIRST-funded and
other projects. References to the FSAP, however, were limited and somewhat generic. Four projects
(three FIRST) contained references to a specific International Organization of Securities Commissions
(IOSCO) principle or FSAP technical note.

Six of the projects examined required time extensions of more than one year. Reasons, when
discussed, ranged from the exogenous and unavoidable (changes in government executives and civil
unrest), to government timing preferences, or changes in the project plan. Budget overruns were not



96           The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 6
TABLE 6.3    | Capital Markets Regulation and Development: Project Relevance—
               Links to FSAPs

                                                                                              2004–08	2009–14

  All projects (29)

  FSAP available in preceding 5 years? 	                                                          5	                 11

  Mention of underlying FSAP in project document	                                                 2	                     9

  IOSCO Principles assessment/Cap. Mkts Technical Note available? 	                               5	                     6

  IOSCO Principles /Technical Note mentioned? 	                                                   1	                     4




  FIRST-financed projects

   Prior FSAP available in preceding 5 years? 	                                                   1	                     6

   Mention of prior FSAP? 	                                                                       0	                     5

   IOSCO Principles assessment/Cap. Mkts Technical Note available?	                               1	                     6

   IOSCO Principles /Technical Note mentioned?	                                                   0	                     3


Sources: World Bank and IEG.

Note: FSAP=Financial Sector Assessment Program; IOSCO=International Organization of Securities Commissions.




a major issue. Only two had budget overruns above 10 percent of the original budget. Six projects
appear to have been completed under budget.

On basic monitoring of outputs and outcomes, information was partial (Table 6.4). Only five had
a substantially complete record of the project, and in seven, minimal information was available.7
Because most of the projects fall in the category of advisory work, only limited project completion
reports are required. However, based on the 13 projects where a self-rating was found, 12 were rated
satisfactory or better.8 Curiously, five of the six projects that were delayed for longer than one year
received satisfactory or higher ratings.9 Three projects in which elements were dropped were each
rated satisfactory.

Dissemination information, if any, only focused on client dissemination, with rare consideration
of whether project findings would be beneficial to other countries or future projects. This lack of
discussion was surprising, because many projects produced high-quality reports, in areas such as
risk-based supervision, that could have been used elsewhere. The grant report and monitoring report
for the Nigeria project on demutualization highlighted its potential benefits for others, but the two
projects in Sri Lanka and Costa Rica, beginning just after, were seemingly unaware of it.



                                                                       Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group       97
TABLE 6.4   | Capital Markets Regulation and Development: Project Relevance—
              Completion Reports

 Report Characteristics	Numbers

  Number of projects on which completion reports (TTL and/or GRM) were available	                  23

  Number of project completion reports on which a rating was provided for the final report         10
  Number of final reports rated satisfactory or higher                                             10
  Number of projects with no rating for final report on completion report                          13

  Number of completion reports on which a satisfactory rating was awarded by the TTL for project   12
  Number of completion reports with a partially satisfactory rating                                1
  Number of completion reports with no rating for project on completion report                     10

  Number of completion reports on which a satisfactory rating was awarded by the TTL despite
                                                                                                   5
  significant delays (6 projects delayed more than one year), No rating for one project

  Number of completion reports on which a satisfactory rating was awarded by the TTL despite
                                                                                                   3
  incomplete components (total 3 projects)


Sources: World Bank and IEG.

Note: TTL=task team leader; GRM=grant report and monitoring report.




Results—Outputs and Outcomes
Self-ratings, more easily available than independent external ratings, were based largely on output
and were uniformly satisfactory. They did not indicate whether regulations had been submitted to
the legislature, let alone whether they were adopted or enacted. A self-rating for the final report
or product was found for 10 of 23 projects and each was self-rated at least “satisfactory” and
occasionally “highly satisfactory.” No comments were found indicating that a project product was
inadequate or unsatisfactory. The present evaluation independently reviewed 14 final reports or
products, on which sufficient information was available, and found 10 to be of high quality. The
remaining four products were acceptable but of lesser quality.10 The capital market development
strategy reports for Azerbaijan (P121468), Costa Rica (P132213), Vietnam (P097913) and Sri Lanka
(P147366) each provided sound analyses of the issues, challenges, and strategies that should be
considered for capital market development within the country. In Azerbaijan, for example, the project
reports reviewed were found to be well thought out and well written, realistic in the assessment of the
current market and the possibilities for growth, and responsible in not recommending development
initiatives that would be too costly and too sophisticated for a capital market of this size and potential.
In Costa Rica, another small country, the final reports and technical materials available were
considered of high quality.

A number of the projects developed draft laws or regulations that clients considered to be of high
quality and suitable for submission to decisional bodies, and some were adopted. In Morocco
(P123550) the covered bond law was enacted. In Vietnam (P106405), new regulations governing
investment funds were adopted and implemented.11 In Costa Rica (P132213) a substantial revision


98          The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 6
to its Securities Act was drafted and submitted to the legislature, and new regulations governing
intermediaries, investment funds, and hybrid bonds for infrastructure development were submitted
for adoption. By 2015, the investment fund and hybrid bond regulations were also finally adopted.
However the Securities Act amendments and the regulation on intermediaries have not been
finalized. In Sri Lanka (P126528), the draft amendments to enhance SEC civil enforcement powers
and capacity, and the legal framework to strengthen investor protection and introduce new financial
products were completed, though not enacted into law, as of 2015.12

The four products considered acceptable but of lesser quality were found to be generic, not
country-specific, in content, and lacking the level of detail and quality of analysis found in the
other products. Two examples were PowerPoint presentations to train regulatory staff in Pakistan
(P096372) and in the West Bank and Gaza (P131009). The Pakistan project, to train Securities and
Exchange Commission of Pakistan staff on mutual fund regulation and onsite inspections, dealt
largely with business operations and investment principles of mutual funds in general, rather than the
creation and operation of a regulatory examination and supervision program. The West Bank and
Gaza training was meant to develop a risk-based supervision system for the authorities, but was a
nonspecific explanation of risk-based supervision systems in other countries.

Comments on Project Outcomes
To the extent that information is available, and given the relatively short passage of time since project
completion, IEG’s review of the projects in this sample indicated clear positive outcomes in some
projects. These comments are prefaced with the caveat that outcomes and impact may not be
achieved until many years after project completion. Even beyond adoption of draft regulation, market
response can take years, and exogenous factors can materially impact long-term success.13

Positive outcomes were observed in Azerbaijan. Following completion of the advisory report,
the Bank Group approved a Capital Markets Modernization Project (CMMP; US$2.15 million), to
implement its proposals. Projects on government debt markets in Colombia (P105418), Costa Rica
(P124287), Morocco (P129990), and Nigeria (P127365) all appear to have achieved positive results
or indications of promising outcomes, in three cases corroborated by IEG findings in the field. In
Colombia, significant changes were made to rationalize competing financial instruments. In Morocco
a new automated platform for trading government securities in the secondary market is now
operational, though trading continues to be primarily over the counter. The Ministry of Finance has
begun making changes in its debt issuance calendars that will support development of a benchmark
yield curve, another positive outcome from this project. Recommendations on the primary dealer
system have also been formally incorporated into a convention signed by the dealers. The Colombia
project (P148637) to strengthen its self-regulatory organizations appears also have had a positive
outcome. A year later, in 2014, the IOSCO assessment undertaken as part of an FSAP, rated the
principle on the use of self-regulatory organizations as fully implemented. Similarly, in 2013, following
completion of the Vietnam project (P106405) on regulation of investment funds and adoption of the
regulation drafted under that project, the first IOSCO assessment for Vietnam was completed and the
four principles on investment funds received positive outcomes for a first-time assessment.14




                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   99
Outcomes elsewhere are mixed or unclear. Projects in three countries addressed demutualization
of national stock exchanges. As of 2015, the Colombo Stock Exchange in Sri Lanka has not been
demutualized;15 nor, as of September 2015, had the Nigeria Stock Exchange been demutualized.16 No
action has been taken in Costa Rica either. However, worldwide, the trend toward demutualization,
popular at the turn of the millennium, seems to have abated. In Costa Rica and Vietnam, some of the
draft laws prepared are yet to be adopted.17

However, action by a legislature is an exogenous factor beyond the control of the project. Among
the cases reviewed there were exogenous factors such as a change in client country personnel
and reorganization (Pakistan), a failure of the legislature to act on reform proposals (West Bank
and Gaza), which had a material impact on project completion, output, and outcome. Although
sometimes difficult to see (Pakistan), there were instances where high risk was evident. A project
in the West Bank and Gaza (P131009) to develop a set of securities regulations noted that the
regulations developed could not be adopted and implemented until the foundation law, drafted in
a previous project (P117420), was enacted. The project proposal was clear that passage of the law
was unlikely to occur for years. There may have been factors such as country engagement in fragile
and conflict situations that encouraged the World Bank to proceed nevertheless, and this could be
viewed as an extenuating circumstance.

Capital Market Infrastructure: Regulation and Development—
A Summary of Findings
Programs appear relevant in a country context, and related to FSAPs, despite limited CAS/CPS
references. In terms of relevance, many projects make references to preceding diagnostic FSAPs.
Global relevance and prioritization across countries are harder to determine. Yet the extent and strength
of the link to FSAPs, and the degree to which it was reflected in project design, were variable and could
have been stronger. In terms of links to country programs, the projects were rarely explicitly referred to,
but this could be a reflection of their frequently very small size. Often there was a mention of an overall
capital market development program. It is clear that the present bottom-up approach of determining
projects reflected a good level of relevance to the country team. In terms of strategic relevance for the
network as a whole, there remain fundamental questions as to whether the country-driven model on
its own is adequate, and whether a supplementary global assessment is needed. Thus the objective
of building standalone national securities markets in countries as small as Costa Rica and Azerbaijan
could be considered too ambitious, notwithstanding the perceived benefits of success.

Project design in many cases reflected traditional best practice of advanced countries, for example,
with regard to supervisory practices. The challenge of trying to impose sophisticated international
best practices on a market in its infancy was clearly identified in the closing report of one project
in the West Bank and Gaza (P131009).18 Similarly, efforts to develop specific and sophisticated
securities products, such as securitization, or covered bonds in Morocco, or asset-backed
securitizations in Sri Lanka, or hybrid infrastructure securities in Costa Rica, may have been too
complex and advanced for the capital markets and financial sectors in these countries.19

Project processes and outputs were mixed but generally positive. Although final reports or products
could not be located for 10 projects, the final outputs that were found (19) and reviewed (14) were


100      The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 6
diligently executed. Fourteen of these reports or products were found to be of high quality and the
remaining four were of satisfactory quality. There were six instances of significant delay (one year or
longer), but the remaining projects were completed on schedule or close to schedule. There were
only two instances of significant budget overruns (greater than 10 percent) and six projects were
completed under budget. Three projects involved occasions when not all intended tasks and outputs
were produced. In outcomes, allowances must be made for the inevitable lag in final results in the
legal and regulatory area. The review observed that in many cases drafted laws or regulations were
completed but not acted upon for years or not at all.



Corporate Governance: Support Extended by the Bank Group—
An IEG Assessment
Both the World Bank and IFC, in cooperation with the OECD and the IMF, have supported
improvements in governance of companies, building upon the OECD’s Principles of Corporate
Governance (2004, revised in 2015). A core instrument at the World Bank has been its Reports on
the Observance of Standards and Codes for Corporate Governance (CG ROSCs). IFC’s focus was
on corporate boards of directors and the development of corporate governance scorecards but, also,
on advice for regulators and small businesses.

IEG’s evaluation focused on the influence of Bank Group work on countries’ corporate governance.
IEG measured changes in corporate governance in Bank Group client countries by undertaking
comparative assessments of their corporate governance over time, using the CG ROSC yardstick,
and assessed the extent to which such changes were associated with Bank Group interventions.
IEG compared the timing and content of Bank Group interventions to see whether they reflected the
diagnostics of the ROSCs—that is, to see whether they responded to known corporate governance
issues in the countries concerned. Finally, IEG triangulated these findings with information obtained
from desk reviews, field visits, and interviews with Corporate Governance staff. IEG reviewed the
full portfolio of corporate governance activities in all countries where there had been corporate
governance–related activities. IEG’s review (detailed in Appendix 6.2) found:

n	   Most client countries made progress in their corporate governance environments over the review
     period. Several did so on their own with limited support from the Bank Group after an initial diagnostic;
     slightly more than half may have benefited from Bank Group support. Deterioration of corporate
     governance in some prominent Bank Group clients was likely owing to known external factors.

n	   In a majority of countries, the World Bank’s ROSC assessments underpinned Bank Group
     corporate governance interventions, though in more than a third of countries both the World
     Bank and IFC had work programs for corporate governance that were seemingly unrelated to the
     assessment.

n	   Supplementary Bank Group support—lending or advisory—had partial success in countries where
     corporate governance assessments were combined with other forms of World Bank intervention.




                                                            Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   101
n	   Some areas of success were arguably easier to attain; for example, improvements in accounting
     and auditing, or independence of external auditors. Gains are noticeably fewer in difficult areas
     such as “disproportionate control disclosure” or “shareholders’ rights to participate in fundamental
     decisions,” as well as with respect to enforcement.

n	   Over the years, improved mutual awareness of World Bank and IFC corporate governance
     interventions is emerging, although there may be scope for more formal and systematic
     cooperation (see Appendix 6.2).



Securities Settlement Systems
Together with soft infrastructure such as regulation and development, markets need the hard
infrastructure of clearance, settlement, and depository systems, which are essential for securities
trading to minimize risk and ensure efficient transactions.20 They allow the exchange of any securities
and the exchange of liquid funds to pay for them. These arrangements comprise not only technical
means of transfer, but also the institutions, instruments, and standards that support such exchanges.
Support for the building of payments and securities clearance and settlement infrastructure has been
provided virtually exclusively by the World Bank.




Box 6.2 | Securities Clearance and Settlement: Significant Early World Bank Work

        Confidence in the clearance and settlement systems for securities is essential
        for market development. At the World Bank, De La Lastra, Guadamillas, and Holttinen (2000)
        documented clearance and settlements standards then available, and the World Bank
        (2002) developed a methodology for assessing these systems. Guadamillas and Keppler
        (2002) describe settlement systems in a cross-section of Latin American countries. National
        payments systems, which allow financial institutions to transfer money efficiently, are also
        an important part of World Bank work. Listfield and Montes-Negret (1994) and Humphrey
        (1995) describe these systems and provide advice on their design. These matters are further
        explored by Bossone and Cirasino (2001), which reflects the Western Hemisphere Payments
        and Securities Clearance and Settlements Initiative, an effort led by the World Bank. Cirasino
        and Guadamillas (2004) offer advice on reforming payments and settlements systems.
        Lessons from the work performed by the World Bank, the IMF, and other international
        financial institutions on payments systems are summarized in Cirasino and others (2007).




102        The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 6
The World Bank’s Regional and Global Role: Setting Standards for
Payments, Clearance, and Settlement


Regional Knowledge Building and Rollout
World Bank payments, clearance, and settlement initiatives in individual countries followed a
successful regional rollout model, in partnership with regional regulators, and with foundations that
preceded the evaluation period. Stage setting began with the Western Hemisphere Initiative (WHI)
in Latin America at the end of the 1990s, which initiated multilateral exchanges on the need for
modernization of payments, securities settlement, clearance, and depository arrangements to raise
efficiency and protect against risks. The World Bank developed a standard diagnostic methodology
that led to a series of assessments in 24 Latin American and Caribbean countries, followed typically
by requests for fee-based services.21 The WHI model was extended to other regions, within the
evaluation period (Appendix 8.1): the Arab Payments and Securities Settlement Initiative (API),
Commonwealth of Independent States Payments and Securities Settlement Initiative (CISPI),
the South Asia Payments and Securities Settlement Initiative (SAPI), and the Pacific Payments,
Remittances and Securities Settlement Initiative (PAPRI).22 The Bank’s biannual Global Payment
Week, launched in 2006, is still undertaken jointly with its WHI partner the Center for Latin American
Monetary Studies (CEMLA), and alternated, every other year, with a cosponsored regional payments
meeting.23

The sustained successive rollouts, the high demand for country-level work requested by regional
finance ministers and central banks, the willingness to pay for services in many cases, and the
institutionalized character of the regional forums established suggest a successful series of outcomes
to these initiatives, from the point of view of use of convening power for sustained multi-region
institution building. Further, the World Bank’s biannual 150-country payments survey database is
an institutionalized contribution to public knowledge. The World Bank prominently and consistently
drew attention to the need for integration of issues relating to securities settlement systems within the
overall payments framework; the global dialogue prior to this had been largely on interbank payments
issues.24

Global Forums—Standard Setting and Core Principles
IEG independently undertook participant interviews to evaluate the convening power of the World
Bank and its global contributions in the area of payments and clearance, settlement, and depository
systems (CSD). Numerous BIS documents, as well as market participants, refer to the role of the
World Bank in the global dialogue around payments and securities clearance and settlement and
the setting of standards that led eventually to the formulation of the 2012 Integrated Principles for
Financial Market Infrastructures (Box 6.3). IEG’s independent verification involved interviewing a
range of senior persons external to the World Bank, who had also participated in these global forums
at the BIS/Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS)/IOSCO and witnessed and
interacted with the World Bank payments team in this capacity. They included prominent figures in
the payments and securities settlement area currently or formerly representing the BIS, G10 central
banks, participant heads of the largest global payments networks, and participant members of
securities and exchange commissions of both advanced and developing countries.


                                                         Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   103
Box 6.3 | Global Forums on Payments Systems: World Bank Participation

      The International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) had
      separately developed the Objectives and Principles of Securities Regulation (IOSCO, 1998)
      while the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) of the central banks
      of the G10 Countries produced the final version of the Core Principles for Systemically
      Important Payment Systems (BIS, 2001). Building on this, the CPSS and IOSCO jointly
      developed recommendations for securities settlement systems. Inputs from the IMF and
      the World Bank are acknowledged in the preamble to the CPSS-IOSCO consultative
      report (2001), finalized shortly thereafter. The World Bank subsequently participated in the
      2004 standards-setting exercise around counterparty risk in payments systems.

      In 2009, following the global crisis, the need for safe settlement for short-term notes
      drew attention to the role of securities settlement and depositories. This led eventually
      to the preparation and issuance in 2012 of Integrated Principles for Financial Markets
      Infrastructures, 24 principles that cover systemically important payments systems, securities
      clearance, settlement and depository arrangements, central counterparties, and repositories
      for recording trades in certain derivatives. The World Bank remained engaged throughout in
      these standards-setting exercises, reflecting the perspectives of developing countries in a
      hitherto G10-dominated group. The role of the World Bank is noted in Bank for International
      Settlements documents on its Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI);
      its consultative Report on the CPSS-IOSCO principles: and its releases on the 2012
      Integrated Principles.

      Sources: IEG, BIS.




Particularly favorable comments were received on the extent to which the World Bank represented
emerging markets’ viewpoints. Commentators pointed out that the World Bank was able to sensitize
the BIS and formerly exclusively G10 participants to the concerns and positions of emerging market
economies, as well as their likely reactions to specific draft principles. The “practitioners experience”
of the World Bank with developing countries’ perspectives was clearly acknowledged, because
the World Bank had “talked to the market” in such countries. According to one commentator, the
World Bank had made the standards relevant to a much wider world, providing guidance and taking
a leadership role in discussions on their interpretation and use in different jurisdictions. The World
Bank also helped with the adoption of standards, in the context of the FSAP assessments. Repeated
mention was also made of the value of the Payments Week and other global workshops that helped
bring together central banks, securities and exchange commissions, and persons representing
clearing houses and settlement and depository institutions. These, together with the World Bank’s
diagnostic work and the surveys, helped identify gaps and implementation issues.



104      The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 6
Nonetheless, dissenting commentators raised questions. One questioned the extent to which the World
Bank had been an active or passive participant in the 2004 forum on central counterparties. Another raised
a similar question with regard to the 2012 revision and synthesis of the financial infrastructure guidelines.
However, these commentators identified themselves as “occasional” rather than “core” participants. The
World Bank is likely to remain important as a representative of the least developed countries.

Payments and Securities Clearance and Settlement:
Project-Level Portfolio Review
IEG next undertook a portfolio analysis with focused category-building of the objectives, design and
outcomes of World Bank work supporting payments and securities settlement systems in its client
countries, based on the examination of a portfolio of 75 country-based projects (Appendix 6.4 and
Table 6.5).25 Few focused on securities settlement arrangements. In fact, out of the 75 interventions


Table 6.1 | S
             ecurities Settlement Systems and the World Bank Payments System
             Portfolio (2004–14)

                                            Total                                                    Core

                                          Projects                      Central     Percent of       CSD

                                         Reviewed       Percent of     or Major       Central/     projects     Percent of

                                             =75         Total 75       CSD=30       Major 30         =10         core 10

 To what extent was there some               56            75              24            80            9               90
 focus on payments systems and
 CSD?

 Was the main focus on retail                34            45              13            43            1               10
 payments?
 To what extent was the focus on             48            64              18            60            6               60
 the enabling legal and regulatory
 environment?
 To what extent was the focus on              2             3               0             0            0                0
 market conduct?
 To what extent was the focus on             30            40              21            70            9               90
 the reduction of specific areas
 of risk?
 To what extent was the focus on             25            33              15            50            4               40
 the installation of equipment and
 hardware?
 To what extent did the payments             30            40              30           100           10               100
 component specifically relate to
 securities clearance, settlement
 and depository arrangements
 If the focus was on securities,             27            (36)            26            87            9               90
 was it largely on government
 securities? (% CSD)

Note: CSD=clearance, settlement, and deposit systems.




                                                                     Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group         105
reviewed, only 30 were determined to have components with a focus on securities clearance and
settlement, and further screening suggested just 10 with clearly specified securities settlement
systems (SSS) or CSD elements. Forty-five were focused on overall aspects of the national payment
systems, or on even broader overall financial system reform with embedded payments system
components.26 Almost half of the 75 had a large focus on retail payments.27 There was also a
significant focus on legal and regulatory aspects (two-thirds of projects).28 Risk reduction was an
important explicit objective especially associated with the establishment of real-time gross settlement
(RTGS) systems (about half of all payment systems projects).29

Elements on securities clearance and settlement tended to focus largely on arrangements for
government securities (80 percent to 90 percent of such projects), reflecting limited private securities
trading in many of these countries. Examples are Mozambique (2013), which clearly stated in its
concept note that the project would support the government bond market. Similarly, the project
in Rwanda (2008) financed an automated transaction platform in a market in which only one
nongovernment security was ever issued. Exceptions, among the top 30, were the Financial Sector
Monitoring and Technical Assistance project in Moldova (2012) which had a component on the share
registry system reform and Syria’s FIRST-financed Development of Damascus Securities Exchange
in 2007.

A large number of World Bank interventions, both lending and advisory projects, focused on the
installation of hardware for securities settlement systems. From the portfolio review, it is noted that
15 out of the 30 core projects, and four out of 10 core projects, made up this type of intervention.
Overall, 25 out of the total 75 projects focused on the hardware infrastructure. Advisory services for
hardware installation included Vietnam’s Study for the Establishment of a Central Security Depository
in 2007 and the Technical Assistance for Payment System Reform in Georgia in 2008, where the
central bank was implementing a new settlement system that combined RTGS and public debt
securities settlement systems.

Relevance to Capital Market Development: 30 Core Projects
Out of the 30 projects with a substantial focus on CSD, the majority—17 projects, including four
“core” projects—did not make any reference to the nature of the country’s securities markets in their
project documents, reinforcing the observation that the general aim of these projects did not explicitly
include capital market development, but rather focused on the building of sound large-value and retail
payments systems. Some of the remainder provide good descriptions of their countries’ securities
markets, with a focus on government debt securities.30 Eleven of the available project documents for
the 30 did not mention the importance of the securities settlement systems; three had only limited
descriptions of it. However, in the cases of Georgia (Technical Assistance for Payment Systems Reform,
FY’08) and Namibia (Securities Depository Project, FY15), the project documents describe how critical
the securities settlement systems were for financial sector development in these economies.

In terms of the relevance of design, half the projects in the core 30 made reference to underlying
diagnostics, especially FSAPs. In addition, 17 referred to a specific diagnostic for payments and
CSD systems.31 There was explicit alignment of the recommendations and follow-up in 16 out of



106        The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 6
Box 6.4 | Projects with Relevant Payments Elements—Results Achieved

      Hardware installation in the payments area was successfully implemented with World
      Bank loans in Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Ethiopia, and Rwanda; in others the recipients
      decided to use other financing because of cumbersome procurement processes at
      the World Bank. External factors such as security concerns in Yemen (FY14) caused
      the project’s suspension. And the clearance, settlements, and deposit systems (CSD)
      feasibility study in Vietnam (FY07) might have been followed by a lending project to
      finance the system implementation, but the loan was apparently cancelled because of
      competition from the Asian Development Bank. In Georgia the World Bank assisted in the
      procurement of the real-time gross settlements system, which was eventually financed
      by USAID. These results suggest that the Bank’s internal processes slowed down
      implementation, even when the Bank had the necessary expertise.

      Impacts of advisory services are more difficult to measure. There is evidence, at least, of
      outputs with regard to the result of legal and regulatory development, in the area of payments
      and CSD. About a third of the 30 core interventions assisted the development or amendment
      of laws. The Capital Markets Modernization Project in Azerbaijan, approved in 2011,
      supported the drafting of the Law on Securities, and in the West Bank and Gaza the
      National Payment Systems Law was drafted with the World Bank’s “Support to World
      Bank Group Payment Systems II” technical assistance (FY09).

      Sources: World Bank Implementation Completion and Results Reports.




30 interventions.32 However, there was no FSAP preceding the intervention in Azerbaijan, Georgia,
or Vietnam.

Implementation results were available for just nine out of the 30 core projects and these were self-
evaluations by World Bank teams. These are, however, based on the project as a whole and not on
its payments systems components alone, let alone on the securities settlement aspects. World Bank
team self-evaluations rate its performance as “satisfactory” vis-à-vis internal work quality in seven,
and indicate the successful achievement of some project outputs related to payments and securities
settlement. The remaining two were self-rated “moderately satisfactory.” Only two IEG ICRR ratings
are available: the Kenya FLSTAP (FY04) and the Mozambique Financial Sector technical assistance
(FY05). In the Kenya FLSTAP, the payments system components were alluded to as “surpassed”;
they refer largely to electronic payments, an RTGS system, and the payments law, all of which
contribute indirectly to better securities settlement. In Mozambique, the ICRR refers to the successful
enhancement of financial infrastructure, alluding specifically to the RTGS system, and improved
payments oversight, but does not make reference to the planned introduction of a Central Security
Depository.



                                                                     Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   107
Payments and Securities Clearance and Settlement—
Country-Level Assessments
IEG supplemented the product-level analysis with a country-level review of interventions by a
market expert, supplemented by interviews of task team leaders, and information from IEG’s case
studies. These broadly confirm the summary assessment above, while providing additional depth.
They confirm the relevance of interventions in the area of payments systems, including those with a
primarily RTGS focus, because such systems and their associated legal infrastructure and oversight
support efficiency and lower risks for payments as well as clearance and settlement (Appendix 6.5).

The supplementary review also sheds light on the high focus on government securities. SSS
and CSD capabilities are generally packaged together in modern RTGS systems. Second, they
focus on the safe and efficient settlement of government securities, partly because these are
important tools for money market operations and provide collateral for transactions among financial
institutions themselves and with the central bank, and thus help liquidity management and efficient
implementation of monetary policy. This contributes to financial stability, and indirectly also supports
capital market development. The interventions remain highly relevant as basic infrastructure for
capital market development in the medium term, although this is not a primary objective.33

This review indicates that the World Bank adapted its interventions based on the level of market
sophistication, from the basic installation of RTGS systems to the upgrading of such systems to
improve their efficiency—Tajikistan and Turkmenistan are examples. Thus World Bank interventions in
five Europe and Central Asia countries included the replacement of existing RTGS systems with new
automated transfer systems (ATS) that have both RTGS and automated clearing-house processing
capabilities. This new generation of RTGS has added features of queueing of transfer orders and
intraday liquidity facilities, resulting in more efficient use of liquidity for real-time settlement.

A few interventions were undertaken with some view to supporting capital market development
(Azerbaijan, Kenya, Mongolia); an even smaller number had a specific focus on strengthening certain
aspects of capital markets (Turkey, Vietnam) or derivatives trading (Morocco). IEG reviews of available
evidence on these, including interviews of task team leaders and clients, uniformly suggest good
quality design, often referencing best international practice, but with mixed success in acceptance
and implementation.

Market Infrastructure: Securities Settlement Systems—
A Summary of Findings
To conclude, World Bank contributions to market infrastructure in the form of securities settlement systems
was important, yet infrequently an explicit objective. Typically the primary focus was the installation of sound
and efficient payment systems that reduced systemic risk and increased efficiency, especially in terms of
the legal framework, oversight, and RTGS systems, with associated clearing houses and depositories.
To the extent that securities clearance and settlement was a focus, the emphasis was frequently on
government and public securities, because of their use as collateral in intraday liquidity facilities, and not for
capital market development per se, often reflecting client countries’ limited financial market development. A
few projects had a more explicit, if secondary, reference to capital market development.



108       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 6
Box 6.5 | World Bank Support for Payments and Securities Settlement Systems:
          Country Perspectives

    World Bank interventions in the Dominican Republic illustrate a long and successful
    engagement beginning with a core focus on the payments system, and, after 10 years, expanding
    to areas more relevant to securities, with a focus on regulation. They began with a technical
    assistance loan in FY04 and continue to the present, however, with a reimbursable advisory
    services–financed technical assistance continuing into FY16. The Financial Sector Technical
    Assistance Loan (FSTAL) of FY04 supported a comprehensive reform of the payments system,
    including assistance to the central bank in acquiring a new real-time gross settlement (RTGS)
    system, establishing an appropriate legal framework, and defining supervisory functions. Prior
    to the FSTAL, there had been no automated securities settlement system; all trades settled
    bilaterally through the exchange of underlying physical assets, and settlement risks were assumed
    by counterparties. The FSTAL financed an RTGS system, implemented in April 2008; supported
    the authorization of the national securities custodian CEVALDOM to enable the dematerialization
    of securities; helped draft new payment systems regulation which enabled the central bank to
    oversee the payment systems, and helped define a collateral system and concepts such as legal
    finality. One indicator of the usefulness of these interventions is that at the time of the FSAP in
    2009, the RTGS system in the Dominican Republic either fully observed or broadly observed
    all 10 Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) Core Principles for Systemically
    Important Payment Systems. The same FSAP pointed out that whereas nongovernment debt
    securities were immobilized at the CEVALDOM, government and central bank bonds and bills
    were still settled via physical certificates. The recent reimbursable advisory services has provided
    technical assistance to the securities regulator in the drafting of a new securities law, especially
    regarding topics pertaining to custody, clearing and settlement, and establishing the regulator’s
    oversight function with regard to financial infrastructure.

    Kenya and Azerbaijan provide examples of payments and securities settlement interventions
    that had a more explicit focus on capital market development. In Kenya, the World Bank
    had mixed success with its two investment lending projects that included support for a
    securities clearance, settlement, and deposits system (CSD): the FLSTAP (FY05, closed) and
    the IFPPP (FY13, active). Although the FLSTAP aimed to provide technical assistance and
    funding for the acquisition of a securities depository, slow World Bank procurement proved
    frustrating, and the government decided to finance this themselves. The World Bank, however,
    supported the backup site of the payment systems. The present project, the IFPPP, is focused
    on the rationalization of the two different CSDs in Kenya; one for government securities
    and another for nongovernment securities (corporate bonds, equities etc.) The former is
    managed by the Central Bank of Kenya and the latter, the Central Depository and Settlement
    Corporation (CDSC), is owned by the Nairobi Stock Exchange. Although the World Bank has
    urged the CDSC to take over the capacity of the central bank system, the central bank
                                                                  (Box continues on the following page.)


                                                           Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   109
      Box 6.5 | World Bank Support for Payments and Securities Settlement
                   Systems: Country Perspectives (continued)

      remains concerned about inadequate capitalization and also about the ownership of the
      CDSC. (The Nairobi Stock Exchange has just been demutualized, and brokers still hold
      a significant amount of its equity). This experience underscores the sometimes complex
      political nature of ensuring sound decision making in this area. The consolidation of
      securities depositories was a frequent element of payments projects.

      In Azerbaijan, as in Kenya, the World Bank sought to assist the consolidation of the National
      Depository Center, which held nongovernment securities, and the Baku Stock Exchange,
      which acted as the depository for the treasury bills and central bank notes. Azerbaijan’s
      Capital Markets Management Project aimed to establish a single independent CSD;
      however, this has not so far been realized, and related infrastructure problems remain.

      Very few projects had explicit capital market development objectives, even when they included
      components such as securities clearance and depository arrangements. Turkey
      and Vietnam, however, provide examples. In Turkey, FSAP follow-up advisory services
      reviewed its fragmented CSD arrangements, spread across three entities. Its analysis and
      recommendation were principles-based, with reference to CPSS-IOSCO Recommendations
      for Securities Settlement Systems (RSSS) and subsequent updates. Its key recommendations
      were the establishment of central counterparties for government and nongovernment securities,
      consolidation of its CSDs, and improvement in the governance arrangements and transparency.
      However, there was little follow-up discussion with the government.

      In Vietnam, a World Bank FIRST-funded Feasibility Study for Establishing a CSD in Vietnam
      (2007) provided a single CSD System Implementation plan for Vietnam’s two exchanges;
      the HOSE (for blue chips) and the HNX (for small caps but also for government securities.
      The study also encompassed plans for an upgraded IT system. It was expected to feed into a
      proposed Financial Market Infrastructure Development Project (2010) but the project did not
      occur and the intended IT procurement did not take place. Nevertheless the single CSD role is
      well fulfilled by the Vietnam Securities Depository (VSD) today, which clears and settles all trades
      and acts as the central depository for equities, corporate bonds, and government securities.
      Settlement follows international best practice. Onsite interviewees point out, however, that VSD
      began to assume its new role in 2005, two years prior to the project, when the newly formed
      entity was already taking over clearing, settlement, and ownership recordkeeping functions from
      the back offices of both exchanges. It is suggested that the role of the World Bank’s technical
      assistance may have been to provide onsite consultation in parallel to reforms. The causal
      connections between the VSD’s state of operation today and the contributions made by the
      project in 2007–08 are therefore unclear.




110      The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 6
Most projects were well designed, reflecting preceding diagnostic work, often through FIRST or
FSAP recommendations. The World Bank was able to adjust intervention designs over time and
across countries to maintain its relevance in different contexts. Long-term engagement was usual,
often beginning with regional initiatives and diagnostics that later underpinned both policy-based
and investment lending. But to the extent that projects involved the installation of hardware, World
Bank processes were cumbersome and led to the loss of ground compared to other sources of
finance. Documents provide limited evidence on outputs or outcomes; most but not all appear to
have achieved desired outputs. It is difficult to capture outcomes such as risk reduction. Technical
assistance and legal and regulatory advice were of good caliber, though the degree of uptake was
sometimes unclear. Some topics occurred repeatedly: for example, the issue of consolidation of
CSDs, or the pros and cons of RTGS upgrades. Efforts could be made to pull these experiences
together across countries and to provide best-practice or best-fit guidance for new clients.

Overall, and taken in combination with the reviews in the preceding sections on the World Bank’s
global and regional roles, its overall contribution to the development of payments systems, as well as
securities clearance, settlement, and depository arrangements was substantial. It played a pioneering
role in promoting the modernization of payment systems and associated securities CSDs since the
late 1990s, and pointed out the need to bring emerging and developed countries onto the same
footing. These important infrastructure elements enable efficient and sound government securities
trading, liquidity management, the smooth functioning of money markets, and implementation of
monetary policy. The World Bank’s approach and processes have been multipronged and have
drawn upon several funding sources: FIRST and other trust funds, FSAPs, and reimbursable advisory
services. Efforts began from regional surveys, leading to awareness of gaps illustrated in country-
level diagnostics. Country interventions for reforms followed, which created momentum for peer
learning and the cross-fertilization of ideas. The World Bank itself gained knowledge and experience,
which formed the basis of its work with standard setters. And through the FSAPs and technical
notes, the World Bank was a key implementer of standards.

E ndnotes

1
     his report includes institutional, legal, regulatory, and policy framework aspects under the heading of infrastructure.
    T
    This is a somewhat wider perspective than the use of the term by global standards-setting bodies, who refer
    exclusively to clearing houses, securities settlement systems, CCPs and Central Securities Depositories.

2
    T
     hese projects were selected to represent countries in all World Bank regions; each country selected had more than
    one pertinent intervention.

3
    Azerbaijan Financial Sector Modernization (P125462), 2012–2016. $2.15 million.

4
    Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative (see also Chapter 8).

5
     ne project, Azerbaijan P125462, was financed by the SECO Trust Fund and two projects in the West Bank and Gaza
    O
    (P117448 and P117420) were financed by the Bank Group Trust Fund for the West Bank and Gaza. Funding for the
    programmatic project, Columbia P133789, was from the World Bank’s budget; however, this umbrella was linked to
    several distinct Bank Group activities funded from a variety of different sources.

6
    I
    n the Pakistan Country Partnership Strategy of April 2014, there was no specific information concerning the ongoing
    Capacity-Building Project. Although the Pakistan Country Partnership Strategy of July 2010 identified “Strengthened



                                                                      Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group       111
     Competitiveness and Governance of Markets” as a Pillar I objective, there was no specific reference to capital markets
     projects.

7
     This issue is more extensively discussed in Chapter 8.

8
      he 12 reports included three rated highly satisfactory, six rated satisfactory, one rated fully achieved, and two rated
     T
     largely achieved.

9
     S
      ignificant delays in execution were noted in the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan (SECP) Capacity-
     Building project of 2005. Though the reasons appear to be exogenous to the project, they appeared to reflect a
     changeable political environment in which the achievement of results may well be difficult. Yet project performance
     was self-rated satisfactory. Notwithstanding the delays, a second grant, Capacity Building of Institutions of Capital
     Markets (2011, $380,000), was awarded to extend the work. Significant delays were also noted in project execution
     in the Sri Lanka project for the Amendment to SEC Act (2011) and Development of NBFI Sector (2014). Although the
     first project was estimated to take approximately 1.5 years, completion required more than 2.5 years. According to the
     closing report, ”This was mainly due to the fact that there were significant disruptions in leadership in the SEC with two
     Chairmen having resigned due to political interference.” The closing report also claimed that nonetheless “all activities
     undertaken were delivered within the initial approved budget for this project.” Other documents indicated, however,
     that that not all activities originally planned were in fact undertaken and completed; for example, the portion of the
     project focused on the draft Takeovers and Mergers code was canceled.

10
      inal reports were found for nine of the 13 FIRST-funded projects, and for nine of the 16 non-FIRST projects. Fourteen
     F
     of the 18 reports were reviewed (translations of four reports were not found).

11
      omments by the task team leader in the Grant Report to the effect that the Vietnam State Securities Commission
     C
     (SSC) believed that this project was “the best donor supported project at the SSC to date” are corroborated by IEG’s
     field visit.

12
      he Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka website indicates that the most recent amendments to
     T
     the Securities Act occurred in 2009. Available at: http://www.sec.gov.lk/wp-content/uploads/SEC-Act-Revised-
     Edition-2009.pdf.

13
      he FIRST evaluation conducted a survey of host nation/client representatives. The results illuminate the significant
     T
     gap between successful outputs and successful outcomes. The report points out that “With regard to outputs,
     87 percent of clients reported that the project produced all of the deliverables they expected. However clients reported
     that in 62 percent of the projects the recommendations had been fully implemented. In 23 percent, there was some
     implementation, and in 8 percent of projects there was no implementation.”

14
     Three were broadly implemented and one partially implemented.

15
     Source, Colombo Stock Exchange website, “About Us,” available at: https://www.cse.lk/aboutus.do

16
      ee Nigerian Stock Exchange website, Corporate Governance. Available at: http://www.nse.com.ng/aboutus-site/
     S
     corporate-governance/corporate-governance-overview

17
     E
      arly demutualization had occurred in India, however, at the turn of the millennium. And recently, though outside the
     period of the present evaluation, Morocco’s law on demutualization was passed in April 2016.

18
      The proposed regulatory framework may be in compliance with international standards (e.g., IOSCO) but poorly
     “
     adapted to the state of development of the local market: The primary mitigating strategies for this risk will be to put
     in place a robust consultative process with relevant stakeholders to ensure a iterative process in terms of adapting
     international standards to local environment and the selection of consultants with strong experience working in
     markets at different stages of development.”

19
      orocco’s experience with covered bonds and securitization illustrates the importance of timing and a conducive
     M
     macro environment. The instruments were developed in 2012–14 but there were virtually no transactions, given the
     prevailing quantitative easing by the central bank. Similarly, securitizing small and medium enterprise (SME) loans will
     be challenging until the central bank discontinues its advantageous SME window.



112           The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 6
20
      learance, settlement, and depository arrangements also have “soft” aspects—rules and laws that govern their
     C
     operation.

21
      irasino and others (2007): Reforming Payments and Securities Settlement Systems in Latin America and the
     C
     Caribbean. Appendix A4.3 details the regional initiatives.

22
     Cirasino and Nicoli (2010) summarizes the work of the Arab Payments Initiative.

23
     n conjunction with these, the World Bank manages a new database, the Global Payments Systems Survey,
     I
     undertaken every two years in 150 countries.

24
     
     For example, Guadamillas and Keppler (2001), and Cirasino and Guadamillas (2004).

25
     See Appendix 6.4 for a description of this portfolio and a list of projects with core content.

26
     E
      ven in interventions with high clearance, settlements, and depository systems content, this may not have been a
     stated project objective, especially in the case of lending projects. Of the 14 out of 30 high content lending projects,
     10 described broad objectives (for example, the Financial Infrastructure and Markets project in the Democratic
     Republic of Congo, stated that the project objectives were “to modernize payments infrastructure and increase
     availability of term financing to MSMEs”). Advisory projects were typically more specific: for example, a FIRST study for
     Establishing a Central Security Depository in Vietnam, and a fee-based service in the Bahamas which focused clearly
     on an assessment of the migration plan of government securities to the Bahamas International Securities Exchange in
     terms of robustness, safety, and efficiency.

27
     Such as Argentina (2006; P103302), Ethiopia (2014, P149104), Peru (2014, 147360), and Tajikistan (2014).

28
     n Morocco, the Capital Market Development and SME Finance Project in 2014 aimed at development of the legal
     I
     and regulatory framework of derivatives settlement systems. The Dominican Republic’s reimbursable advisory service
     “Legal Framework for Securities Settlement Systems” in 2015 contributed to the legal infrastructure for securities
     transactions.

29
     A
      ppendix 6.5 describes risk reduction through real-time gross settlement systems and its links to securities clearance
     and settlement.

30
      xamples are the Financial Sector Capacity-Building project in Ethiopia, the Financial and Legal Sector Technical
     E
     Assistance Project in Kenya, and the Debt Market Development project of Mozambique (all in FY14).

31
     F
      or example, the Turkey FY12 Financial Sector Development Technical Assistance project, aimed to reform the
     clearing and settlement systems to achieve compliance with CPSS-IOSCO recommendations.

32
      or example, in Yemen, in 2012 the World Bank conducted an assessment of financial infrastructure and based
     F
     on that, two interventions followed; a Financial Infrastructure Loan (2014) as well as a FIRST advisory intervention:
     Improving Financial Infrastructure (2013).

33
      ne example is Rwanda, where a core project component, the Government Securities System, was for the transfer of
     O
     government and central bank securities; Ethiopia is another example.




                                                                       Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group       113
       7
                 highlights




   Real Sector   1         Support to infrastructure finance has grown

      Support:             in importance at the World Bank Group, yet

Infrastructure             support through capital markets instruments

       Finance             has been limited; typically, support is embedded

       and the             within a wider framework of financial market

  Environment              development, or infrastructure finance.




                 2
                           The Bank Group’s ESMID and, now, Deep

                           Dive programs illustrate the complex range of

                           market development actions needed to support

                           infrastructure bond issues and structured

                           finance arrangements.




                 3         Bank support is increasingly extended within

                           the framework of broader infrastructure

                           finance arrangements, such as public-private

                           partnerships, which can provide a contractual

                           umbrella that can help insulate against the

                           inherent risks of greenfield projects.




 x
 114             The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 7
4   The Bank Group’s guarantee instruments

    have provided support for infrastructure

    finance, though rarely, recently, through bond

    enhancements. However, guarantees on

    commercial loans also serve to crowd in equity

    investors, as well as project bond issues, in a

    structured finance transaction.




5   Support to sectors such as the environment

    through the Bank Group’s Green Bonds was

    embedded within overall Bank Group funding

    arrangements. The Bank Group’s issuance is

    modest in global terms, though it has played

    an important convening role with regard to the

    Green Bond principles. Other theme bonds are

    similarly structured.




6   The Bank Group has also fostered some

    innovative bond issuance, such as its

    catastrophic risk bond and the sukuk vaccine

    bond.




              Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   115
T h e pr e c e d i n g s e c t i o n s looked at the extent to which the Bank Group helped client

countries to develop their capital markets, through the creation of sound practice for issuers and

investors, and the installation of sound capital market infrastructure; the present section looks at

the extent to which the Bank Group itself supported the use of capital markets instruments in its

own real sector operations. Beyond support for financial resource allocation and price discovery,

capital markets matter because of their potential support for economic development in real sectors.

The present chapter focuses on one core area of the real sector—infrastructure—and examines the

extent to which the Bank Group made use of capital markets instruments to support the financing of

infrastructure. Possible vehicles are IFC purchases of bonds to support infrastructure finance issued

by investee companies; IFC or World Bank credit enhancements for project bonds; or indirectly

through crowding-in better financing terms for projects. The Bank Group also supports clients’

access to capital markets through advisory work, whether to provide an enabling environment, or

through hands-on support for the structuring of individual transactions.


Further, Bank Group Treasuries have issued bonds to support various Bank Group real sector priority
areas: the environment and inclusive finance, or structuring of bonds for vaccine finance or to protect
against catastrophic risk. These are summarized briefly at the end of the chapter and detailed in
Appendix 7.5.



Supporting Infrastructure Finance through
Capital Markets Instruments
Mobilizing resources for infrastructure finance has received increasing emphasis as a key priority
for the Bank Group throughout the review period of this evaluation, as noted in a series of strategy
statements, and at international forums (G20, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda) and in the 2015 Global
Financial Development Report, reflecting increasing awareness of infrastructure financing gaps.1 The
Bank Group’s infrastructure financing strategy for FY12–15 mentions the need for support to capital
market development as one element along the spectrum of public-private partnership activities.

IEG Portfolio Review
Fifty-four Bank Group operational interventions were identified as having a reference, in terms of
capital markets areas, to the use of capital markets instruments in infrastructure finance. These
are defined here to include the power sector, water, transport, and urban infrastructure.2 These
interventions included 46 World Bank AAA, seven lending projects supported by the World Bank,
and six IFC investment projects that involved both securities and infrastructure development.



116      The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 7
Box 7.1 | Project Bonds and Infrastructure Finance

      Project bonds allow borrowers to access a capital market investor base, attract another
      pool of liquidity that could complement—and for some projects fully replace—bank funding
      and, for projects with a long economic life, obtain longer tenors than available in the bank
      market. Project finance and infrastructure assets, with their long-dated tenors, flexible
      structures, contractual framework, and cash flows, lend themselves well to fixed-income
      investors and in particular to “real money” investors, such as pension funds and insurances
      with long-term liabilities structures. Fixed-income investors are keen to increase their
      allocations to long-dated assets as they search for returns in the current low-interest-rate
      environment. For borrowers, project bonds could help diversify away from the historical
      reliance on banks as a sole source of funding. The capital markets’ deep investor base
      and wide geographical spread also reduces reliance on investors from one single
      country. Whereas historically the U.S. dollar Qualified Institutional Investor (the so-called
      section 144a) base was the only market for long-dated bonds, Southern European and
      Asian investors have become much more important in recent years and have shown an
      increased appetite for longer tenors. Yet today, project bonds, widespread in advanced
      economies, remain relatively rare in emerging market economies.




At first, the list appears small. However, the portfolio below does not include World Bank or IFC
advisory projects that were primarily focused on other areas of capital markets, but may also have
had an infrastructure finance development element. Important programs under ESMID and the
Deep Dive are discussed in the chapter on bond market contributions; they did not include flags for
infrastructure finance.

Infrastructure Finance and Capital Markets Instruments—
World Bank
Only seven World Bank lending projects, listed below, explicitly referred to the use of capital markets
for infrastructure financing, typically through investment or technical assistance loans (Appendix Table
A7.1). Typically, they provide or have provided support for the development of regulatory frameworks for
long-term financing for infrastructure projects, with a broad-based focus, often including public-private
partnership structures or concession agreements and sometimes with an embedded capital market
element. Such limited direct support toward mobilizing capital market funding, reflects the nature of World
Bank instruments. Bank loans and credits are extended to governments and not for project finance;
hence, they are not appropriate vehicles for providing direct support for capital market transactions.

Despite necessarily limited direct transactional support, World Bank presence or support to the
government helped project entities to issue their own paper (Lima Metro; Kenya), through support




                                                           Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   117
FIGURE 7.1   | Bank Group Infrastructure Interventions and Capital Markets–Related
               Financing (FY04–14)
                                                       A. BY YEAR
             15




             10




              5




              0
                  04


                         05


                              06


                                         07


                                               08


                                                      09


                                                              10


                                                                      11


                                                                              12


                                                                                     13


                                                                                          14


                                                                                                     15
                  20


                       20


                              20


                                      20


                                              20


                                                     20


                                                            20


                                                                    20


                                                                            20


                                                                                    20


                                                                                          20


                                                                                                20
                                    IFC Investment        WB AAA           WB Lending

                                                     B. BY REGION
             12


             10


              8


              6


              4


              2


              0
                       AFR         EAP        ECA          LCR        MNA           SAR        OTH
                                    IFC Investment        WB AAA           WB Lending




to the enabling environments, often in a broad-based framework that sought to increase publics-
private partnerships in infrastructure finance. In addition, the World Bank offered advisory services
on mobilizing resources for infrastructure through project bonds, at both the global and country
levels.3 At a country level, however, in about half the identified portfolio of AAA projects, there was
limited focus on the specific theme of capital market instruments for infrastructure, typically aiming at
improving regulations related to increasing the use of public-private partnerships and infrastructure
financing in general. Although 41 AAA interventions were identified as providing assistance to
enhance capital market financing for infrastructure (Appendix Table A7.2), on closer examination,
11 focused primarily on public-private partnerships.4 Thirteen focused on vehicles for the financing of



118      The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 7
Box 7.2 | World Bank Infrastructure Lending: Support for the Use of
         Capital Markets Instruments

     An early project, the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) project in West
     Africa (2004), was structured to support capital market development, and to enhance capital
     mobilization for infrastructure through technical assistance, a line of credit, and a guarantee
     facility. When the project closed in 2011, the regional regulatory framework for select aspects
     of capital market development improved and corporate bond issues increased, though
     attribution is difficult. In terms of direct support to infrastructure building, several road
     subprojects and one port subproject were financed, but from the line-of-credit component,
     and not through market-based finance. There are no references to new bond issues for these
     infrastructure projects. The guarantee facility was cancelled at midterm restructuring owing to
     the lack of well-structured subprojects. The operation was rated moderately unsatisfactory.
     Finally, there is one development policy loan (DPL) in this cluster; however, it is difficult to
     attribute DPL conditionality to specific instances of real sector projects.

     The ongoing Kenya adaptable loan program provides a good example of overall support
     to infrastructure finance, with some reference to capital markets instruments. It had a primary
     focus on the establishment of an enabling framework for public-private partnership (PPP)
     financing, together with broad-based support for structuring an initial cluster of six PPP
     projects, which are all in the infrastructure area. However, the project also included,
     in its design, support for the management of financial instruments to be ultimately used,
     including the development of an offering regime, primary and secondary markets, upgrading
     of regulations on securitization under the Capital Markets Authority, and on the institutional
     investor side, the parallel revision of insurance and pension fund investment regulations. The
     project envisages the use of limited-recourse debt financing and discusses the pros and cons
     of domestic versus foreign currency denomination; however, in an overall financing structure,
     bond issues are only one option in such contracts.

     Another recent and still active World Bank–provided US$300 million loan to Peru (Lima
     Metro 2) helped finance government contributions to a privately owned and operated metro
     concession. Although not specifically designated as a capital markets development or
     support operation, the financing plan for the project envisaged the mobilization of funds from
     the capital market, and the project company placed bonds worth US$1.2 billion
     in the U.S. capital markets. The World Bank and other multilateral agencies augmented
     the government’s overall financing support to the project, and consequentially added to
     its perceived robustness, thus contributing to its favorable bond rating and good market
     response. The World Bank also provided technical support to the government, which
     contributed to the development of a bankable structure and issuance of a project bond.
                                                               (Box continues on the following page.)




                                                           Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   119
Box 7.2 | World Bank Infrastructure Lending: Support for the Use of
          Capital Markets Instruments (continued)

      Less positively, the World Bank loan to the India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited
      (IIFCL), an IBRD loan of US$1.195 billion approved in 2009, and also still active, was
      intended to increase the long-term financing for infrastructure PPPs in India. The inclusion
      of a capital markets code in the project’s classification likely reflected the initial expectation
      that the PPPs thus funded would tap capital markets for funding. The loan has been largely
      cancelled because of shortfalls in project design and mismatches between government
      and World Bank safeguard policies. Although India financed a large number of PPPs
      during this period, the impact of this specific project on the PPP program in India and on
      capital markets development has been negligible.




urban infrastructure, housing finance, and miscellaneous issues.5 Five projects focused on policy and
regulation, and another nine on broad-based issues of market development. Three looked at country-
specific and subregional infrastructure funds.

Four policy studies embedded issues relevant to the development of capital markets for infrastructure
within the context of a review of overall financial sector development, or overall capital market
development. These included an AAA activity in Turkey, and others in Uruguay, Costa Rica, and
the Caucasus. The project in Turkey focused on capacity building at government and supervisory
agencies. A significant recent effort in providing support for overall capital market development,
with an embedded component for infrastructure finance, was a 2014 FIRST-funded study in Costa
Rica. This broad-based work included a review of regulations for the use of capital markets for
infrastructure finance, to help establish the right balance between flexibility on the structuring side
and investor protection on the other.6

In three cases the policy notes prepared explicitly discussed capital markets in the context of
infrastructure development—a second project in Turkey (identifying regulatory and structural
constraints to deepening financial markets, with a focus on the investment funds industry; support
for drafting secondary legislation for the Capital Markets Law); Colombia (advice on the design and
implementation of an infrastructure equity fund program to promote domestic and international
pension funds to invest in Colombia’s infrastructure sector) and the Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa (COMESA) study in Africa on the design and management of an infrastructure fund.
Support for local government and project bond issuance was also made available to subnational
entities in Indonesia (two interventions), to raise funds for infrastructure development.7 Though
not included in the portfolio above, it is noteworthy that in 2015, an application was prepared
for a FIRST-funded advisory intervention in El Salvador that aimed at utilizing capital markets to



120      The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 7
finance infrastructure investments—specifically, to address the protracted issuance framework,
develop alternative issuance channels such as private placements and hybrid offers, strengthen the
supervision of intermediaries in terms of offering and distribution practices, and improve the pricing
and liquidity of nongovernment bonds.

Thus most of the advisory activities with direct relevance to both capital markets and infrastructure
development occurred in the context of support for public-private partnerships—for example, the
two regional projects in Africa as well as one in Kenya, largely for the assessment of potential investor
interest, the diagnosis of constraints, and the development of modalities to manage early-stage financing
(feasibility, construction, and commissioning phases). Efforts were made to link significant sources of
long-term capital (sovereign wealth funds, pension funds, equity funds, and insurance institutions) to
project finance. Bond issuance, ratings, and credit enhancements formed a part of the agenda.

Perhaps the most relevant cluster of recent advisory efforts of the Bank Group for infrastructure
finance and capital market instruments is associated with the ESMID and Deep Dive programs. The
IFC/World Bank Global Capital Markets (GCM) group has worked jointly with regional units in the
ESMID programs, and are currently engaged in an associated new program; the Deep Dive. Typically
these tasks did not incorporate infrastructure codes or flags, because this was a relatively small,
albeit significant element of the overall program. ESMID focused specifically on nongovernment bond
markets, with the explicit intention of supporting governments, from the overall regulatory framework
to individual bond issues. Because their primary focus was on the overall private bond market
development environment, both in individual countries and in regional clusters, these projects have
been coded to, and discussed in, the bond market cluster in the present evaluation. It is nevertheless
interesting to review their contributions to infrastructure finance though capital market instruments.

ESMID East Africa intended to support six identified transactions in the areas of transport, water,
and housing development, but none had come to the market by 2015.8 However, the Project
Completion Report points out that at least US$48 million worth of bond transactions were brought
to market with ESMID support, and regulatory approvals were secured for US$99 million worth
of bond issues.9 Nevertheless, the project’s contributions to developing the legal and regulatory
infrastructure for corporate bond issuance, improvements in efficiency and reductions in time
and support for smoothing constraints, was impressive. These upstream successes have been
instrumental in providing support to successor projects, such as the ongoing Kenya public-private
partnership project (Box 7.2), which is now supporting a series of highway projects, with the potential
for use of capital markets financing.10 Though ESMID’s intention from the start was to mobilize
capital markets so as to finance real economy projects, the reality of the macro situation and public
debt management implied that reforms for the latter had to be undertaken in tandem for successful
development of the nongovernment bond market.

ESMID Latin America (also discussed in Chapter 2) had similar program goals: improved legal
and regulatory frameworks for nongovernment bonds and increased issuance and investment
in the nongovernment bond segment in Colombia and Peru, especially in the priority sectors of
infrastructure and housing. Although the program provided assistance on regulatory fronts, improved



                                                           Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   121
financing conditions, and improved investability for institutional investors, challenges remain, including
the need for systematic consensus building, continued competition from banks, and long lead times
for transactions to come to market. The external evaluators and Bank Group staff concluded that
such challenges could be tackled by the Deep Dive initiative, a successor to ESMID on an even
broader scale, piloted in Colombia and elsewhere in late 2013.11

The multisector and multidisciplinary Deep Dive approach has perhaps the clearest focus on
infrastructure finance so far. In Colombia, it seeks to leverage resources across nine units of the Bank
Group to help Colombia use capital markets to finance large-scale strategic development needs,
especially including infrastructure, within a broad public-private partnership framework. The Deep
Dive may be the next step forward after programs such as ESMID, which while far-reaching, were not
cross-sectoral. Infrastructure finance is now the central focus of the Deep Dive in Colombia, where
the program is assisting Colombia build its bond markets to finance a $25 billion “Fourth Generation”
(4G) toll road program. IFC is an advisor to the national Infrastructure Agency (ANI), and the Bank
Group project includes a range of advisory services to support infrastructure bonds as well as a
$70 million IFC investment in Financiera de Desarrollo Nacional (FDN), the domestic infrastructure
development bank which is the new financing vehicle established by the government for these
transactions. Institutionally, the project has enjoyed unique advantages, given the close links between
Bank Group staff and Colombian authorities. For all these reasons it is difficult to comment on the
replicability of this approach, though at least partial demonstration of results is indicated. By the end
of 2015, negotiations for concessionaires for 17 projects were under way. And in early 2016, financial
closure on one project was announced.12

IEG also reviewed the extent to which World Bank guarantees may have supported the use of
market-based infrastructure finance. Although World Bank sovereign lending is not a suitable
instrument for supporting project finance, World Bank guarantees directly offer enhancements that
can support bond issuance as well as the mobilization of equity. If debt guarantees are extended to
bonds, they directly support the bond issuer, by enhancing the rating of the bond, and expanding
the group of eligible investors. More typically, guarantees may be offered on any part of the financing,
and may crowd in a range of additional investments in the form of equity or loans. While bond
guarantees are the most directly relevant for capital market instruments and infrastructure finance,
IEG also explores the extent to which Bank Group guarantees have helped to provide indirect
support to relevant projects, crowding in equity financing.13

World Bank guarantees were in fact used largely to support infrastructure projects. During the
entire period 1994–2015, the World Bank provided guarantees for 55 projects; of these 42 were for
infrastructure (Appendix Tables A7.3 and A7.4).14 Within the evaluation period, 34 guarantees were
approved, of which 29 were for infrastructure (FY04 to FY15). In terms of instrument type, however,
support in the form of guarantees of bond instruments were extended to only four infrastructure
projects—and all four occurred before the reference period for this evaluation.15 Three other bond
guarantees were extended by the World Bank, though not for infrastructure projects; these also fall
outside the period of evaluation. The bulk of the infrastructure guarantees (and all those within the
evaluation period) were extended for commercial loans.



122      The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 7
Box 7.3 | World Bank–Supported Project, Corporate, and Sovereign Bonds for
          Infrastructure Finance

    All 29 World Bank guarantees for infrastructure, extended during the period FY04 to
    FY15, except one, supported the energy sector, and within the energy sector, primarily, new
    private investments in electricity. Many enhancements were provided in the countries where
    it was most difficult to mobilize private capital: 21 guarantees supported projects in Sub-
    Saharan Africa. Although these guarantees were for commercial loans, they eased access to
    all forms of market-based finance.

    These projects also illustrate the difficulty of isolating capital market finance elements, when
    project sponsors and investors look at the overall structure of public and private finance.
    Thus in the case of the DASU Hydropower project, for example (FY14, Pakistan), domestic
    and international capital markets were approached, for the issue of bonds and project loans,
    with the support of World Bank project guarantees, given the World Bank guarantee on the
    commercial loans for the project. Four independent power plants in Kenya (2012) achieved
    financial closure with the help of World Bank guarantees, attracting additional private
    capital. Other cases of indirect support to bond market infrastructure finance exist, through
    structured finance arrangements, which are not included in the guarantee list; for example,
    loans to Jamaica for the Rockfort power project that enabled the project to issue its own
    bonds, backstopped by loans from the World Bank and the Inter-American Development
    Bank (IDB). However, in the Morupule B power project in Botswana (2009) the World Bank
    guarantee support made the project more economically viable through obtaining better terms
    (including longer tenor) from commercial lenders—although no private equity was mobilized.
    Often, as in Kenya, World Bank support led to similar subsequent transactions proceeding
    without its support.

    In relatively few instances, World Bank support has been used to structure securities for
    projects, corporates, and sovereigns, thereby enabling access to institutional capital at
    critical junctures under difficult market conditions. All these occurred outside the review
    period but provide examples of structures which could be replicated to raise resources from
    the capital markets.

    n	   Philippines—National Power Corporation, 1994: World Bank guarantee for a
         10-year-maturity US$100 million bond issue.

    n	   Jordan—Telecommunication Corporation, 1995: World Bank guarantee for a
         seven-year US$50 million bond

    n	   Thailand—Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand, 1998: World Bank Guarantee
         for 10-year bonds for US$300 million
                                                            (Box continues on the following page.)




                                                        Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   123
Box 7.3 | World Bank–Supported Project, Corporate, and Sovereign Bonds for
          Infrastructure Finance (continued)

      n	   Argentina (Sovereign)—1999: Six series of zero-coupon notes of US$250 million
           each with maturities of one to five years backed by a World Bank guarantee. Gross
           proceeds—US$1.165 billion

      n	   Colombia (Sovereign)—2001: 10-year notes issued in two tranches amounting to
           US$1 billion backed by a World Bank guarantee

      Catalyst role of the World Bank:

      n	   Jamaica—Rockfort Power Project, 1994: US$81 million mobilized through five-year
           Caribbean Basin Projects Financing Authority (CARIFA) bonds issued by the project
           entity, in Puerto Rico, backed by a joint take-out financing commitment from the World
           Bank and IDB

      n	   Ghana (Sovereign)—2015: 15-year bonds for US$1 billion with a World Bank (IDA)
           guarantee

      Sources: IEG; Sutherland (1998) “Financing Jamaica’s Rockfort Independent Power Project.”




Infrastructure Finance and Capital Markets Instruments—IFC
Of the 152 IFC projects that used capital markets instruments during the period 2004–14, 18
supported infrastructure. Support in the form of bond purchases, or bond guarantees, was extended
to only six projects (Appendix Table A7.5), where IFC’s role was identified as providing additional
“comfort” to investors so as to mobilize funding.

Two bond sub-sovereign or municipal guarantee projects in IFC’s portfolio enabled these entities
to enhance the terms of their infrastructure finance bonds: the Chuvash Republic of the Russian
Federation and the City of Johannesburg in South Africa. In the former, IFC’s local currency
guarantee for the government’s bond issues enabled the Republic to obtain a higher rating and a
longer maturity bond than had been possible in the past. In South Africa, a similar guarantee for
the City of Johannesburg’s municipal bond issue enabled it to considerably extend its maturity,
refinancing high-cost bank debt, and securing long-term financing for infrastructure projects.16

IEG also reviewed IFC’s loan guarantees and performance bonds, and found that a small minority
crowded in fresh equity but all helped support enhanced overall financing terms. Of the remaining 12
projects with the use of “capital markets instruments” for infrastructure finance, nine were loan guarantees
and three were performance bonds (Appendix 7.3). In virtually all cases, these enhancements led to
greater volumes or better terms of other finance, and in two instances there was equity investment by the
sponsor, though project documents attribute additionality in only one instance (South Africa, Hernic BEE).



124        The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 7
Box 7.4 | MIGA Guarantees for Bond Instruments and Guarantees for Infrastructure

    Although MIGA has issued a number of guarantees in support of capital markets
    instruments, it was excluded from the present evaluation at the Approach Paper stage, primarily
    to contain the scope. MIGA has also been active in the area of infrastructure finance. MIGA has
    traditionally provided political risk insurance to private sector investors and lenders, and has in
    recent years expanded its range of products to offer coverage against the risk of non-honoring
    of financial obligations by a sovereign or sub-sovereign government entity or a state-owned
    enterprise. MIGA has been the subject of a comprehensive recent IEG evaluation ( MIGA’s
    Financial Sector Guarantees in a Strategic Context (IEG, 2011)).

    MIGA’s six capital market projects compare to 15 at IFC and none at the World Bank
    over the evaluation period. Four of MIGA’s six projects were in FY04–08, prior to the
    global financial crisis. During FY09–14, MIGA’s involvement in support of capital market
    transactions consisted mainly of offerings of its new coverage for the non-honoring
    of financial obligations. The credit enhancement triggered by MIGA’s participation in
    the structure, either by providing political risk insurance or a non-honoring of financial
    obligations guarantee, involved easier overall access to capital. Over the 10-year period
    reviewed, MIGA issued guarantees in support of the following six capital markets
    transactions:

    n	   $10.1 million (2005) to the parent company of a Latvian mortgage company
         to protect against transfer restrictions and expropriation of funds related to an
         investment in a mortgage-backed securitization

    n	   $66.5 million guarantee (2005) to cover the risks of transfer restrictions and
         expropriation on parent funding for a local currency securitization of trade
         receivables by a bank in Brazil

    n	   $107.6 million (2006) in political risk insurance covering an international bond issue
         by a highway authority in the Dominican Republic

    n	   $10.2 million (2007) and $75 million (2006) guarantees against transfer and
         convertibility restrictions on investments made in securitized portfolios of residential
         mortgages originated in Kazakhstan (two guarantees)

    n	   $99 million (2012) to support a cross-currency swap agreement between the
         government of Senegal and an international bank against non-honoring of sovereign
         obligations. That swap agreement hedged the currency exposure of the government related
         to a $500 million bond issued in 2011
                                                            (Box continues on the following page.)




                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   125
Box 7.4 | MIGA Guarantees for Bond Instruments and Guarantees for Infrastructure
             (continued)

      n	   $575 million in 2014 against the risk of non-honoring of sovereign obligations by
           the Hungarian Export-Import bank, on its offshore notes issues

      The gross coverage for these capital markets projects totals $948 million, of which
      $575 million, in two separate structured tranches, was for the non-honoring of sovereign
      financial obligations guarantee issued in 2013 in support of Hungary’s Export-Import
      Bank. These operations represent 4.6 percent of total MIGA guarantees issued over this
      period—but just 1.8 percent if the guarantee issued in 2013 in support of Hungary’s Export-
      Import Bank is excluded.

      Looking beyond guarantees in support of capital market instruments, on the argument
      that risk mitigation in the form of guarantees has helped to crowd in capital on better
      terms overall, MIGA has been very active in infrastructure. Of the 360 MIGA guarantees
      issued during the evaluation period 103 were in the infrastructure sector. With 27 out of the
      35 World Bank guarantees, the World Bank also focused heavily on infrastructure, while
      12 of IFC’s 80 guarantees supported infrastructure projects, because a large proportion
      of IFC’s guarantees (45 out of 80) were in the financial sector.

      Source: Appendix Table A7.6.




Overall, findings significantly reflect the different roles and instruments at the disposal of the World
Bank and IFC. IFC successfully supported six transactions during the review period through bond
purchases and bond guarantees. The Bank Group’s advisory programs strengthened the enabling
environment and offered transactional support. The World Bank’s guarantee program, though
offering direct support for bond enhancements in the past, has of late focused largely on overall
risk mitigation, with 29 projects for infrastructure finance over the evaluation period. Many served
to crowd in equity or encourage project bond issues. The Bank Group meanwhile is moving toward
a more holistic public-private partnership approach to infrastructure finance, which can provide
contractual protections to investors in infrastructure projects.



Green Bonds and Theme Bonds
Demand for green bonds and environmentally friendly investment opportunities increased after 2000,
following the Montreal Protocol and the adoption of the UN Principles for Responsible Investing
(PRI) (see Appendix 7.5 for details). The European Investment Bank (EIB) was the first multilateral
development bank (MDB) to issue a Climate Awareness Bond (CAB), in 2007, introducing a core
underlying concept—a structured product linked to an equity index which ring-fenced the use of



126        The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 7
Box 7.5 | IFC: Infrastructure Support Through Bond Purchases

      In the Peru liquified natural gas (LNG) project, there was an equity
      investment prior to IFC’s disbursement of Senior Credit Facilities. Although there was
      no direct linkage to IFC’s intervention, it can be argued that IFC’s presence was an
      encouragement. In a project in Brazil, IFC financed the purchase of the company’s
      debut Eurobond for up to US$50 million. The lead manager emphasized that IFC’s role
      as anchor investor mobilized other investors, leading to the successful debut issue of
      greater than US$300 million. In the Middle East and North Africa, for the Renaissance
      MCB project, IFC provided financing through a quasi-equity investment of up to US$30
      million in mandatory convertible bonds. According to the board paper for this active project,
      IFC’s investment helped this South-South project to successfully close the financing plan
      which it could not complete through an issue of bonds on a rights basis in July 2012. IFC’s
      participation provided comfort to both existing investors and potential investors as the
      company seeks funding in the future.

      IFC also financed the Mersian International Port in Turkey. As per the board document, the
      company’s Eurobond was the first international single-asset infrastructure bond issued by
      a corporate in Turkey. Because institutional investors remain selective, displaying a strong
      preference for blue-chip issuers with long international credit histories, IFC’s participation
      in this offering served as a strong vote of confidence at a time when European banking
      markets were still recovering from the sovereign debt crisis.

      Source: IEG.




proceeds to underlying Bank Group portfolios of environment lending and investment. IBRD (2008)
and IFC (2010) each began to issue “green”-labeled plain vanilla bonds, ring-fencing the proceeds
to match disbursement of their respective climate change portfolios, mobilizing nearly $12.7 billion
over 2010–15. Bank Group green-labeled bonds enabled its plain vanilla debt instruments to meet
the demand for socially responsible investors (SRIs) who were looking to meet their compliance
requirements without taking on screening or additional risks. Other issuers entered the market as
investor interest grew, and by 2014 aggregate Bank Group annual issues were only about 10 percent
of total green bond issuance in the global marketplace. The most significant contribution of the
Bank Group has perhaps been its key convening role in bringing together stakeholders to agree to a
general framework for such issues, now known as the Green Bond Principles (GBP).

Treasury departments of both IBRD and IFC also began to undertake bond issues to support
other Bank Group priority areas, notably IFC’s Banking on Women and Inclusive Business bonds
(Appendix 7.5). All such Bank Group thematic bonds ring-fence relevant areas of the portfolio,



                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   127
attracting new investors and diversifying the Bank Group funding base. Although there is no obvious
additionality in funding obtained, the Bank Group’s greatest contribution lay in fostering development
of this new segment of debt capital markets.

In addition, IBRD Treasury has played a significant advisory and managerial role in assisting the
“vaccine” bonds issued by the International Finance Facility for Immunization. IBRD helped develop
the catastrophe bond (CAT), which allows entities that are exposed to natural-disaster risk, such as
insurance companies, to transfer a portion of that risk to bond investors. In 2009, IBRD created a
MultiCat Program for which the World Bank acted as arranger, allowing clients to sponsor catastrophe
bonds using a common documentation platform; and in 2014 IBRD created the Capital-at-Risk-Note
Program which allowed it to issue bonds supported by the strength of its own balance sheet.



Real Sector Support at the Bank Group and Capital Markets
Instruments—A Summary
Although the Bank Group supported the increased provision of infrastructure finance in client
countries, its specific focus on project bonds and bond guarantees has been declining, partly
reflecting a more holistic, public-private partnership–based approach. Support for the development
of capital markets–based infrastructure finance has been the most evident, in recent years, in the
broad-based bond market advisory services of the Bank Group, notably the ESMID and, more
recently, the Deep Dive programmatic initiatives, that try to bring together the multiple elements
of bond market development, institutional investor involvement, and the creation of public-private
partnership frameworks, to support project finance with capital market involvement, with partial
success.

Perhaps the most direct support that the Bank Group can offer is through its guarantees and
credit enhancements for infrastructure finance arrangements. In this complex realm of structured
finance it is not obvious that Bank Group purchases of bonds, or guarantees of bonds, are the only
capital market–enhancing forms of support; risk mitigation in the form of loan guarantees has the
same capacity to crowd in other forms of finance, and at better terms. In some transactions Bank
Group loan guarantees can enable project entities to issue their own bonds. Because the credit
enhancement needed in some case can be substantial, the feasibility of such an approach is largely
dependent on the quality of underlying assets.

The IEG evaluation of Bank Group guarantees instruments (2009) also shows that such guarantees
have helped public agencies tap bond markets for better terms than they would have received
without guarantees. Most public agencies that accessed capital markets under the partial credit
guarantees (PCGs) subsequently accessed commercial markets again, without guarantees. In
Jordan, the PCG helped the telecom utility become the first Middle Eastern corporation to tap the
Eurobond market. The Jordan operation also involved the participation of the local capital market,
facilitating mobilization of domestic foreign exchange deposits. It also points to the early guarantees
provided for Colombia (2001) which enabled Colombia to reestablish access to U.S. capital markets



128        The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 7
at a time when investor interest was minimal. In Argentina (1999), although the country was able to
access non-U.S. capital markets at similar terms, the PCG enabled it to issue a significantly larger
bond ($1.2 billion) than would otherwise have been possible at the time.

It is puzzling that there has been such a noticeable decline in the offer of bond guarantees over the
past decade, from the World Bank in particular. This may be a reflection of the prevailing difficulties
with project finance in the wake of the crisis, and it may also reflect the move toward a more holistic
public-private partnership–based approach to infrastructure finance. The emphasis on use of public-
private partnership and limited-recourse financing to create new infrastructure assets has enabled
the mobilization of private equity, primarily because these structures (generally through a contractual
framework and credit enhancements) insulate the project’s revenue stream from risks which the
private sector is unable to bear or mitigate. These structures have enabled the funding even of
greenfield projects because construction risk is managed within the contractual framework, and
commercial banks and equity do not need the project to achieve a threshold rating. The Bank Group
has contributed to this trend by providing technical assistance, financing, and risk mitigation. The
increased use of such structures for infrastructure development is expected to continue, wherever
feasible. Meanwhile, the Bank Group can also explore structures that are being used by other IFIs, for
example the EIB’s Infrastructure Bonds, which provide a replicable model (Appendix 7.4).

    Longer-term market factors remain a factor for project bonds. Project risk profiles (especially
for construction risk) are not conducive to credit ratings that would be acceptable to institutional
investors. Cross-border risks remain. Mobilizing long-term funding from capital markets internationally
and locally is affected not only by the inherent structure of projects and whether they have acceptable
credit, but also by macroeconomic stability, regulatory frameworks, and contract enforcement
capability. Though desirable, project bonds are unlikely to be a large source of infrastructure
financing, especially for greenfield projects.

E ndnotes

1
    D
     etails of the articulation of Bank Group strategy toward infrastructure finance, including the use of capital markets
    instruments, is given in Appendix 7.1, which also discusses World Bank knowledge contributions on the theme of
    project finance.

2
    The portfolio selection is detailed in Appendix 7.2. Housing finance however is not included.

3
    A
     t a global level, see Gray and others (1997), Dailami and Hauswald (2003), historically, and recently, Bond, Daniel
    (2014) and Bravo, Fernando, (2014) Garcia-Kilroy (2014).

4
    Representing 40 from the Approach paper and one additional recent project in Costa Rica.

5
    I
    llustrating the difficulties of separating housing from the urban sector, and the difficulty of separating either from
    infrastructure. Capital markets codes sometimes appear in interventions related to housing finance, owing to the
    mention of mortgage-backed securities.

6
     wo public-private partnership projects in India were not included in the analysis because they are ongoing and have
    T
    no final reports. However, a review of their project objectives and description in the Concept note suggests relevance.
    One attempts to design a financing framework which can leverage private sector funds, including financing from capital
    markets if feasible, for the renewable energy sector. The other reviews requirements for the use of capital markets for
    infrastructure financing.



                                                                        Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group       129
7
      he “Strengthening Subnational Fiscal Capacity for Infrastructure Financing” Technical Assistance I in Indonesia
     T
     claimed to improve awareness of subnational capital markets for municipal bonds while the “Jakarta Fiscal and Bond
     Issue” technical assistance provided debt management advice and a credit rating assessment to the provincial
     government of Jakarta.

8
      airobi Water and Sewage company, Kenya airports, City of Kigali Bus, Housing Finance Co., Faulu Kenya, and the
     N
     Uganda Water Corporation.

9
     P
      RIDE Tanzania (a microfinance institution), Consolidated Bank, Centum Investment, and Athi River Mining—largely
     financial intermediaries, with one exception.

10
     n parallel to the launch of ESMID in East Africa, there was a significant spike of about $430 million in corporate bond
     I
     issues in the area of telecommunications infrastructure because of two large issues: KenGen and Safaricom. However,
     ESMID admits to having only a minor role in these issues.

11
      ee Chapter 2. There are additional advanced examples of Deep Dives besides Colombia, including Peru and South
     S
     Africa, and other experimental programs to develop capital market solutions to finance infrastructure; for example, a
     project under preparation in Brazil to develop a new class of local currency project bonds for domestic pension funds,
     with specific enhancement from the government to mitigate risks. These efforts are still under way and therefore too
     early to evaluate; however they reflect Bank Group efforts to develop a comprehensive approach to the large-scale
     challenge of financing infrastructure through capital markets and to leverage institutional investors.

12
      acifico 3, the first Project of Colombia’s ambitious fourth generation (4G) infrastructure program to reach financial
     P
     close (February 2016).

13
      or guarantees for sovereign and sub-sovereign bond issues, in addition to infrastructure bond issues for public-
     F
     private partnership transactions, a Bank Group–wide working group has been established to better align client funding
     needs with the full spectrum of Bank Group offerings.

14
     I
     EG reviews data prior to the evaluation period because it sheds light on significant changes in patterns of World Bank
     support, as described below.

15
      hilippines: a geothermal power plant; Lebanon: power sector restructuring; Electricity Generating Authority of
     P
     Thailand; and a Jordanian telecommunications project.

16
     O
      bservers point out, however, that a large proportion of the bonds were “stripped” from the start by “conduit buyers”
     because of a shortage of long-term investors who reissued them as 1-year rolling notes under a new name without the
     guarantee. This outcome illustrates that guarantees on their own cannot ensure the offtake of longer-dated paper if
     market appetite is limited.




130           The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 7
       8
                      highlights




Sustainability,       1    The future coherence and sustainability of

      Quality,             capital markets work requires stable funding.

  Monitoring,              The Finance and Private Sector Development

         and               network (FPD) has experienced a rising

 Coordination              proportion of externally financed funding.




                      2    The program has been significantly self-

                           sustaining, and has won the support of

            Results and    Performance
                     donors. But its funding model could of  the
                                                          have

                    World      Bank Group 2015
                     contributed to its opportunistic engagement.

                           Future vulnerability could be an issue.
                                            An Independent Evaluation




                      3    Donor support was particularly high for bond

                           market development, especially for the ESMID

                           program and for capital market regulation and

                           development, through the FIRST trust fund.




                      4    Conventional assessment of development

                           impact of such an intensively analysis
                                                         knowledge-
                                                                   Careful observation and
                                                                  of program data
                                                                   and the many issues
                                                     not only
                           based program is hampered impacting  by
                                                               program
                                                                   efficacy reveal what
                           extremely limited evaluative evidence,
                                                         works as well as what
                                                                   could work better. The
                                                           and file core
                           but also by failure to maintain knowledge gleaned is
                                                                   valuable to all who strive
                           documentation. This will also to ensure that World
                                                         negatively     affect
                                                                   Bank goals are met and
                                                      surpassed.
                           knowledge sharing and learning.



                                   Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group        131
                                        5
                                                  Evidence suggests better-than-average overall

                                                  program quality, as corroborated by IEG’s

                                                  country case studies. Clients were largely

                                                  appreciative of work quality, though process

                                                  sometimes remains an issue.




                                        6          Internal collaboration between the World

                                                  Bank and IFC and between field offices and

                                                  headquarters was variable, ranging from

                                                  examples of excellent practice, especially in

                                                  advisory services, to sensible divisions of labor

                                                  but little systematic interaction. Scope for

                                                  improvement remains in some areas.




132   The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 8
Pr e v i o u s c h a p t e r s i n t h i s e va luat i o n discussed the relevance of the Bank

Group capital markets program, its quality at entry, and its effectiveness in terms of program outputs

and outcomes. This section examines issues related to sustainability, especially, program funding;

monitoring, and client perceptions of quality and internal organization.




Funding the Capital Markets Work Program
Although the Finance and Private Sector Development (FPD) program was reasonably funded within
the World Bank’s budgetary environment, the share of capital markets funding, within this total,
declined. As shown in Figure 1, during the evaluation period, and within the World Bank’s budgetary
environment, the share of FPD in the total budget available to the World Bank’s networks rose
slightly, from about 3 percent to about 5 percent.1 However, within the overall FPD budget, capital
markets work, which had increased steadily until the middle of the period, began to taper off relative
to other areas of financial sector work. Simultaneously, other areas within FPD rose—for example,
financial inclusion—suggesting a shift in internal priorities (Figure 8.1). These data refer to the budget
at the FPD anchor, which has diminished over time, with a shift of budget toward the regions. Yet
the anchor share of the capital markets practice, relative to the regions, did not diminish, and the
movement of budget toward the regions does not explain this decline.

External funding sources helped to support the FPD network and the capital markets work program
to a significant extent. The reason why the FPD network, as a whole, held its own in terms of funding
over the evaluation period was its increased reliance on trust funds. Trust funding for FPD increased
even when there was a decline in the proportional use of trust funds World Bank-wide. The capital
markets segment of work was even more reliant on external funding than the FPD network as a whole
(Figure 8.2, Panel A). Further, looking within the major practice areas in FPD, the capital markets
segment has been the most consistently reliant on Bank-executed Trust Funds, (BETFs) though in the
past two to three years the financial inclusion agenda has attracted a lot of trust funding. The financial
systems segment obtained external funds during the years of the financial crisis, but its external
funding has since diminished to negligible levels (Figure 8.2, Panel B).

Besides BETFs, however, the FPD network, and especially, the capital markets practice, made use of
funding from additional sources that are not, strictly speaking, within the World Bank–financed budget.
Such sources, which are included within the budget for accounting purposes, include, in particular,
externally financed outputs which are essentially mechanisms for donor support for small programs
below $1 million; and reimbursable advisory services, where services are paid for by the recipients.
In addition, the capital markets practice enjoyed funding from GEMLOC (the Global Emerging
Markets Local Currency bond program; see chapter 2); obtained as fee income from PIMCO for the
management of a portfolio of bonds linked to the GEMLOC index. Adding sources such as externally
financed outputs, reimbursable advisory services, and GEMLOC to BETFs, using a wider definition of
“non-BB” budget, made a negligible difference for the World Bank as a whole over this period—less


                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   133
  FIGURE 8.1            | Financial Sector Funding and Capital Markets Funding (2004–14) (Percent)
                      A. SHARE OF FPD AMONG NETWORKS                                                      B. SHARE OF CAPITAL MARKETS WITHIN FPD
              4,000                                                   6.0                            250,000                                   8.0
              3,500
                                                                      5.0                            200,000
              3,000                                                                                                                                  6.0




                                                                                      U.S. DOLLARS
US$ MILLION




                                                                            PERCENT




                                                                                                                                                           PERCENT
                                                                      4.0
              2,500                                                                                  150,000
              2,000                                                   3.0                                                                            4.0
              1,500                                                                                  100,000
                                                                      2.0
              1,000                                                                                                                                  2.0
                                                                      1.0                             50,000
               500
                 -                                                    0.0                                 -                                          0.0
                        05
                        06
                        07
                        08
                        09
                        10
                        11
                        12
                       04




                        13
                        14




                                                                                                           04
                                                                                                           05
                                                                                                           06
                                                                                                           07
                                                                                                           08
                                                                                                           09
                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                           14
                     FY
                     FY
                     FY
                     FY
                     FY
                     FY
                     FY




                     FY
                FY




                     FY
                     FY




                                                                                                        FY
                                                                                                        FY
                                                                                                        FY
                                                                                                        FY
                                                                                                        FY
                                                                                                        FY
                                                                                                        FY
                                                                                                        FY
                                                                                                        FY
                                                                                                        FY
                                                                                                        FY
                              Total Budget                                                                              FPD Network
                              FPD                                                                                       Capital Markets
                              Share of FPD Network in Total                                                             Cap mkts over FPD network
                            % Cap.            % Fin.         % Fin.
                           Markets          Inclusion       Systems
                                                                                                          C. SHARES OF FINANCIAL SYSTEMS, CAPITAL
                                                                                                              MARKETS, AND FINANCIAL INCLUSION
                          (anchor) in      (anchor) in     (anchor) in                                14.0
                             FPD               FPD            FPD
                                                                                                      12.0
        FY04                   5.4              0               9.5
        FY05                   4.6              0              10.6                                   10.0
                                                                                          PERCENT




        FY06                   5.5              0              10.4                                    8.0
        FY07                   6.2             0.9             10.4
                                                                                                       6.0
        FY08                   6.9             1.6             12.6
                                                                                                       4.0
        FY09                   7.4             1.9             13.1
        FY10                   7.0             2.3             12.7                                    2.0
        FY11                   7.0             2.9             12.3                                    0.0
        FY12                   7.1             4.2             10.1
                                                                                                         04

                                                                                                               05

                                                                                                                       06

                                                                                                                       07

                                                                                                                       08

                                                                                                                       09

                                                                                                                       10

                                                                                                                       11

                                                                                                                       12

                                                                                                                       13

                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                       FY

                                                                                                              FY

                                                                                                                   FY

                                                                                                                    FY

                                                                                                                    FY

                                                                                                                    FY

                                                                                                                    FY

                                                                                                                    FY

                                                                                                                    FY

                                                                                                                    FY

                                                                                                                    FY
        FY13                   7.0             4.5              7.9
                                                                                                                    Cap.markets (anchor) in FPD
        FY14                   6.0             4.8              7.2                                                 Fin. Inclusion (anchor) in FPD
                                                                                                                    Fin. Systems (anchor) in FPD

  Source: IEG analysis based on World Bank data. Note:

  FPD=Finance and Private Sector Development.




  than 2 percent—though there is a discernible trend increase. But for the FPD network, there was a
  greater trend increase in funding from such sources. And among the anchor Finance and Markets
  practices, the greatest trend increase was in the capital markets practice (Figure 8.3).2

  The bond market segment of the capital markets program had particularly strong support from
  external funding. IEG undertook a detailed supplementary analysis of capital markets funding for
  bond market development advisory services and analytic and advisory activities, identifying funding
  sources at the task level for the 86 reviewed. In addition to GEMLOC and reimbursable advisory
  services, these data also illustrate the importance of other funding sources, the FIRST trust fund
  (subsumed under the broader category of BETFs, in the preceding analysis), and the SECO- and
  SIDA-financed ESMID programs. These are not fully captured in the aggregate funding analysis of
  the preceding section, which refers only to the World Bank and to World Bank–financed funding,



  134                 The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 8
FIGURE 8.2                            | Changes in the Relative Share of Financial Sector Work at the Anchor:
                                        Capital Markets, Financial Systems, and Financial Inclusion (2004–14)

                                      A. TRUST FUNDS—FPD NETWORK AND                                    B. TRUST FUNDS—CAPITAL MARKETS, FINANCIAL
                    45                     CAPITAL MARKETS PRACTICE                                14        SYSTEMS, AND FINANCIAL INCLUSION
                    40
                                                                                                   12
                    35
                    30                                                                             10
PERCENT




                                                                                         PERCENT
                    25                                                                              8
                    20
                                                                                                    6
                    15
                                                                                                    4
                    10
                              5                                                                     2
                              0                                                                     0
                                                07

                                                08

                                                09

                                               10

                                               11

                                               12

                                               13

                                               14




                                                                                                                       07

                                                                                                                       08

                                                                                                                       09

                                                                                                                      10

                                                                                                                      11

                                                                                                                      12

                                                                                                                      13

                                                                                                                       14
                                       06




                                                                                                               06
                                             FY

                                             FY

                                             FY

                                             FY

                                             FY

                                             FY

                                             FY

                                             FY




                                                                                                                    FY

                                                                                                                    FY

                                                                                                                    FY

                                                                                                                    FY

                                                                                                                    FY

                                                                                                                    FY

                                                                                                                    FY

                                                                                                                    FY
                                      FY




                                                                                                             FY
                                             BETF-IBRD&IDA / IBRD&IDA                                          Share of Cap Mkts BETF / Anchor BETF
                                             BETF-FPD Network / FPD Network total                              Share of Fin Systems BETF / Anchor BETF
                                             BETF-Cap Mkts / Total Cap Mkts                                       Share of Financial Inclusion in BETF /
                                                                                                                  Anchor BETF

Source: IEG analysis based on World Bank data.

Note: BETF: Bank-executed Trust Fund.




FIGURE 8.3                            | Contributions of Non-Bank Budget Funding to Finance and Private
                                        Sector Development Work
                                                   CONTRIBUTION OF “NON-BB” FUNDING TO FPD PRACTICE AREAS
                              10
PERCENTAGE POINT DIFFERENCE




                                  8
     TO TOTAL FUNDING




                                  6


                                  4


                                  2


                                  0


                              –2
                                      FY04         FY05   FY06     FY07       FY08       FY09              FY10        FY11           FY12   FY13          FY14

                                      Bank total           FPD Network               Cap. Mkts                       Fin. Inclusion             Fin. Systems


Source: Source: IEG analysis based on World Bank data.

Note: Includes Bank-executed trust funds, externally financed output, reimbursable advisory services, and, GEMLOC (2004–14);
BB=bank budget.




                                                                                             Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group                 135
whereas the ESMID program, undertaken jointly between the World Bank and IFC, distributed
funds to projects under both institutions (Appendix Table A8.1).3 The inclusion of SECO and SIDA,
primarily for bond market work, further adds to the importance of external funding for capital market
development work. It also illustrates the difficulty of capturing a complete budget picture, integrated
across the World Bank and IFC, for the Finance and Markets practice as a whole.

These data show that SIDA was the largest source of funds for bond market advisory activity by
the Bank Group during the period (37 percent) and GEMLOC was second, with more than 17 percent
of bond advisory funds. Residual funds from GEMLOC amounted to some $1.8 million at the end
of FY15. The Bank Budget provided about 16 percent of the funds for the full portfolio of advisory
interventions. The third largest provider of funds outside the Bank Group was SECO (10 percent).4
Between FY07 and FY15, the capital markets practice received about $7.8 million from SIDA, in
addition to about $2 million from SECO. These are significant sums compared to the total
of some $23 million spent on advisory projects in the bond markets area during the years
2004–14.5 Toward the end of 2015, the Capital Markets Practice secured another significant grant
from SECO, to establish a new trust fund, this time for around Sw F15 million, discussed further
below (about US$15 million).


TABLE 8.1    | Funding Sources for the Bank Group Advisory Services for 86 Bond
               Market Interventions (2004–14)

                                             No of AS/          % No of            Allocated Funding            % Total Allocated
 Funding Source                                AAA              AS/AAA                   ($000)                     Funding

  BB (exc. GEMLOC, RAS)	                         24	             27.9	                    3,867	                      16.5

  SECO	                                          8	              9.3	                     2,723	                      11.6

  SECO/SIDA	                                     1	              1.2	                       657	                       2.8

  SIDA	                                          8	              9.3	                     8,670 	37.0

  GEMLOC	                                        30	             34.9	                    4,029 	                     17.2

  FIRST	                                         6	              7	      	                  812 	                      3.5

  RAS	                                           3	3.5	                                     606 	                      2.6

  Debt Management Fund	                          1	              1.2	                         59 	                     0.3

  Bilateral/ other	                              5	              6.9	                     2,032 	                      8.7

  Total Advisory projects	                       86	             100	                   23,455 	100.0


Source: World Bank Business Warehouse data.

Notes: AS = advisory services, AAA = analytic and advisory activities, BB = Bank Budget, DMF = Debt Management Fund, FIRST = Financial
Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative, GEMLOC = Global Emerging Markets Local Currency Bond Program, RAS = Reimbursable
Advisory Services, SECO = Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs, SIDA = Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency.




136         The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 8
FIRST, a significant BETF, also provided considerable resources for the World Bank capital markets
program. Established in 2002, initially to provide funding for FSAP- and ROSC-recommended follow-
up, it gradually provided support for a broad spectrum of financial sector advisory work, for both
the World Bank and the IMF in principle, though over time the World Bank’s share accounted for the
bulk of the resources.6 During the review period as a whole, there were 345 World Bank–executed
projects, compared to just 57 undertaken by the IMF (Table 8.2).




Box 8.1 | FIRST—An Introduction

      The Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening (FIRST) initiative is a multidonor initiative
      (including the World Bank Group and the International Monetary Fund) that supports financial
      sector development, housed in the World Bank Group’s Finance and Markets Global Practice.

      FIRST operates in a wide range of financial markets. Activities funded may include reform
      strategy and policy advice, strengthening legal, regulatory, and supervisory frameworks,
      financial market and product development, and capacity building. The program currently
      includes two project windows: (i) a “catalytic” window through which FIRST funds small­
      scale technical assistance projects to tackle targeted, short-term needs, based on country
      demand; and (ii) a “programmatic” window through which FIRST funds larger programmatic
      technical assistance engagements designed to provide funding across multiple projects
      connected through a multi-year reform program. FIRST has funded approximately one­third
      of World Bank–executed technical assistance projects in the financial sector, and staff and
      clients report that “finding alternative sources for the projects funded by FIRST would be
      almost impossible” (DPMG, 2014).

      The program has had three funding phases; the most recent began in 2013. Throughout
      these phases, FIRST has seen an increase in the average size of projects ($180,000 and
      $380,000 Phases II and III respectively). Since its recent introduction, there has been an
      uptick in demand for larger, programmatic projects (from one in 2014 to four in 2015)
      (FIRST Database).

      FIRST has been subject to several evaluations; the latest was completed in May 2014. The
      evaluation found FIRST-funded projects to be successful in delivering high-quality outputs;
      projects were delivered on time and on budget, and were perceived to be strategically
      relevant. However, establishing clear evidence on outcomes and impacts was more difficult.
      Impacts materialized in a significant number of projects, but for others, implementation of
      recommendations fell short, sometimes owing to lack of consensus on reform or lack of
      knowledge and implementation capacity. In the area of capital markets, five countries were
                                                             (Box continues on the following page.)




                                                         Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   137
Box 8.1 | FIRST—An Introduction (continued)

      reviewed by the 2014 evaluation. With one exception, project deliverables were completed
      on time and on budget, and overall, clients were satisfied with the quality of the consultants’
      work. Outcomes, however, were mixed, and the expected impact on financial markets is
      difficult to assess.

      Phase III includes a strong focus on results and puts forward a monitoring and evaluation
      framework consisting of two components: (i) standardized log frames across all FIRST
      projects and programs; and (ii) country-level impact measures which are expected to capture
      the aggregate impact of FIRST work, both catalytic and programmatic, in each country. The
      2014 evaluation describes the challenges associated with setting targets when results are
      expected years down the road, and recommends that monitoring and evaluation systems and
      procedures be realistic in terms of the time frame for measurement (DPMG, 2014).

      Sources: FIRST website, IEG.




Within the financial sector, FIRST generously supported capital market development. Although only
40 of the 345 World Bank projects and two of the 57 IMF projects were identified as Capital Markets
projects in the FIRST database, adopting a broader definition, in line with the rest of the present
evaluation that includes relevant projects under insurance, pensions, and financial infrastructure
suggests a considerably larger role for FIRST in capital markets funding. On this basis two-fifths
(140 out of 345) of World Bank projects, and a fifth of IMF projects, in terms of numbers, fall in this
area (Table 8.2).7 Based on this broader definition, US$30.4 million of FIRST projects, by value, were
relevant to the capital markets space during 2002–15; of which the World Bank executed US$28.3
million and the IMF executed US$2.1 million. The lower share for the IMF likely reflects its greater
emphasis on stability and surveillance-related issues.

Just as ESMID provided particular support for bond markets, FIRST provided the most support to
the legal and regulatory area, which accounted for two-thirds of the capital markets support received
(discussed in Chapter 6). Nonetheless, close to an additional 30 percent of FIRST capital market
funding was also used for the development of bond markets. Looking at the importance of FIRST in the
IEG-identified capital market portfolio used for this evaluation, FIRST-financed interventions included
476 AAA and US$19 million in cumulative value. As in the preceding analysis, about a third of the
technical assistance portfolio (97 projects and US$12 million in cumulative cost delivered) were funded
by FIRST.

Other indicators of the importance of FIRST for the capital markets program include the frequency by
which it is mentioned in country CAS documents, in the context of support for capital markets work.
In the CASs reviewed by IEG (see Chapter 1), FIRST was the most often referenced trust fund, with



138      The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 8
TABLE 8.2   | FIRST Projects Relevant to Capital Markets (2002–15)

                                                                 No. Trust       No.            Avg.             Total
 Executer	     Main Sector	       Main Sector (Details)          Funds           Projects       value($m)        ($m)

                Bus. Conduct (Corp.
               		                                                       5	             4	0.09	 0.5
                Governance)

               	                   Capital Markets	                   40	             40	         0.17	             6.8
               Capital Markets
               	                   Financial Infrastructure	          34	             33	0.20	 6.6

                                   Insurance	                         48	             45	         0.24	           11.3
  WB
               	Pensions	                                             18	18	0.17	 3.0

               Capital Markets Total	                                145	           140	          0.20	           28.3

               Rest Total		                                          205	 205	0.19	39.7

               World Bank Total		                                    350	 345	0.19	68.0

                   	               Capital Markets	                     2	             2	         0.19	           0.4

                 	                 Financial Infrastructure	            4	             4	         0.22	           0.9
               Capital Markets
                 	                 Insurance	                           3	             3	0.16	 0.5

  IMF              	               Insurance/Pensions	                  2	             2	0.18	 0.4

                   Capital Markets Total	                             11	 11	0.19	 2.1

                   Rest Total		                                       46	            46	          0.19	           8.9

                   IMF Total		                                        57	            57	          0.19	          11.0

                   WB+IMF Total		                                    407	           402	          0.19	79.0

Source: FIRST database (June 2015).




13 out of 23 relevant activities in the context of capital markets development in four of the five country
case studies undertaken by IEG, particularly in Morocco and Vietnam (Appendix Table A8.2) as well
as in Colombia and Kenya, though in these latter, together with the support of ESMID.

IEG’s case studies also highlight the importance of donor, trust fund, and other funding for
supporting the Capital Markets agenda. Four out of five case studies highlighted a significant role
for trust funds, with ESMID and GEMLOC playing a major role. In Kenya, the role of trust funds was
seen as critical in funding Bank Group activity. In Vietnam, the capital market work raised money
from other external sources—an ASEM trust fund.8 India is the one exception. The FIRST 2014
evaluation highlights these challenges by stating that “finding alternative sources of funding for the
projects financed by FIRST would be very difficult because FIRST was almost alone among donors




                                                               Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group       139
TABLE 8.3   | IEG Capital Markets Portfolio: Importance of FIRST (2004–14)

                                                                         (Nos)	               Value ($m)
 Product Line                                                  Number	Percent	 Total	Percent

  World Bank AAA

   EW	                                                            151	             32	   19,891	       33

   TA	                                                            325	68	 40,700	67

  World Bank Technical Assistance and FIRST

   TA-FIRST	                                                       97	 30	 11,687	29

   TA-REST	                                                       228	 70	 29,013	71


Note: EW=economic and sector work; TA=technical assistance.




to fund a broad range of TA.” Clients, in particular, stated that FIRST was the “best and sometimes
only” source of funding (FIRST, 2014).

The ability to obtain external funding suggests that donors and partners found this work of significance
and quality. ESMID was sustained through three large-scale external evaluations, indicating strong
external endorsement. Vulnerability with regard to program sustainability remains a question. GEMLOC
resources, in particular, came to an end after 2015, as fee income from PIMCO ceased. Fortunately for
the capital markets practice, a new trust fund agreement, with SECO, and for a sum of about
$15 million, was finalized for further bond market development work. As with the previous ESMID
programs, resources are targeted toward specific countries, beginning with Colombia, Indonesia, Peru,
and South Africa. Countries identified for a possible next wave are Egypt, Ghana, Vietnam, and Tunisia.

Yet such external reliance had some consequences for program coherence and country choice.
Because demands for FIRST funding were submitted individually by country teams, often in the
aftermath of FSAPs, there was little opportunity for a broader strategic view at a country or regional
level, let alone a Bank-wide level.9 Support sometimes went to countries that lacked the size or
systems for program sustainability. There were several instances of duplication of content; also,
the piecemeal approach left gaps in coverage of the full spectrum of activities needed to develop
a market. Despite efforts at careful targeting, GEMLOC interventions at the country level were
sometimes fragmented. FIRST has tried to combat this through its recent programmatic approach.
The SECO and SIDA programs have taken a much more integrated approach in specific markets;
however, country selection questions may remain. Transparent and rigorous criteria for selection must
be defined, as well as channels to transfer country-level learning and experience to other countries.

The funding of global programs and cross-country initiatives remains an issue. GEMLOC’s most
important work was its advisory services, including its global Peer Group discussions. While



140         The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 8
GEMLOC funded at present from the residue of fee revenues, and with $1 million earmarked for
global programs in future allocations from SECO, the Bank Group should ensure that future funding is
available. Indeed, funding for additional strategic, cross-cutting and global work must also be found,
if the Bank Group is to become an innovator and knowledge leader, and not only a replicator in this
area. In the country-driven model of World Bank work, there has been less attention to strategic and
cross-cutting work than desirable. If reliance on external funding remains high, at the least a larger
proportion of funding could be moved toward global and cross-cutting themes, to permit the Finance
and Markets Global Practice to take a holistic view and tackle cross-country issues.



Assessing Work Quality
Limited Evaluative Evidence
The present evaluation highlights the difficulties of assessing development outcomes for Bank Group
knowledge-based work because of a lack of evaluative materials. Of the 1,071 projects in the capital
markets portfolio, only 12 percent, or 132 projects, have been evaluated. The most evident reason
is that World Bank AAA, which accounts for more than 40 percent of the portfolio, is not subject to
independent evaluation. IFC Advisory and Investment projects are subject to independent evaluation
and validation, but on a sampling basis, which significantly reduces the number of evaluated projects
available as evidence for the present evaluation (Table 8.4).

Nevertheless, subject to this caveat, indications suggest higher than average performance. For IFC
advisory services 68 percent were at least moderately satisfactory, versus 60 percent across IFC.
World Bank ratings are only available for its lending, and here, too, results are better than average:



TABLE 8.4     | Capital Markets Portfolio: Projects with Evaluation

                             No.            No. w/ Evaluation                % w/                                       Avg. Rest WBG
 Executor                  Projects          (w/ DO Rating)                Evaluation	       Avg. KMK DO                 Port­folio DO

  WB Lending	                  87	                  51 (50)	                   0.59	                0.82	                       .72

  WB AAA	                     476	                  0	                         0.00                   -                          -

  IFC Investment	             421	                  63 (54)	                   0.15	                0.48	                       .66

  IFC Advisory	                87	                  31 (25)	                   0.36	                0.68	.60

  Total	                      1071	 145	                                       0.14	0.65	                                       .68


Source: IEG portfolio review and Bank Group databases.

Note: DO = development outcome. Three out of the 132 projects are missing development outcome ratings; they were rated as “too early to
judge” and “not rated.” In addition, 13 projects with a 2015 evaluation fiscal year remain in the evaluation pipeline and are thus not included in
the 132. Avg. Bank Group Overall Portfolio DO accounts for the remaining Bank Group projects approved between 2004 and 2014 and have
been evaluated; tests show that the differences are significant only for IFC Investment.




                                                                               Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group                141
82 percent are at least moderately satisfactory, versus 72 percent for all lending.10 IFC Investment
experienced the opposite trend, but project-level ratings for IFC investments are less relevant for the
present evaluation. Few projects in this group—for example, IFC private equity funds, which make up
two-thirds of IFC’s investment portfolio—actually have capital market development objectives.

Based on the limited evaluative evidence, project-level work quality indicators show mixed results.
These indicators focus on design, implementation, and institution support contributions. They differ
between the World Bank and IFC, and between investment and advisory work. For World Bank
lending, “overall bank performance” includes subcategories for quality at entry and supervision.
For IFC Investment, subcategories for overall work quality include screening, appraisal, structuring,
supervision and administration, and role and contribution. For IFC advisory services, subcategories
include design and implementation quality as well as the role and contribution of IFC. And for
all categories, the ratings reflect the work quality for the entire project, which typically includes
components not specific to capital markets.

Nevertheless, subject to this caveat, indications suggest higher than average performance. For IFC
advisory services, 68 percent were at least moderately satisfactory, versus 60 percent across IFC.
World Bank ratings are only available for its lending and here, too, results are better than average:
82 percent are at least moderately satisfactory, versus 72 percent for all lending. IFC investment
experienced the opposite trend; however, project-level ratings for IFC investments are less relevant for
the present evaluation. Few projects in this group—for example, IFC private equity funds, which make
up two-thirds of IFC’s investment portfolio—actually have capital market development objectives
(Table 8.5). Although comparisons of the capital markets portfolio against the rest of the respective
Bank Group portfolios suggests some overperformance at the World Bank and underperformance at
IFC, it is difficult to make comparisons given the different yardsticks in each category.

Limited Basic Documentation
Aside from limited institutional evaluation, serious limitations in the filing of core documents for advisory
service projects constrain knowledge transfer and thematic evaluation. Core documents are not always
available in the system, residing instead in personal staff computers or folders. This not only limits the
extent to which development outcomes can be assessed but also limits Bank Group knowledge-sharing
and learning possibilities, both internally and vis-à-vis clients. IEG undertook a systematic review of core
documentation availability in the World Bank Operations Portal, and in IFC’s i-Desk, for advisory services
in the capital markets portfolio. Core documents were defined to include some form of concept note or
proposal, mission back-to-office reports, core and supplementary reports, consultant terms of reference,
documentation of the peer review process at concept and final report stages, and documents relevant
to dissemination. Results show that just over 40 percent of World Bank AAA, on average, have all the
required core documentation (Table 8.6). Results for IFC are somewhat better. There is variation across
different segments of the portfolio, with poorer results for bond market work, and relatively good results
for housing and insurance.11 Perhaps not surprisingly, given the need for clearance to proceed to next
steps, looking across the project cycle the best information is available at the earliest (concept) stage, and
the poorest is for completion and dissemination documentation. It is also notable that final reports are
missing in some cases in up to half of the portfolio.12



142       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 8
TABLE 8.5   | Capital Markets Portfolio: Work Quality Ratings (Avg. Rating)

 Rating	                                   WB Lending	IFC Investment	IFC Advisory	                        Avg. WBG Overall
                                                                                                                             IFC
                                           Avg.	N	Avg.	N	 Avg.	N	 WB	IFC IS
                                                                                                                             AS

  Overall Bank Performance	                0.78	      51	                                               0.73

  Bank Quality at Entry	                   0.74	      50	                                               0.65

  Bank Supervision	                        0.88	      49	                                               0.81

  Overall Work Quality	                                        0.70	       54	                                    0.71

  Screening, Appraisal, and
                                                               0.57	54	                                           0.62
  Structuring

  Supervision and Administration	                              0.78	       54	                                    0.83

  Investment Role and
                                                               0.67	54	                                           0.74
  Contribution

  Advisory Role and Contribution	                                                    0.78	     27	                           0.80

Note: Avg. Bank Group Overall Portfolio DO accounts for the remaining Bank Group projects approved between 2004 and 2014 that have
been evaluated.




IEG case study authors in India, Kenya, Morocco, and Vietnam also commented on weak
documentation, especially for World Bank AAA. Details on implementation and deliverables were
not consistently available. IFC projects were found to be relatively better documented. IEG further
investigated the extent to which documentation availability differed by funding source. The Vietnam
case study found that the use of trust funds introduced discipline into project development not
otherwise evident in the rest of the World Bank AAA stream, owing to the need to submit grant
reports to donors. Such accountability-driven information is also evident in the external evaluations of
ESMID. Yet the May 2014 external evaluation of FIRST found errors in project classification as well as
poor reliability of existing project data. Projects financed as reimbursable advisory services to clients
were particularly poorly documented and often classified as unavailable even to Bank Group staff.
Finally, IEG compared the availability of core documents, as defined here, and non-core documents,
from the point of view of assessing advisory service quality, including administrative correspondence
(for example, on mission timing), procurement and disbursement documents, etc. In many cases,
project files were found to consist mainly of the latter.

Overall, results indicate that if knowledge sharing and learning and advisory services are core
institutional goals, this area of the Bank Group advisory portfolio is not equipped to meet these
objectives. There is no reason to believe that other areas of Bank Group advisory services
perform significantly better. As regards reimbursable advisory services, although such high levels
of confidentiality may be merited in a private consultancy firm, the question arises of whether a



                                                                        Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group        143
TABLE 8.6   | Capital Markets Portfolio: Documentation Availability by Topic Area

                                                  	 Bond Mkts	Insurance	                       Pensions	    Housing
                                                   WB        IFC        WB             IFC      WB         WB       IFC
                                                   AAA       AS         AAA            AS       AAA        AAA      AS

  Total Interventions (No.) 	                       79	        9	         24	           6	       32	       32	        24

  Concept note/pkg/PDS Approval%	                  65.8	100	 70.8	 83.3	 56.3	                             75	 100

  Concept note review/minutes %	                   41.8	     33.3	 45.8	 66.7	                   50	       59.4	66.7

  BTORs %	                                         35.4	     22.2	       20.8	         33.3	     53.1	     71.9	20.8

  Consultant/General TORs %	                       13.9	       0	        45.8	         83.3	     28.1	     56.3	   87.5

  Reports/Core Output %	                           55.7	     55.6	       45.8	         66.7	     65.6	     53.1	   91.7

  Present./supp. outputs	                          35.4	 55.6	 45.8	 66.7	 28.1	                           46.9	83.3

  Minutes/peer review of outputs	                  27.8	     11.1	 41.7	66.7	 50	                          50	58.3

  Proj. Completion Summary	                         38	      66.7	       41.7	 66.7	 37.5	                 40.6	91.7

  Dissemination Document	                            0	        0	         25	          66.7	     21.9	     21.9	75

  Overall Percentage Availability	                 34.9	     38.3	       42.6	         66.7	     43.4	     52.8	75


Note: BTOR=back-to-office report; TOR=terms of reference.




knowledge-sharing and development-focused Bank Group should adopt this approach or consider
some early declassification or sharing of declassified versions, as with FSAPs.

Monitoring and Evaluation
Case studies found that overall monitoring and evaluation, results frameworks, and indicators fell
short in World Bank AAA, and were generally better in IFC advisory services (Table 8.7). Despite
these monitoring and evaluation constraints, external evaluations of products such as FIRST
and ESMID suggest that work quality was good in general, and outputs appreciated by recipient
countries. The 2014 evaluation of the FIRST trust fund finds that overall, FIRST-funded projects were
successful in delivering high-quality outputs, projects were well designed, recommendations were
appropriate, and most were completed on time and on budget. In the area of capital markets, the
evaluation finds that the five projects reviewed were well designed and outputs were of high quality,
though outcomes and impact were more uneven.

Client Interaction and Coordination within the Bank Group
IEG’s case studies suggest that strategic engagement with clients and work quality were generally
perceived to be good, though work processes were sometimes considered lacking. The Bank



144         The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 8
Box 8.2 | Monitoring and Evaluation Frameworks for Capital Markets Projects

      In Kenya, the monitoring and evaluation framework for ESMID was found to be appropriate
      and was adapted over time to incorporate three attributes beyond the initial set of
      indicators: stronger link between overall program goals, component objectives and program
      measurement; greater emphasis on qualitative measures; and utilization of a more logic-
      based system. On the other hand, in Colombia, limited clarity on monitoring and evaluation
      hindered its implementation, while in Morocco, indicators monitored were, in some cases,
      too far upstream to indicate outcomes. Morocco’s 2010 World Bank Sustainable Access
      to Finance development policy loan used the submission of a draft law to Parliament as an
      indicator for DPL 2010. Though the indicator was met, the law was not passed; however,
      this also indicates that the political process can slow outcomes even when implementation
      agencies perform well.

      In Vietnam, World Bank AAA projects that were not trust-funded provided scant attention to
      monitoring and evaluation. Projects funded by trust funds contained more reference
      to outputs and outcomes, but the measurement tended to be more narrative than
      quantitative and lacked a detailed monitoring and evaluation framework. In contrast, IFC’s
      advisory services projects in Vietnam demonstrated a lot of thought in measuring outputs
      and impacts. For example, the flagship corporate governance project listed 57 indicators
      and the bond market project contained 34. And in both the bond market and corporate
      governance streams the indicators served as a constant reference point for evaluation.
      Progress against indicators was reviewed in the semi-annual reports and the completion
      reports. In some cases, however, appropriate monitoring and evaluation for capital markets
      areas is difficult, given overall project size and complexity. As one case study points out,
      some projects did not merit full-blown monitoring and evaluation systems, because they were
      relatively short or with relatively small budgets. Requiring a detailed monitoring and evaluation
      framework may have been process over substance.




Group was often seen as a trusted advisor; however, it did not always play the lead role in the
capital markets space. Thus in Vietnam, the reviewer notes that the Bank Group consistently
engaged strategically with decision makers, and enjoyed the trust of the authorities uniformly, and
country clients described the work as high in value-added. In Colombia, positive client feedback
was reported. In Morocco, the Ministry of Economics and Finance, the capital markets regulator,
and debt market management team all suggested a collaborative relationship with the World Bank
capital markets team. In Kenya, the Bank Group’s role as “honest broker” was seen as valuable and
Bank Group staff were seen as being responsive to client needs. However, clients sometimes had
complaints about process, and at points the Bank Group suffered from a lack of strategic direction
and a diffuseness of effort, sometimes with insufficient feedback to clients.


                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   145
TABLE 8.7   | Quality of the Results Framework and Monitoring and Evaluation—
              Lending and Non-Lending Technical Assistance

 Question	Colombia	Kenya	India	 Morocco	Vietnam	Avg.

 Overall, in the capital markets interventions
 reviewed, was there a logical link between
                                                               2	           2	 n/a	 3	               2	1.8
 Bank inputs and expected outputs or
 achievements at the country level?

 Were results indicators used, and were they
 appropriately chosen relative to the goals to                 1	           1	n/a	 2	                1	 1
 be achieved? Were they quantifiable?

 Were baselines and targets specified?	                        1	           2	         n/a	   2	     1	   1.2

 To what extent did the framework target
                                                               1	 1	                          1	     1	1
 variables under Bank Group control?

 Did the results framework take account of
 exogenous factors—e.g., collaboration with                    1	 n/a	                        n/a	   1	0.5
 other bilateral aid donors / IFIs?

 Were the results that the operation aimed
 to achieve over ambitious, compared to the                    2	          n/a	 1	            1	     n/a	0.8
 content of the operation?

 Overall Country Score	                                       1.3	          1	         0.3	   1.5	   1




In India, the relationship with the client is more complex: World Bank engagement in this area has
declined, whereas IFC’s has grown in prominence. Early World Bank work on demutualization,
corporate bonds, and the public debt management agency was well received and well regarded.
However, whereas the World Bank had a significant engagement with the Government of India in
an advisory capacity in capital market development in the early part of the period under IEG review
(2004 to 2014), after about 2009, the pace of engagement slowed down. Although the World Bank is
well regarded by the Indian authorities, its interventions are somewhat piecemeal. Demand from the
government in this area is variable, and there is fragmentation among regulators, affecting the depth
of the World Bank’s engagement. In particular, its engagement with the Reserve Bank of India, a
key player in this space, has been limited, though the World Bank Treasury department has recently
expanded its advisory role. IFC’s engagement, especially at the outset of the period, was largely with
the private sector and, until recently, did not have the character of a partner in development. However,
IFC’s recent Treasury operations have won praise for their innovation and timeliness, and for their link
back to real sector finance. Its support to the banking sector and purchase of bank bonds also won
some comments regarding the responsiveness and professionalism of IFC front-line Mumbai-based
staff, and enforced but assisted exposure to IFC’s Environmental and Social guidelines.




146         The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 8
Coordination Within the Bank Group
Internal Bank Group coordination in capital markets areas has varied from near-best practice to
mixed. The Capital Markets department has been one of the few Bank Group units that operates
on a truly joint basis across the World Bank and IFC, and its work on debt markets is undertaken
in close collaboration with World Bank regional country teams, with the World Bank Treasury Debt
Management team, and the World Bank’s Debt Management Team housed in the macroeconomic
global practice. Interestingly however, there is little synergy between the Treasury departments of
either the World Bank or IFC, whereas institutions such as EBRD and ADB illustrate that more is
possible in this area (Chapter 2). In areas such as housing finance and insurance, there is a logical
separation of roles between the World Bank and IFC, with the former advising on the policy front,
and the latter providing hands-on support to corporate entities operating in these areas (Chapters
4 and 5). In the area of insurance, there is little evidence of uptake in IFC of the many International
Association of Insurance Supervisors assessments embedded within FSAPs. By contrast, in
corporate governance, Reports on Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSCs) have increasingly
come to provide information for IFC advisory work (Chapter 6; Appendix 6.2).

From a country program perspective, there were both thematic as well as country-specific variations
in internal coordination between Bank Group teams. In Kenya, Colombia, Morocco, and Vietnam,
coordination was said to be good, particularly in areas relating to advisory services and bond market
development. For example, in Kenya, given that developments around the areas of government and
nongovernment bonds and legal and regulatory reforms were interlinked and were both seen as key
by the government, Bank Group institutions worked closely together—to a significant extent under the
umbrella of the Capital Markets department, already noted for its contributions to collaboration. This
was particularly under the ESMID and GEMLOC programs, but the same teams also contributed to
lending projects, FSAPs, technical assistance under FIRST, and debt market development.

In Vietnam, IEG’s case study also reports good internal work coordination in the area of advisory
work. The allocation of project task team leader responsibilities between the World Bank and IFC
was consistent, with the World Bank taking the lead with public institutions, including all seven capital
market regulation, development, and financial infrastructure–related projects. Projects with primarily
private sector counterparts were implemented under IFC advisory services—including the three bond
market projects and two corporate governance projects. Although each unit implemented its projects
on a daily basis, interviews suggest awareness within the resident mission staff of complementary
interventions. Colombia also points toward a reasonable level of coordination in the delivery of
advisory activities, particularly after the 2012 FSAP, and especially in the areas of bond markets and
infrastructure. This synergy has expanded under the Deep Dive approach.

Work in Morocco suggested a similar complementarity of roles, though with less mutual recognition
and interaction. The two organizations worked in complementary areas: the World Bank focusing on
regulation and supervision in the public markets, while IFC worked almost exclusively in private equity
markets. It is not clear how well informed each was of the other’s work. One area in which there
were obvious linkages was in corporate governance, where the ROSC prepared by the World Bank
became a foundation for subsequent work by IFC.



                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   147
In India, even more than in Morocco, few areas of overlap or coordination were noted; possibly in part
because IFC and World Bank offices in New Delhi are in different locations. IFC also has an office in
Mumbai, which handles a large part of its activities with the financial sector as well as IFC’s Treasury
issues. Discussions suggest that staff in both Bank Group agencies had some awareness of each
other’s work but there is little by way of regular or formal interaction to share views and information.
There was some interaction between World Bank staff and IFC staff in the area of housing finance,
but whereas IFC staff had an awareness of the issues in areas like mortgage securitization, the
staff in the field was much more focused on urban development. The World Bank worked on its
own on stock market demutualization and on the corporate bond market, where IFC staff had little
knowledge, interest, or overlap.

Notwithstanding generally complementary, if sometimes remote links, there were aspects of
the relationship between the World Bank and IFC and sometimes between field offices and
headquarters, in capital markets areas, that could be problematic for clients. In Kenya, World Bank
staff noted gaps in mutual understanding at both management and operational levels about how
the other institution operates, leading to difficulties with some technical assistance lending. And
Vietnam’s work in the private equity area indicated a decided split between the roles of the resident
mission, the regional IFC office, and Washington, DC–based staff. Essentially the description was
that “the resident office manages the relationships, the regional office manages the business and the
DC staff is focused on social policy.” Country counterparts complained of a diffuse decision-making
structure, lack of accountability by any one person, and a conflict of goals among IFC staff, especially
with regard to the use and impact of environmental, social, and governance criteria. Yet, in India,
clients appreciated the global perspective of Washington-based staff, and its complementarity to the
responsiveness of local IFC staff, including such areas as corporate governance and environmental
standards. These contrasting perspectives suggest that notwithstanding positive findings in many
areas, there remains scope for improvement.



Sustainability, Quality, Monitoring, and Coordination—A Summary
Finance and Private Sector Development, especially the capital markets program, has experienced
a rising proportion of externally financed funding. The future coherence and sustainability of capital
markets work requires stable funding. The program has been significantly self-sustaining, and
has won the support of donors. But its funding model could have contributed to its opportunistic
engagement. Future vulnerability could be an issue.

Knowledge management could be improved, although overall program quality was better than
average. Conventional assessments of development impact of such an intensively knowledge-
based program are hampered not only by extremely limited evaluative evidence, but also by failure
to maintain and file core documentation, which will also negatively affect knowledge sharing and
learning. Evidence suggests better than average overall program quality, as corroborated by IEG’s
country case studies. Clients were largely appreciative of work quality, though process sometimes
remains an issue. Internal collaboration between the World Bank and IFC and between field offices


148      The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 8
and headquarters was variable, with examples of excellent practice, especially in advisory services,
to sensible divisions of labor, but little systematic interaction. Scope for improvement remains in
some areas.

E ndnotes

1
      lthough these data reflect information available to World Bank management, they refer to the Finance and Private
     A
     Sector Network, which was the organizational structure until 2014. The Capital Markets practice is one principal
     directorate, distinct from Financial Systems and Financial Inclusion. It therefore omits payments and securities
     clearance and settlement, but includes the entirety of the nonbank financial institution group.

2
     Excluding one outlying observation for the Financial Systems practice, in 2014.

3
     L
      ooking at ESMID in East Africa as an example, there were eight projects in the evaluation period, including three
     managed by IFC: (545164; 600053, and one focused solely on Nigeria: 562707) and five under the World Bank:
     P121995, P124057, P129763, P143456 and P149828. Yet work in these projects was seamlessly undertaken across
     World Bank and IFC codes. Of the total of 14 ESMID interventions in IEG’s bond market portfolio, five are mapped to
     IFC.

4
      detailed analysis of SECO and SIDA contributions to the ESMID programs by year corroborates this result (Appendix
     A
     Table A8.1).

5
     n addition to contributions to the ESMID program, SECO also funded three Government Bond Market projects that
     I
     were not a part of ESMID, with total funding of $1.2 million: P129817 (South Africa Government Debt); P129819
     (Colombia) and P129818 (Peru); these account for the difference between the totals in Table 8.1 and Appendix Table
     A8.1, which focuses only on the ESMID program. In addition, Table 8.1 also reflects the aggregation of bank budget
     contributions to ESMID in project data.

6
     Details of the program may be found at http://www.firstinitiative.org//

7
     T
      he FIRST portfolio is categorized at a high level by main sectors, while subsector and thematic categories provide
     added granularity. For the purpose of this evaluation, selective additional codes were added under the financial
     infrastructure, insurance, and pensions categories to attempt to match the FIRST definitions to those of the present
     evaluation.

8
     I
     n Vietnam, there was also good coordination and mutual sharing with the Asian Development Bank on the capital
     markets agenda, despite an early understanding (2002) that the Asian Development Bank would take the lead in this
     area.

9
      unding from FIRST has now been stable for more than a decade. Periodic external evaluations of the FIRST program
     F
     2009, 2011 (including a client survey), and 2014, mandated by its governing body, confirm that in general, work quality
     is good and that most FIRST programs achieve their desired outputs. Yet questions about project selection have been
     raised in recent evaluations.

10
     However, samples are small and t-tests of differences are not statistically significant.

11
      oor documentation in the case of bond market work could be partially owing to the programmatic clustering of
     P
     projects, sometimes with a single detailed final evaluation (as in ESMID East Africa), or to the nature of the projects, as
     in GEMLOC, which took the form of repeat conferences, surveys of participants, etc., which do not lend themselves to
     the core document cycle described above.

12
     I
     n the present evaluation, this lack of documentation in the usual repositories was compensated by personal
     solicitations from staff, as well as by the “complete enumeration” evaluation approach adopted for both the relevant
     topic portfolios and the country case studies. This implied that about two-thirds of relevant projects, by project ID,
     have been reviewed, on average, as discussed in the preceding chapters.




                                                                       Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group     149
           9
  Conclusions and    Historically, both IFC and the World Bank

Recommendations:     took the right strategic choices with regard to many broad

    What Worked,     directions over the past decades. When IFC undertook to support

  What Didn’t, and   client countries’ capital market development in the 1970s, with

    What’s Next?     the creation of its first capital markets department, the question of

                     whether or not to sequence market-based finance after banking

                     was a conundrum. Both IFC and the World Bank decided to

                     support capital market development in tandem with overall

                     financial reform; a decision later supported by empirical research,

                     which did not favor either a bank-led or market-led model.


                     World Bank attention to local currency government bond
                     market development began in the aftermath of the Asian crisis
                     as recognition of the importance of local currency government
                     borrowing grew, and its GEMLOC program responded. IFC’s
                     early support for emerging market asset classes proved
                     pioneering, as was its contribution toward the building of
                     investability indices in these assets. As markets matured and
                     private players emerged, the Bank Group emphasized areas of a
                     “public good” nature, or where catalytic frontier market support
                     was needed. Thus IFC moved attention away from public stock
                     markets as equitization receded and toward private equity, for
                     small businesses, and the development of local fund managers.
                     Today as low-income countries graduate form IDA, new
                     emphasis on local bond market development is needed for their
                     domestic resource mobilization.

                     These early decisions were in line with the Bank Group’s aims of
                     development support, especially for public sector management
                     and for smaller enterprises. The costs of the traditional model of
                     being a “public, listed company” are inherently too high for most
                     small businesses.


     x
     150             The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 9
Thus the Bank Group followed broadly correct strategic directions at critical points. And several
aspects of its program of interventions have been innovative: ranging from several first-time and
unusually structured local currency issues of both IFC and IBRD Treasuries, and its three-pronged
self-financing GEMLOC program for building government bond markets, some of IFC’s securitization
programs, to its insurance-related “CAT” or catastrophic risk bonds; and displaying global leadership
and convening power (as in the Green Bond principles and contributions to standards-setting for
financial infrastructure). Yet, today, at a more detailed level, there is room for improvement in certain
areas, and for a more coherent program for capital market support across its elements.

Strategic Coordination Across Program Areas
Driven in part by its funding model, and possibly reflecting the Bank Group’s partial strategic
underpinning for capital market development for most of the review period, capital market
development at the country level has sometimes been a patchwork of interventions. Even at
a broader level, links across key related segments of interventions have surprisingly failed to
develop. Thus while the Capital Markets group at the Finance and Markets anchor has had a
strong program for developing client countries’ bond markets, the local currency bond market
development program undertaken by IFC’s Treasury department focused, independently, on
a quite different set of countries. Treasury programs could be more effective if undertaken in
tandem with deeper system reforms for local bond market development that countries themselves
undertake. Such an integrated approach was adopted by the ADB/ASEAN+3 initiative, and there
are also elements of greater integration today at EBRD; for example, through its diagnostic work,
or its construction of benchmark money-market indices in markets which they aimed to support
through bond issuance (for example, Romania, Russia). Such upstream integration between
money market development and bond market development has been rare, although not unknown
(for example, Colombia, Morocco), at the Bank Group.

Another area that would have benefited from greater program integration has been the linkage
between insurance and pensions projects, so that their potential role as institutional investors
contributing toward capital market development could be better captured. Although at an analytic
level the knowledge of these linkages and how they could be captured have been well known to Bank
Group staff, in practice, this knowledge usually did not transfer to most operations in these areas.
One exception has been the initiative in Colombia to invest in infrastructure bonds. In this context,
some countries’ experiences with suitable investment vehicles, such as the Mexican certificates of
capital development (CCDs) largely held by Mexican pension funds, and Peruvian infrastructure debt
trust funds are of interest. More broad-based menus of investment, that help to optimize returns but
nevertheless safeguard the funds of investors, are needed.

Sequencing and Clustering of Reforms
In most countries, the Bank Group engaged in dialogue on a broad front in capital market areas,
and the sequencing of interventions was not a major issue. But in some cases where engagement
was demand-driven and highly specific, it was not possible to achieve effectiveness, because the
program did not span important linked areas. One example was the corporate bond market work
in India in which World Bank outputs, though thorough and cognizant of the interrelation between



                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   151
government and corporate bond market development, could have had greater overall impact had the
dialogue also spanned the government securities market.

Issues concerning the interrelationship between government and corporate bond markets are of
importance to the Bank Group, and seemingly, early emphasis on the former, through vehicles such
as the GEMLOC program, is now ceding to greater emphasis on corporate bonds, for example
through the Deep Dive initiative, and eventually, to transactions support, for example in the area of
infrastructure project bonds, as in Colombia. Countries point out that the Bank Group’s “honest
broker” role in addressing issues in the enabling environment, and not the transactional support, per
se, has been its most important contribution. Although recognition of and support to project bonds is
very important, care may be needed to maintain, as necessary, an arms-length relationship between
the policy and advisory support on the one hand, and transaction support on the other, benefiting
from IFC’s capabilities of translating policy into practice.

Adapting Advice to Country and Global Needs
International best-practices methods are an important benchmark but may not be optimal for every
country. In some instances, projects proposed the adoption or adaptation of developed capital market
solutions to smaller, less developed capital markets, which were not ready for such solutions. Risk-
based supervision procedures are currently viewed as international best practices, yet the stage of
market development in the West Bank and Gaza was far too preliminary to warrant the use of this
technique. Other examples were the introduction of mortgage liquidity facilities in countries where
macroeconomic and financial market conditions may not have had the depth or stability to ensure
their success, or projects to develop equities-based capital markets in countries where there would be
difficulty in finding a sufficient “critical mass” of private companies to issue and list equities. Such Bank
Group projects were “ahead of their time.” Conversely, there may a need to alert the most sophisticated
clients to issues associated with products such as credit derivatives, or trading processes associated
with new technologies (for example, high-frequency trading) that can lead to increased risk.

However, there were also instances of thoughtful adaptation and tailoring of solutions to country
circumstances. In the Europe and Central Asia region, payments systems interventions ranged from
the installation of basic real-time gross settlement systems in countries such as Turkmenistan and
Tajikistan, to others where the World Bank supported the replacement of such basic systems with
newer generation systems with added features of the queuing of transfer orders and intraday liquidity
facilities, resulting in more efficient use of liquidity for real-time settlement.



Recommendation 1
Integrate capital market development within the Bank Group across different
areas of support.
To strengthen the loose-knit Bank Group strategy toward capital market development, sometimes
fragmented country-level interventions, and missed opportunities for integration, IEG recommends
that the Bank Group:



152       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 9
n   	 Prepare an underlying strategic framework for capital market development that spans all relevant
     elements of market development, from issuers to investors and including market infrastructure, for
     the Bank Group as a whole, that recognizes interlinkages and sets priorities.

n   	 Prepare guidelines for the Bank Group insurance and pensions programs that review at the design
     stage issues related to accumulation and asset management—for their own benefit as much as for
     the benefit of capital market development.

n   	 Identify a set of countries where programs for IFC’s local currency Treasury bond issuance can be
     paralleled with support from the Capital Markets department in terms of measures for deepening
     and strengthening the selected countries’ local currency bond markets.

n   	 Encourage consideration of enhancements, through the guarantees program, of infrastructure
     bond issuance in public-private partnership approaches.

Diagnostics
A first issue in this regard is the need to improve use of FSAP findings. For a start, the incorporation
of FSAP findings into the work program has been highly reliant on the FIRST trust fund, and
translation into CASs has been a pale reflection of the underlying available knowledge. Even FIRST-
funded projects did not optimize the use of the FSAP; for example, only a handful referred specifically
to underlying IOSCO assessments and the extent to which recommended priorities were observed.
The FSAP process could be used not only for the project planning and preparation process, but
also to track long-term project outcomes, especially because project completion reports, prepared
soon after project closure, are rarely in a position to capture final outcomes. Such linkages have
been attempted in some rare cases, as in Colombia (2014), on the strengthening of Colombia’s self-
regulatory organization framework.



Recommendation 2
Enhance the use of the FSAP instrument to underpin the design of capital
markets interventions.
Given the availability of high-quality diagnostics that could be better used to strengthen the
diagnostic underpinnings of capital market development, following any FSAP, the global practice, if
possible, together with the relevant country department, should:

n   	 Incorporate FSAP recommendations in the preparation of Systematic Country Diagnostics and
     consider these findings, as appropriate, in Country Partnership Frameworks.

n   	 Establish Bank-wide criteria to assess prioritization of FIRST/FSAP follow-up work and identify
     funding for FSAP follow-ups from sources additional to FIRST.

n   	 When successive FSAPs are undertaken, make use of them to track long-term project
     outcomes.




                                                          Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   153
Generating, Sharing, and Using Knowledge
The Bank Group could build a program of cutting-edge knowledge work to underpin future programs
in the capital markets area. One example here is the use of new technology for funding options for
small businesses. There is need for continued innovation in this area, even as new digital financing
models such as FinTech gain ascendance. While correctly moving away from the public listed
company model, unviable for small enterprises, private equity and venture capital rarely exit with an
IPO. Today, local OTC trading platforms, crowdfunding, B2B trading platforms, or startup nurseries
that focus on private equity and venture capital investors may better serve small business needs. This
is just one example of an area to explore; others must be explored if the Bank Group is to maintain a
reputation as an innovator and not just a replicator in this field.

For the Bank Group to be able to provide cutting-edge knowledge and continue to innovate
and maintain relevance, it needs to strengthen its learning culture and practices. There are
basic concerns relating to the systematic maintenance of documentation, and the setting of
better standards for self-evaluation in advisory services. The absence of documents—especially
downstream documents—limits the extent to which lessons can be drawn or shared. As IEG
illustrates, procurement documents proliferate in project files where final reports are missing or only
available in local languages. Downstream documents are less commonly available than concept
notes, for which upstream clearances are required.

Data issues also affect the capital markets program. Although significant steps have been taken to
compile and standardize information available in databases such as FinDebt, it still falls short of what
is needed to monitor core program areas, for example, local currency bond market development.
IEG’s comparison of FinDebt information with that available from external vendors and country data
sources suggested shortfalls in core areas.

The Global Practice could make better use of its knowledge repository to enable access to
information on areas of common interest, through routine best-practice notes. For example, projects
on covered bonds have been undertaken in Brazil, India, Morocco, and Turkey, with few exchanges
of information (although in India, IFC staff introduced clients to the Turkish and European models).
Demutualization has been another topic of widespread interest in Costa Rica, India, Kenya, Morocco,
Nigeria, and Sri Lanka. A synthesis of experience would be of value. In the same vein, dissemination
is important, not only through written notes but also through convening events that bring together
clients across countries—as in the GEMLOC Peer Group dialogues. Systematic maintenance and
publication of the findings of such proceedings are also suggested.



Recommendation 3
Strengthen knowledge management within the capital markets area and
develop a frontier global knowledge program.
n   	 Implement and monitor service standards for maintenance of document repositories, data collection,
     and program monitoring and evaluation, including databases for capital market monitoring.



154        The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 9
n   	 Ensure the write-up and cross-country dissemination of findings on priority topics, identified by
     relevant units (for example, on GEMLOC Peer Group dialogues, or on frequently recurring themes
     such as demutualization);

n   	 Deepen the knowledge base both at the country and global levels, to ensure that Bank Group
     knowledge is at the cutting edge and provides intellectual leadership.

Tailoring Funding to Program Sustainability
Future program sustainability at present rests precariously upon the adequate and consistent
availability of an array of trust funds and other sources, such as reimbursable advisory
services. Should funding cease, not necessarily because of weak performance but as a result
of changes in donors’ priorities, program sustainability becomes a concern, as the funding of
GEMLOC has demonstrated. Such funding models may have contributed to the opportunistic
and sometimes incoherent pattern of interventions across countries, as well as, in some cases,
within countries.

To some degree this has been addressed by new features of the FIRST program for programmatic
funding, allowing a longer time horizon within a country. However, it does not address questions
of completeness of coverage, or choices across countries, or limiting assistance to countries that
do not meet preconditions for sustainability. GEMLOC country-level technical assistance was not
programmatic, though the program attempted to leverage funding from parallel sources. While new
programs such as ESMID and the Deep Dive take a holistic view of capital market segments in a
given country, questions on country selection criteria remain. Clear criteria to ensure fairness and
transparency across countries are merited.

Finally, care must be taken, within such funding models, to safeguard the attention to global
programs, global engagement, and research, if the Bank Group is to provide knowledge leadership
and move toward the role of being an innovator rather than replicator of country-level programs.
Vulnerability of global programs under country-driven models is an issue.



Recommendation 4
Review funding sources available for capital market development and their
impact upon program design:
n   	 Provide stable sources of funding for core global and country capital market programs, that
     balance internal and external sources and allow the Bank Group to respond to its priorities.

n   	 Apply transparent and uniform criteria for country and program selection, for new and continuing
     trust fund programs.

Extending the Analysis
Finally it must be recognized that the present report does not attempt to holistically cover all potential
sources of long-term development finance, and has limited itself to capital markets finance only.




                                                           Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   155
Although the report has alluded, in some places, to the impact of the banking system upon capital
market development, a more complete treatment would require the development of a comprehensive
perspective on different sources of long-term finance—and the role of the Bank Group’s interventions,
for example, vis-à-vis development finance banks. These areas are still to be evaluated.




156      The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | Chapter 9
references

Akhter, S., Liu, Y., and K. Daly. (2010). “Cross Country Evidence on the Linkages between Financial Development
    and Poverty.” International Journal of Business and Management, 5(1), P3.

Anderson, P. R., A. C. Silva, and A. Velandia-Rubiano. 2010. “Public Debt Management in Emerging Market
    Economies: Has This Time Been Different?” Policy Research Working Paper No. 5399. World Bank, Wash-
    ington, DC.

BIS (Bank for International Settlements). 2001. Core Principles for Systemically Important Payment Systems.
     (Basel: Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems).

———. 2006. “Housing Finance in the Global Financial Market,” CGFS Publication No. 26 (Basel: Committee on
   the Global Financial System).

———. 2012. Principles for Financial Markets Insfrastructures. Basel: Committee on Payment and Settlement Sys-
   tems, Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions).

Bossone, B., and M. Cirasino. 2001. “The Oversight of the Payments Systems: a Framework for the Development
    and Governance of Payment Systems in Emerging Economies.” Western Hemisphere Payments and Securi-
    ties Clearance and Settlement Systems Research Series No. 1. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Brull, S. 2008. “The Buy Side: The Key in the Lock?” Institutional Investor April 18.

Chan, E., M. Chui, F. Packer, and E. Remolona. 2011. “Local Currency Bond Markets and the Asian Bond Fund 2
    Initiative.” (Bank for International Settlements, Basel).

Chiquier, L., O. Hassler, and M. J. Lea. 2004. “Mortgage Securities in Emerging Markets.” Policy Research Work-
    ing Paper No. 3370. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Chiquier, L., and M. J. Lea. (Eds.). 2009. Housing Finance Policy in Emerging Markets. Washington, DC: World
    Bank.

Cirasino, M., and M. Guadamillas. 2004. “Reforming Payments and Securities Settlement Systems: A Key Ele-
     ment of Financial Infrastructure.” Access Finance No. 2. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Cirasino, M., and Nicoli. 2010. “Payment and Securities Settlement Systems in the Middle East and North Africa.”
     World Bank, Washington, DC

Cirasino, M., M. Guadamillas, J. A. García, and F. Montes-Negret. 2007. Reforming Payments and Securities
     Settlement Systems in Latin America and the Caribbean. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Clarke, G. R., L. C. Xu, and H. F. Zou. 2006. Finance and Income Inequality: What do the Data Tell Us? Southern
     Economic Journal 72(3), 578–596.

Dailami, M., and R. Hauswald. 2003. “The Emerging Project Bond Market: Covenant Provisions and Credit
     Spreads.” Policy Research Working Paper No. 3095. World Bank, Washington, DC.

De La Lastra, I., M. Guadamillas, and E. Holttinen. 2000. “Matrix for the Assessment and Recommendations of
    the Securities Clearance and Settlement systems.” Western Hemisphere Payments and Securities Clear-
    ance and Settlement Initiative Working Paper No. 1. World Bank, Washington, DC.

DPMG (Development Portfolio Management Group). 2014. The Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initia-
   tive (FIRST): Phase II Evaluation. University of Southern California, Los Angeles.

Dorfman, M., and R. Palacios. 2012. “World Bank Support for Pensions and Social Security.” Discussion Paper
    No. 1208. World Bank, Washington, DC.




                                                               Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group   157
EBRD (European Bank for Reconstruction and Development). 2013. “Local Currency Lending and Borrowing
   2000–2010.” EvD Special Study. London.

Garcia, E., and I. Dalla. 2005. “The Role of Supranational Institutions in Local Currency Bond Markets: The Expe-
     rience of the ADB and the IDB.” Infrastructure and Financial Markets Review 11(1).

Gray, R. D., M. Hoskote, A. S. Kumar, J. Ruster, and S. von Klaudy. 1997. “Mobilizing Domestic Capital Markets
     for Infrastructure Financing. International Experience and Lessons for China.” World Bank Discussion Paper
     No. 377. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Guadamillas, M., and R. Keppler. 2001. “Securities Clearance and Settlement Systems: a Guide to Best Practic-
    es.” Policy Research Working Paper No. 2581. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Harwood, A. (Ed.). 2000. Building Local Bond Markets: an Asian Perspective. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Hassler, O., and S. Walley. 2012. Mortgage Liquidity Facilities. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Hinz, R. P. (Ed.). 2010. Evaluating the Financial Performance of Pension Funds. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Holzmann, R. 2009. Aging Population, Pension Funds, and Financial Markets: Regional Perspectives and Global
    Challenges for Central, Eastern, and Southern Europe. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Humphrey, D. B. 1995. Payment Systems: Principles, Practice, and Improvements. World Bank Technical Paper
   No.260. Washington, DC: World Bank.

IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2006. IEG Review of World Bank Assistance for Financial Sector Reform.
     Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2011. MIGA’s Financial Sector Guarantees in a Strategic Context. Washington, DC: World Bank.

IOSCO (International Organization of Securities Commissions). 1998. “IOSCO Resolution No. 41: Resolution on
    Adoption of the Objectives and Principles of Securities Regulation.” International Organization of Securities
    Commissions, Madrid.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2015. “Colombia: 2015 Article IV Consultation-Press Release; Staff Report;
     and Statement by the Executive Director for Colombia.” Country Report No. 15/142. International Monetary
     Fund, Washington, DC.

IMF, World Bank Group, EBRD, and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2013. “Local
     Currency Bond Markets—A Diagnostic Framework. International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

James, E. 1994. Averting the Old Age Crisis. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Listfield, R., and F. Montes-Negret. 1994. “Modernizing Payment Systems in Emerging Economies.” Policy Re-
      search Working Paper No. 1336. World Bank, Washington, DC.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2004. OECD Principles of Corporate Gover-
   nance. Paris: OECD.

Ötker-Robe, I., and A. M. Podpiera. 2013. “The Social Impact of Financial Crises: Evidence from the Global Finan-
     cial Crisis.” Policy Research Working Paper Series 6703. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Palacios, R. J. 1996. “Averting the Old-Age Crisis: Technical Annex.” Policy Research Working Paper No. 1572.
     World Bank, Washington, DC.

Pollner, J. D. 1999. “Using Capital Markets to Develop Private Catastrophe Insurance.” Viewpoint Note No. 197.
     World Bank, Washington, DC.


158       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | References
Raddatz, C., and S. L. Schmukler. 2008. “Pension Funds and Capital Market Development: How Much Bang for
    the Buck?” Policy Research Working Paper No. 4787. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Rudolph, H. P., and R. R. Rocha. 2007. « Competition and Performance in the Polish Second Pillar.” World Bank
    Working Paper No. 107. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Stewart, F. 2014. “Proving Incentives for Long-Term Investment by Pension Funds the Use of Outcome-Based
    Benchmarks.” Policy Research Working Paper No. 6885. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Sutherland, B. 1998. “Financing Jamaica’s Rockfort Independent Power Project: A Review of Experience for
    Future Projects.” RMC Discussion Paper Series No. 121. World Bank, Washington, DC. http://documents.
    worldbank.org/curated/en/638571468752355698/Financing-Jamaicas-Rockfort-Independent-Power-Proj-
    ect-a-review-of-experience-for-future-projects

Van Agtmael, A. 2007. The Emerging Markets Century: How a New Breed of World-Class Companies Is Overtak-
     ing the World. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Vittas, D. 1996. “Pension Funds and Capital Markets: Investment Regulation, Financial Innovation, and Gover-
      nance.” Viewpoint Note No. 71. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Vittas, D. 1999. “Pension Reform and Capital Market Development: “Feasibility” and “Impact” Preconditions.”
      Policy Research Working Paper. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Watanabe, M. 1998. New Directions in Asian Housing Finance: Linking Capital Markets and Housing Finance.
                          Results and Performance of the
    Washington, DC: International Finance Corporation.


                                               World Bank Group 2015
Wolff-Hamacher, S. 2007. “Local Currency Bond Issues by International Financial Institutions.” Working Paper
     prepared in connection with CGFS Publications No. 28, Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt.
                                                                          Independent
                                                                      An and
World Bank. 2002. “Methodology for the Assessment of Securities Clearance                  Evaluation
                                                                             Settlement Systems.” Western
    Hemisphere Payments and Securities Clearance and Settlement Initiative Working Paper No. 2. World Bank,
    Washington, DC.

———. 2006. Developing India’s Corporate Bond Market. Washington, DC: World Bank. https://openknowledge.
   worldbank.org/handle/10986/19625 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO

———. 2007. Developing the Domestic Government Debt Market: From Diagnostics to Reform Implementation.
   Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2007a. Managing Public Debt: From Diagnostics to Reform Implementation. Washington, DC: World Bank.
   http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/998331468331268053/Managing-public-debt-from-diagnos
   tics-to-reform-implementation.

———. 2014. “A Multipronged Integrated Approach to the Development of Securities Markets:       Dive.” World
                                                                                         Deepobservation
                                                                                      Careful             and
   Bank, Washington, DC.                                                              analysis of program data
                                                                                              and the many issues
———. 2016. World Bank Group Support to Housing Finance. Washington, DC: World Bank.impacting program
                                                                                              efficacy reveal what
World Bank and IMF. 2001. Developing Government Bond Markets: A Handbook. Washington,
                                                                                 works as World
                                                                                      DC: well as Bank.
                                                                                                  what
                                                                                              could work better. The
World Bank, IMF, and OECD. 2015. Capital Market Instruments to Mobilize Institutional Investors to Infrastructure
                                                                                          knowledge gleaned is
                                                                                          DC: World
    and SME Financing in Emerging Market Economies: Report for the G20. Washington, valuable           Bank.
                                                                                                   to all who strive
    http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/192061468179954327/Capital-market-instruments-to-
                                                                                          to ensure that World
                                                                                          Bank goals are met and
    mobilize-institutional-investors-to-infrastructure-and-SME-financing-in-emerging-market-economies-
                                                                                              surpassed.




                                                              Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group    159
      report-for-the-G20

Yermo, J. 2004. “Pension Reform and Capital Market Development.” Background paper for regional study
    on social security reform. World Bank, Washington, DC. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
    en/306171468774285166/Pension-reform-and-capital-market-development




160       The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital Market Development | References
The World Bank Group’s Support to Capital
Market Development
Appendixes
ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................................................................................................... III

APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 1 ............................................................................................................................................... 1
              Appendix 1.1: World Bank Group Strategy Towards Capital Market Development .................................................. 1
              Appendix 1.2: Capital Markets, Financial Development, Economic Growth and Poverty Alleviation ........................ 6
              Appendix 1.3: World Bank Group Evaluative Material on Capital Market Development ......................................... 11
              Chapter 1 Appendix Tables A1.1 to A1.5 ................................................................................................................ 14

APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2 ............................................................................................................................................. 18
              Appendix 2.1: World Bank Group Global Advisory Contributions and Partnerships for Local Bond Market
              Development ........................................................................................................................................................... 18
              Appendix 2.2: IFC’s Bond Purchases and Bond Guarantees ................................................................................. 20
              Appendix 2.4: Monitoring Local Debt Markets: Notes on FinDebt and Bloomberg ................................................. 34
              Appendix 2.5: Experience of Other MDBs in Local Currency Financing ................................................................. 37
              Appendix Figure A2.1 IFC’s Local Currency Bond Issue Program ......................................................................... 43
              Chapter 2 Appendix Tables A2.1 to A2.4 ................................................................................................................ 44

APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 3 ............................................................................................................................................. 48
              Appendix 3.1: The World Bank Group and Public and Private Equities Markets .................................................... 48
              Appendix 3.2: A Variant of Private Equity - Distressed Assets and the DARP Program ........................................ 49
              Chapter 3 Appendix Tables A3.1 and A3.2 ............................................................................................................. 51

APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 4 ............................................................................................................................................. 53
              Appendix 4.1: Housing Finance Projects Reviewed................................................................................................ 53

APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 5 ............................................................................................................................................. 55
              Appendix 5.1: Institutional Investors – Investing in Long Maturity Capital Market Instruments?............................. 55
              Appendix 5.2: Specialized Insurance –Disaster Risk Reduction, Agriculture and Trade Insurance ....................... 57

APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6: ............................................................................................................................................ 59
              Appendix 6.1 Capital Market Regulation and Development: Projects Reviewed .................................................... 59
              Appendix 6.2: Supporting Good Corporate Governance ........................................................................................ 61
              Appendix 6.3: The Western Hemisphere Initiative and Other Regional Payments Initiatives ................................. 80
              Appendix 6.4: Payments Projects Analyzed ........................................................................................................... 81
              Appendix 6.5: Risk Reduction with Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) and Link to Securities Clearance ......... 83

APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7 ............................................................................................................................................. 84
              Appendix 7.1: – World Bank Group Strategy Towards Infrastructure Finance........................................................ 84
              Appendix 7.2: Infrastructure Portfolio Identification ................................................................................................. 87
              Appendix 7.3: – IFC Guarantees and Performance Bonds for Infrastructure: Extracts from Board documents ..... 88
CONTENTS


             Appendix 7.4: – Infrastructure Project Bonds- Other IFIs and Country Models ...................................................... 90
             Appendix 7.5: – Supporting the Environment and Other Priority Sectors: Green Bonds and Theme Bonds.......... 93
             Chapter 7 Appendix Tables A7.1 to A7.5 .............................................................................................................. 103

APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 8 ........................................................................................................................................... 109
             Chapter 8 Appendix Tables A8.1 to A8.3 .............................................................................................................. 109




ii
Abbreviations
AAA     analytic and advisory activities
ABMI    Asian Bond Market Initiatives
ABS     asset backed securities
ADB     Asian Development Bank
AfDB    African Development Bank
AMC     Asset Management Company
AS      advisory services
BETF    Bank-executed trust fund
BIS     Bank of International Settlements
CAB     Climate Awareness Bond
CAS     Country Assistance Strategy
CAT     Catastrophic Risk (bonds)
CBR     Central Bank of Russia
CCD     certificate of capital development
CEMLA   Center for Latin American Monetary Studies
CG      Corporate governance
CHMC    Colombian Home Mortgage Corporation
CMA     Capital Markets Authority (Kenya)
CIS     Commonwealth of Independent States
CPI     Consumer price index
CPMI    Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures
CPS     Country Partnership Strategy
CSD     clearance, settlement, and depository systems
DA      Distressed asset
DARP    Debt and Asset Recovery Program
DFI     Development financing institution
DFID    Department for International Development (UK)
DMF     Debt Management Facility
DOTS    Development Outcome Tracking System
DPL     development policy loan
DPR     Diversified payment receipts
EAC     East African Community
EAP     East Asia and the Pacific
EBRD    European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
EFO     Externally financed output
EIB     European Investment Bank
EMDE    Emerging Markets and Developing Economies
EMRC    Egyptian Mortgage Refinance Company
ESMID   Efficient Securities Markets Institutional Development program
ETF     Exchange Traded Fund
F&M     Finance and Markets
FABDM   Financial Advisory and Debt Management program
FDN     Financiera de Desarrollo Nacional (National Development Fund)
FIRST   Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative
FOVI    Fondo de Operacion y Financiamiento Bancario a la Vivienda (Mexico)
FPD     Finance and Private Sector Development
FSAP    Financial Sector Assessment Program



                                                                              iii
ABBREVIATIONS


GBP        Green Bond Principles
GEMLOC     Global Emerging Markets Local Currency Bond program
GEMX       Global Emerging Markets Local Currency sovereign bond index
G20        A group of 20 major economies including 19 countries and the European Union
GDP        Gross domestic product
GOI        Government of India
IADB       Inter-American Development Bank
IAIS       International Association of Insurance Supervisors
IBRD       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICRR       Implementation Completion and Results Report
IDA        International Development Association
IDB        Inter-American Development Bank
IEG        Independent Evaluation Group
IFFIm      International Finance Facility for Immunization
IFC        International Finance Corporation
IFI        International Financial Institution
IMF        International Monetary Fund
IOSCO      International Organization of Securities Commission
IPO        initial public offering
ISDA       International Swap and Derivatives Association
LAC        Latin America and the Carribean
LNG        Liquified Natural Gas
MDB        Multilateral Development Banks
MBS        Mortgage-backed securities
MIGA       Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
MILA       Mercado Integrado LatinoAmericano (Integrated Latin American securities exchange)
MosPrime   Moscow Prime Offered Rate
M&E        Monitoring and Evaluation
NBFI       Non-bank financial institution
NMRC       Nigeria Mortgage Refinance Company
NPL        non-performing loans
NSE        National Stock Exchange (Kenya)
OECD       Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
PBCE       project bond credit enhancement
PCG        Partial Credit Guarantee
PCR        Project Completion Report
PDM        Public Debt Management
PE         Private equity
PMI        Primary mortgage institution
PPP        Public-Private Partnership
PRI        Principles for Responsible Investment
PSD        private sector development
RAS        Reimbursable Advisory Services
ROSC       Reports on Observance of Standards and Codes
RTGS       Real Time Gross Settlement
RUONIA     the Ruble Overnight Index Average
SEB        Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken
SEC        Securities and Exchange Commission
SECO       Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs
SIDA       Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency
SME        Small and medium enterprise
SOFOLs     Sociedades Financieras de Objeto Limitado (Mexico)


iv
                                                               ABBREVIATIONS


SPV       Special purpose vehicle
SRO       Self-regulatory organization
SSA       Sub-Saharan Africa
SSS       Securities and Settlements System
TA        technical assistance
TC        Titularizadora Colombiana
TD        Treasury Department
TMD       Treasury Mobile Direct project
TTL       task team leader
UN        United Nations
USAID     United States Agency for International Development
VBMA      Vietnam Bond Market Association
WB        World Bank
World Bank Group the World Bank Group
WHI       Western Hemisphere Initiative
XPSR      Expanded Project Supervision Report




                                                                          v
vi
Appendixes to Chapter 1
Appendix 1.1: World Bank Group Strategy Towards Capital Market Development

1. World Bank Group strategy toward capital market development has been scattered across
the respective strategic Board documents of each institution, in relevant if not official internal
powerpoints and presentations, and in related real sector areas. Strategic implications for capital
market development can also be discerned in infrastructure strategy documents, as well as in
documents specific to particular service lines, such as the non bank financial sector service line.
All these are summarized below.
IFC STRATEGY TOWARDS CAPITAL MARKETS

2. At the IFC, the importance of the financial sector in general, and specifically, capital
markets has long been recognized. Initially the strategy was implicit, but powerful, beginning
with the establishment of the Capital Markets Department in the 1970s with the mandate of
providing technical assistance, advisory services and institution building investment. Its early
emphasis was on trading platforms (it supported several stock exchanges), as well as country
level support. Its Korea Country Fund helped to put the country on the investment map. IFC’s
Emerging Market Growth fund was a pioneering success despite early skepticism. IFC helped the
emergence of a new asset class, as well as the most comprehensive source of emerging markets
stock market data in its Emerging Markets Database, and additionally, the construction of early
emerging markets indices. [1]

3. IFC maintained a strong focus in most of these areas during the period under review (2004-
2014), although there may have been some shifts in emphasis of different elements of its
support. [2] Its Strategic Directions (2004) identified strengthening the focus on frontier markets,
as well as maintaining the focus on local financial markets development, as among its core
priorities. It pointed out that governments and corporates were increasingly unwilling to take on
unhedged foreign currency exposure, at the same time as international banks were shying away
from developing country risks. Included in its agenda for developing local financial markets were
providing advisory services, helping financial institutions address important environmental,
social, and corporate governance issues, together with a growing emphasis on housing finance as
well as SME and microfinance activities




[1] IFC’s Antoine van Agtamel has been credited with coining the term ‘emerging markets’ in the 1980s; later described in his
pioneering volume ‘the Emerging Market Centrury’ (van Agtmael, 2007). Barger (1998) documents the IFC’s early contributions
in this area.
[2] IEG has found only a limited number of interventions directly concerned with equities market development across the World

Bank Group, numbering around 19.



                                                                                                                                1
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 1


4. Promoting local currency financing and developing local financial markets remained a
focus in the Strategic Directions FY08-10 document, in three ways: working alongside the World
Bank to create supportive policy, legal and regulatory frameworks; investing and providing
technical assistance to financial institutions; and helping build the necessary financial
infrastructure for such institutions to operate effectively. A strong real sector focus also remained:
support to SME finance together with housing finance, and support for corporate goverance.

5. In tandem, IFC (2008) established its Securities Markets Advisory Services line,
mentioning for the first time a joint IFC-WB team, to create local currency securities markets,
particularly bond markets, and also clarifying that its two pillars consisted of government and
non-government bond market development. While not in a Board document, these goals were
spelled out in detailed presentations. The former pillar was targeted at the reduction of
government financing risk and the creation of benchmarks, and the latter aimed to support real
sector finance for housing, infrastructure and the private sector, as well as to mobilize savings
and provide investments for institutional investors. GEMLOC and ESMID were mentioned as the
wo complementary pillars of this strategy, and from the outset, the funding model was heavily
focused on the ‘public private partnership’ model of GEMLOC, as well as donor funding through
ESMID and other external sources. IFC (2011a), another presentation, provides a detailed
stocktaking of ESMID and GEMLOC.

6. IFC then prepared a presentation (2011bb), that spelled out for the first time a
comprehensive and focused capital market development strategy. It affirmed support to
issuers, intermediaries, investors, and the development of market infrastructure, with the
building of government and corporate bond markets (especially for real sector engagement). It
also suggested a re-engagement in equities markets, with a focus on smaller companies, as key
elements, and acknowledged the impracticalities of small local capital markets in countries with
few large firms. Inter alia it suggest a low priority for support to broker-dealers, rating agencies,
and investments in exchanges. It also affirmed the need for greater coordination with the IFC
Treasury. At a country level, it pointed out the need to move away from one-off engagements,
toward a comprehensive, ‘deep dive’ approach. In parallel, IFC’s Treasury recognized the need
to provide local currency financing for it clients, and has moved beyond loans to bond issuance,
derivatives and swap products as well as to structured finance and securitization through
guarantees and risk sharing facilities (IFC 2010, and IFC 2014).

7. In IFC’s most recent strategy, the ‘Road Map for 2015-2017;’ IFC reiterates the focus on
frontier markets, as well as on the need to develop local capital markets, especially in the
context of infrastructure and real sector finance. It also emphasizes the need to leverage its
investments to promote good corporate governance and environmentally and socially
responsible investment.




2
                                                                         APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 1

WORLD BANK STRATEGY TOWARDS CAPITAL MARKET DEVELOPMENT

8. At the World Bank, there have been fewer formal articulations of financial sector strategy
but its most recent strategy, of March 2007, named capital market development as one of two
areas that would receive special attention. “With respect to capital markets, in addition to the
ongoing diagnostic, emphasis will be given to motivating regulatory reforms via specific
initiatives including the promotion of a global local currency bond fund and the expansion of the
corporate governance program to cover financial institutions. In addition, a deepening of Bank
advisory work is envisaged in areas where public policy issues are major and moral hazard looms
large, particularly the financial sector aspects of pensions systems, catastrophe insurance
products, and low-income housing. Development in these areas will also be supported through
IFC investments and their inclusion in Bank lending operations.” It emphasized the continuing
central role of the Bank in providing systemic policy advice and lending support to governments,
and also pointed out that in the area of capital markets, partnerships with the IMF, OECD and
standard setting bodies, would be integral elements. Its forward looking agenda proposes a
continuation of ongoing diagnostic work, especially FSAPs, as well as, in particular,
the promotion of local currency bond markets, the deepening of Bank advisory work for
financial sector aspects of pensions systems, catastrophic insurance products, low-income
housing, and building financial infrastructure, especially, payments systems. As of early 2016, a
new formal financial sector strategy is under preparation.

9. The Bank’s 2007 strategy was translated into a broadbased description of its activities on
the FPD website, which reaffirmed that “The mission of the Capital Markets Practice is to help
clients build robust, fair and sustainable markets that contribute to financial stability and
economic growth. As a joint Practice of the World Bank and the International Finance
Corporation, the Practice helps clients develop their capital markets, strengthen their corporate
governance frameworks, and oversee their Non-Bank Financial Institutions (NBFIs).

10. One noteworthy feature in terms of the articulation of the strategy into the World Bank
Group organizational structure, however, was the separation of the Capital Markets
Development and Corporate Governance Service Line, and the Non-Bank Financial
Institutions Service Line. Thus the The Capital Markets Development and Corporate
Governance Service Line described its business as “developing domestic securities markets -
notably bond and equity markets - to help emerging market countries develop local currency
funding solutions, improve risk management capabilities, improve pricing benchmarks and yield
curves, diversify and improve financial systems beyond traditional bank products, and provide
new asset classes to accommodate the needs of ever expanding pool of institutional investors.
The Service Line also focuses on improving corporate governance in listed companies, financial
institutions and state-owned enterprises (SOE), in order to improve access to finance, risk
governance, and company performance, resulting in responsible and productive institutions that
contribute to sustainable economic growth and financial stability.” There was no articulated link
to NBFI service line, which stated that “The goal of the Non-Bank Financial Institutions Service


                                                                                               3
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 1


Line is to develop sound and accessible insurance, housing finance and pension fund markets,
and provide related policy and regulatory guidance on the development of non-bank financial
institutions and markets.”

11. The 2007 Strategy makes special note of the importance of the supply of capital market
instruments for institutional investors. “The growth of funds in the hands of institutional
investors (mutual funds, pension funds, insurance companies) is generally outstripping local
economies’ ability to supply suitable assets”.
12. More recently (2015) the WB focused on savers as well as eventual investment in
infrastructure: “enable households to have access to diversified savings and investment
instruments, to buffer the poor against the risks …..and to finance investments in infrastructure
and housing.”(Non-Bank Financial Sector Institutions Service Line, Financial and Private Sector
Development Network.)
FSAP STRATEGY AND CAPITAL MARKETS

13. There has also been an evolution of the role of the WB in the global financial sector
architecture, that increases emphasis on the WB role in developing financial systems. Some
changes are reflected in the periodic Board documents reviewing the FSAP program. Especially
after the global crisis, there was an increase in the role of the IMF in surveillance activities
(reflected in the role of the Fund as a member of the Financial Stability Board) and a
corresponding increase in the role of the WB in the structural development aspects of countries’
financial systems, especially in poorer countries.

INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE AND CAPITAL MARKET DEVELOPMENT

14. In parallel, there have been numerous articulations of the World Bank Group role in
mobilizing infrastructure finance, that inter alia have important implications for the
development of capital markets instruments. [5] At the outset of IEG’s review period World Bank
lending for infrastructure had dropped from US$10.6 billion in 1993 to US$5.4 billion in 2003. This
led to the formulation of an Infrastructure Action Plan (IAP), FY04-07, to revitalize the
institution’s engagement in infrastructure, followed by subsequent Action Plans for FY 09-11
(which identified a $1 trillion gap in financing needs), and the most recently updated World Bank
Group Infrastructure Strategy FY12-15, which lays out the framework for transforming the
Group’s engagement in infrastructure. [6]

15. Specific mention of capital markets financing for infrastructure has received varying
degrees of emphasis. Thus the Action Plan for FY09-11 inter alia discussed both global and local
capital markets as a possible source of infrastructure financing, to be supported by IFC’s Global

[5] See http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTSDNET/Resources/5944695-
1241627159876/SIAPfinal.pdf
[6] Infrastructure Strategy Update FY12-15: Transformation Through Infrastructure.

http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTINFRA/Resources/Transformationthroughinfrastructure.pdf


4
                                                                                  APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 1


Financial Markets group. It also mentioned exploring use of World Bank Group risk mitigation
products and asset backed securities, and it emphasized the need to support PPP for
infrastructure finance. The more holistic recent strategy for FY12-15 takes a broad view of what
is required—in terms of partnership, knowledge, advice, and projects—for infrastructure to
accelerate growth. It emphasizes the need for transformational engagement and recognizes the
need to mobilize private capital and the importance of building public private partnerships. It
mentions the need for support to capital market development as one element along the spectrum
of PPP activities.

16. The present broad based approach of the World Bank Group has been reaffirmed in the
international sphere, where huge if nebulous financing deficits are discussed - e.g., the World
Bank Group umbrella report to the G20 on Long-Term Investment Financing for Growth and
Development (2013); statements of the G20 Investing in Infrastructure working group (2014) on
the need for long term infrastructure investments, to the tune of $2 trillion; and the 2015 Addis
Ababa Action Agenda, which points to a “1 trillion to $1.5 trillion annual gap”.[7] Most recently,
during the 2015 IMF World Bank Annual Meetings in Lima, Peru, the WB’s MD drew attention
to the need to mobilize capital market resources through institutional investors, such as pensions
funds, and to fill the funding gap for infrastructure in the developing countries.[8] Moreover the
2015 Global Financial Development Report focuses on the provision of long term finance,
significantly in the context of capital market development.[9]




[7] Addis Ababa Action Agenda – Third International Conference on Financing for Development July13-
16,2015. It states that “…Investing in sustainable and resilient infrastructure, including transport, energy,
water and sanitation for all, is a pre-requisite for achieving many of our goals.”
http://www.un.org/esa/ffd/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/AAAA_Outcome.pdf ; G20 –Policy Note
“Increasing Investment in Infrastructure” –August 2014 (Australia)
[8] http://live.worldbank.org/infrastructure-investing-for-growth-and-people. These Annual meetings

(October 2015) also showcased the recently established $100 million WB Global Infrastructure Facility, set
up in April 2015, and pointed toward $1 trillion of unmet demand for infrastructure demand in emerging
and developing economies (EMDEs).
[9] Long Term Finance. (2015), World Bank.




                                                                                                            5
Appendix 1.2: Capital Markets, Financial Development, Economic Growth and
Poverty Alleviation

1.      The following note reviews available literature in terms of the relation between financial
sector development and economic growth as well as poverty reduction and inequality
reduction. It also provides summary information on the recent evolution of capital market
development of countries at different income levels. To the extent that information is separately
available on the capital market segment of the financial system, it is provided. The relative
scarcity of information on capital markets’ effects, as a distinct segment of the financial system,
is not surprising as available evidence points toward the complementarity of bank driven and
market driven financial systems, with an increase in the relative share of the latter as countries
grow and develop.

FINANCE AND GROWTH

2.      Financial systems help to allocate capital, mobilize and pool savings, monitor
investments, facilitate risk diversification and management, and ease the exchange of goods and
services (Levine 2005). Evidence of a causal link between financial depth and economic growth
was traced by King and Levine (1993), in a multi-country study that showed that financial
development predicts long-run economic growth. While this initial assessments of the link
between finance and growth was focused on banking as the measure of financial sector
development, Gerschenkron (1962), Allen and Gale (2000) and Demirguc-Kunt and Levine
(2001), provided theoretical and empirical reasons to look at the financial sector beyond banks
as a driver of growth. Beck and Levine (2005) expanded the analysis to include stock markets
and found that the size of the banking sector and stock market development were both
positively related to economic growth. Extending this further, Fink, Haiss and Hristoforove
(2003) found that in addition to banks and stock markets, bond market development also
influences economic activity.

3.      Levine (2002, 2005) based on an empirical examination, shows that classifying countries
as having bank-based versus market-based financial systems is not very fruitful. Although
overall financial development is robustly linked with economic growth, there is no specific
support for either the bank-based or the market-based view. As pointed out by IEG (2006a)
‘Research on the best mix of financial institutions, in terms of bank-based systems versus
market-based (capital markets), shows a striking lack of results. Rather, it is the overall level of
financial sector development, regardless of which structure dominates, that matters for growth.
Thus, whether to promote the establishment or expansion of capital markets in a country will
depend on the circumstances, including the ability of the country to reduce informational
asymmetries.’




                                                                                                   6
                                                                            APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 1


4.      Studies also showed that financial depth influences not just the level of economic
activity, but also the nature of real sector activity, and the industrial structure of an economy.
Capital market development encourages industries that need external finance (Rajan and
Zingales1998), Demirguc Kunt and Maksimovic (2000) also show that stock market
development is more related to the availability of long term financing, whereas banking sector
development is more related to short term finance. While Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, Laeven and
Levine (2004) suggest that financial development, overall, disproportionately helps small firms,
Didier and Schmukler (2013) point out that larger firms, especially, benefit from stock and bond
market access in some prominent emerging economies.

FINANCIAL SECTOR DEVELOPMENT & CAPITAL MARKETS

5.      The extent to which financial structure (bank-based versus market-based) affects
economic growth has also been explored, and the implications of financial structure on growth.
Cross-country empirical research (reported by Levine 2005) finds fairly consistently that there is
no single preferred system, even for financially-dependent industries, or firms with external
financing needs. Overall, the conclusion from the literature to date is that while financial sector
development is good for growth, the financial structure adopted by a country is less important.
However, Demirguc-Kunt, Feyen and Levine (2011) find that as countries develop they increase
their demand for the services provided by securities markets relative to those provided by
banks. Bank-based structures tend to dominate in the early stages of growth, but the relative
importance of banks decreases as economies develop.

FINANCE AND MACROECONOMIC VOLATILITY

6.      The financial sector has played a contributing role in many, if not most, of the economic
crises that have taken place in recent years. The implications of such events on both growth and
poverty are significant. Even before the 2008 crisis, Easterly, Islam and Stiglitz (2000) found that
the development of the financial sector as measured by both bank credit to the private sector
and stock market traded value are negatively related to macroeconomic volatility. But they also
pointed out that while bank credit is negatively related to macroeconomic volatility, the
relationship is not linear; above a certain level of credit, financial sector development adds to
macroeconomic volatility. This is similar to the finding of Arcand, Berkes and Panizza (2012),
who find that financial sector development, defined in this case as private credit to GDP, is
positively related to economic growth, until it reaches 100 percent of GDP, beyond which it has
a negative impact.

7.      The development and expansion of capital markets, and indeed financial markets as a
whole, is not without risk. Instability may limit the impact of financial development on poverty
alleviation. Banking, a central part of most financial systems, is highly leveraged and has been
prone to exaggerated credit cycles that sometimes end in crisis, and there are some signs of
increasing global levels of leverage and possibly nascent bubbles in the real economy. The


                                                                                                   7
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 1


greater role of capital markets in more developed financial systems can diversify some risk
away from banks, dampening overall economic effects of shocks to the banking system. Yet, in a
changing world, technological shifts have introduced new forms and delivery mechanisms of
financial services that bear their own risks. 1 And dynamic changes in global financial structure,
in a post-crisis environment, including regulatory shifts in the banking system, could shift risks
toward 'shadow banks’ and capital markets, and toward emerging as opposed to developed
markets.

8.      Caprio and Klingebiel (2003) showed that fiscal costs of financial crises often exceeded
20 percent of GDP. Bordo et al. (2001), determined that twin (banking and currency) crises have
led to cumulative GDP losses on the order of 18 percent, and Halac and Schmukler (2004)
discuss the significance of regressive wealth transfers unleashed by financial crises. During the
course of the 2008/09 financial and economic crisis, it was estimated by the World Bank that an
additional 53 million persons were plunged into poverty in the developing world. Banking, a
central part of most developed and developing financial systems, is highly leveraged and has
been prone to exaggerated credit cycles that sometimes end in crisis. But historical evidence
informs us that in fact financial crises are more frequent in developing than in developed
countries, likely due to better macroeconomic policy, regulation and supervision (Reinhart and
Rogoff (2009)). And the greater role of capital markets in more developed financial systems
diversifies some risk away from banks, dampening overall economic effects of shocks to the
banking system.

FINANCE, POVERTY AND INEQUALITY

9.      Does financial development help the poor through better resource allocation and more
information? Or does financial development inordinately help the rich, because the poor rely
mostly on informal networks and family? Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2007) and Clarke,
Xu and Zhou, (2006) find that that financial development, measured by growth in private credit,
disproportionately boosts incomes of the poorest quintile of the population and reduces income
inequality. Akhter and Liu (2010), using a broader measure of financial development that
includes non-bank financial institutions, find that financial development helps the poor in
countries with stable financial systems. However instability may limit the impact of financial
development on poverty alleviation; a caution echoed by Jeanneney and Kpodhar (2008). Perez-
Moreno (2010) also points out that it is the moderately poor that clearly benefit. Kim and Lin
(2011), using measures of both bank and stock market development, also find that the relation

1 Certain complex institutional and legal structures are deliberately designed to fall outside the

traditional purview of regulators. ‘Shadow banking’structures provide an example, and they are not new,
nor are they illegal, untaxed, or unmonitored. While these complex structures may use capital markets as
financial intermediaries for transactions that would likely have previously involved banks, this is
primarily a challenge for regulators in the most developed financial markets. Credit derivatives are
another recent example. And certain market processes, such as high frequency trading, now increasingly
present in the larger middle income countries, also carry own risks of exacerbating volatility.


8
                                                                              APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 1


between financial development and inequality depends on the development level the country
has reached. Studies on individual countries also exist, though most use bank-based measures
of financial development. Ayyagari, Beck and Hoseini (2013) also find that financial
development is strongly associated with poverty reduction, a result echoed for Kenya by
Odihambo (2010) and for Pakistan by Imran and Khalil (2012), using bank based data. Jalil and
Feridun (2001), in a study on China which uses a wider spectrum of financial development
variables, also finds that increased financial development will reduce income inequality in
China. Studies that isolate the effects of capital markets as a component of the financial system,
and poverty, are rare, as are those that use stock market development alone as a proxy for
wider financial development.

10.     It should be added that some recent arguments suggesting a link between capitalism,
inequality and instability, e.g., Piketty (2014), are not linked to capital markets. His argument is
against the tendency of capitalism, in general, to concentrate wealth in the hands of capitalists.
There is not a single variety of capitalism and some countries, for example, Sweden and Japan,
operate capitalists systems with well-developed capital markets and low inequality. Rajan and
Zingales (2009) also recognize the inherent problems with capitalism, but argue that financial
markets offer a way out of poverty when they are well managed and developed. Galbraith
(2014) offers four factors impeding a return to normal growth after the 2008 crisis, among which
is the breakdown of law and ethics of the financial sector, but he does not differentiate between
the financial sector and capital markets.

CAPITAL MARKET DEVELOPMENT IN WORLD BANK GROUP CLIENT COUNTRIES (2005-2014)

11.     During the period covered by this evaluation, capital markets, especially debt markets,
grew rapidly in World Bank Group client countries, much more so than in high income
countries. International debt issues by lower middle income countries have grown particularly
rapidly. However, both domestic debt issues and international debt issues by lower and upper
middle income countries remain dominated by government securities. Domestic debt issues
remain lower than bank credit, which is growing at a faster pace than the debt market,
indicating an overall increase of leverage even if not from capital markets (Appendix 1Figure
A1.1). The traditional problem for emerging economies was a lack of credit. In some emerging
economies, this is no longer the case as indebtedness has increased significantly and bubbles
may well have already inflated. There is also some emerging evidence that easy global liquidity
conditions may have led to a surge in some emerging market firms’ bond issuance in
international markets, largely for refinancing and securing lower rates and longer maturities
(Feijen et. al, 2016). The shift toward safer maturity structures may have come at the expense of
a leveraging-up in foreign-currency-denominated financial debt and there are trade-offs
between these risk structures (Bastos et. al 2015).




                                                                                                     9
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 1



 Figure A.1.1 Global Growth of Credit, Debt and Equity (2000-2013)
                               Domestic Debt Securities & Bank Credit Outstanding




                                   International Debt Securities Outstanding




                                   Stock Market Capitalization and Trading




 Notes: International debt securities data is based on 51 countries data on equities is based on 48 countries, and domestic
 debt securities data is based on 21 countries; for which consistent data are available.
 Source: IEG estimates based on data from BIS Bond Statistics and World Development Indicators



12.     Stock markets have grown too, but the pace of growth has faltered and become erratic
after the global crisis. And although the numbers of listed companies has grown perhaps the
most rapidly in lower middle income countries, trading volumes have not kept pace with
market capitalization, and turnover ratios (trading value as a proportion of market
capitalization) have in fact declined.




10
                                                                            APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 1


Appendix 1.3: World Bank Group Evaluative Material on Capital Market Development
1.      Few major IEG evaluations have discussed issues relevant to financial sector
development, and there are no major IEG evaluations of the World Bank Group role in capital
markets development. In IEG’s major evaluations on the financial sector, references to the role
of the World Bank Group in capital market development are scarce. IEG’s most comprehensive
review, of WB support for overall financial sector reforms (2006a), the report mentions that only
22 percent (of financial sector projects) included capital market reform as a component; the
Bank’s lending tended to target banking and bank-like financial institutions. Inclusion of this
area was more frequent in East Asia and Latin America (30 percent) and much lower in Africa
(14 percent) and even East Europe (18 percent). The evaluation itself did not explore issues
related to outputs or outcomes of such interventions; however it includes changes in stock
market capitalization and trading value as a measure of outcomes of WB interventions in the
overall financial sector in specific countries. Countries that were Bank borrowers for the
financial sector and those that were not did not show any difference in changes in these
parameters.

13.     IEG’s second major financial sector evaluation of the past decade, of the Financial Sector
Assessment Program (2006b), pointed out that while the quality and thoroughness of FSAP
banking sector analyses were consistent, there was greater variability in the coverage and
quality of the analysis of other sectors, including non-banks, likely reflecting their small size in
many countries covered. And few FSAPs analyzed the linkages between sectors - for example
only a third of detailed FSAP reviews had an integrated discussion of insurance issues and
capital markets and investment. A number of FSAPs discussed the need to expand the
insurance and pension sectors, and to diversify asset holdings (which would help develop
capital markets), but failed to discuss the lack of available investment instruments. It noted that
nurturing local currency bond markets should be a policy objective for many countries and that
more and better information on these markets is needed.

14.     In the WB Pension Reform evaluation (IEG 2006c), capital market development was
explicitly included as one element of the secondary goals of pension reform, to be supported by
the design of multi-pillar, funded, defined contribution pension schemes. In terms of findings,
the report shows that diversification of pension funds’ investments was not achieved and in
many cases pension investments remained concentrated in government securities markets,
under tight investment guidelines – possibly reflecting macroeconomic constraints. On the
whole capital market development was not observed in case study countries despite the
introduction of multi-pillar systems, although government debt maturity increased somewhat.

15.     One relevant evaluation that covered both the WB and the IFC is the IEG (2009) review
of the World Bank Group’s Guarantee instruments. The report points to the differences and
similarities in partial credit guarantees (PCGs) offered by both institutions. In terms of


                                                                                                  11
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 1


outcomes, it shows that such guarantees have helped public agencies tap bond markets for
better terms than they would have received without guarantees. Most public agencies that
accessed capital markets under the PCGs subsequently accessed commercial markets again,
without guarantees. In Jordan, the PCG helped the telecom utility become the first Middle
Eastern corporation to tap the Eurobond market. The Jordan operation also involved the
participation of the local capital market, facilitating mobilization of domestic foreign exchange
deposits. A Colombia operation enabled Colombia to reestablish access to U.S. capital markets
at a time when investor interest was minimal. In Argentina, although the country was able to
access non-U.S. capital markets at similar terms, the PCG enabled it to issue a significantly
larger bond ($1.2 billion) than would otherwise have been possible at the time.

16.     Although coverage of capital markets in IEG macro and sector evaluations is thin, IEG
does have individual project evaluations for a small proportion of the portfolio. Out of 421 IFC
investment projects in the included portfolio, 202 are old enough to have been reviewed, 55
have XPSRs/PESs (self-evaluation), and 40 of the 58 projects have completed IEG EvNotes. As
regards advisory services in the review portfolio, 60 of the 87 are completed and thus eligible
for review. Evaluations of IFC AS only cover completed projects that were approved after
January 2006 on a sample basis. Out of 87 projects in the review portfolio, 20 were active
projects in portfolio and 19 were approved before January 2006, thus were excluded from
evaluation sampling by design. Thus, though IEG ratings are only available for 21 IFC AS in the
portfolio, about 60% of the projects eligible for evaluation have been reviewed by IEG when
including the six projects not yet finalized.

17.    Even on the lending side, roughly a tenth of the IFC projects evaluated had IEG
validated reviews. 2 Out of 421 IFC investment projects in the included portfolio, 58 had
XPSRs/PESs (self-evaluation), though only 40 of the 58 projects had been reviewed by IEG and
had IEG EvNotes. On the WB side, 87 projects were included in the portfolio, of which 67 were
closed and just over half (47) had an IEG validated ICR review.

18.     On the WB side, ICRRs are available for 47 out of 67 closed projects, out of a total of 87
projects in the IEG portfolio. However, there is no evaluative coverage of the large body of 476
WB AAA, as there is no self-evaluative or independent evaluation convention for AAA at the
WB/ IEG. Task team led AAA completion reports have limited information.



2IEG only reviews IFC investments they deem as “mature”, which generally occurs five years after
commitment, but can take longer. 219 of the 421 IFC investments in the portfolio were committed in fiscal
year 2010 or later, thus have not been evaluated by IEG at this point. Further, IEG does not review follow
on investments and excludes certain other types of projects including those aimed at product
development. Thus, only 161 of these projects met the criteria for evaluation. Of these, 58 have
XPSRs/PESs (34 percent), though only 40 of the 58 projects have completed IEG EvNotes and thus have
recognized ratings.


12
                                                                          APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 1


16.    In terms of performance, out of the 47 evaluated lending products at the WB, a large
proportion - 39 or 83 percent - received satisfactory ratings (highly satisfactory, satisfactory,
and moderately satisfactory). Performance at IFC was more mixed. Of the 40 EvNotes reviewed
by IEG, less than half projects were given a satisfactory rating by IEG. As regards IFC’s advisory
services, 13 of the 21 IEG reviewed projects were given satisfactory ratings, 6 were given
unsatisfactory ratings, and 2 were determined to be too early to judge.

17.     Although there is limited coverage in IEG evaluative material, there are independent
external evaluations of some segments of the World Bank Group capital markets portfolio, due
to their considerable trust fund financing, and the demand for such evaluations by the funding
donors. Thus, the FIRST program had monitoring and evaluation reports in 2009,
2011(undertaken by a team of former IEG staff) and 2014 (USC DPMG). There have been
country specific evaluations of the Vietnam capital markets work and corporate governance
interventions (Adam Smith International, 2013). The ESMID program has had evaluations of its
interventions in Africa (Genesis Analytics, 2013) and in Latin America (Analistas Financieros
Internacionales).

18.     Other IFIs do have major evaluations in the capital markets area. Most recently, EBRD
has undertaken an evaluation of local currency operations, including bonds and swaps (EBRD
2013), and the Asian Development Bank has undertaken a more broad-based evaluation of its
capital markets operations (ADB 2008).




                                                                                               13
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 1




Chapter 1 Appendix Tables A1.1 to A1.5
Appendix Table A1.1 IEG Identification of World Bank Group Capital Markets Portfolio (2004-2014) (Nos.)
                                                                    IFC       IFC            WB AAA       WB         Total
                                                                    AS    Investments                   Lending
  Capital Markets Projects Identified                                87       421             476         87         1071

  1. Developing Capital Markets Instruments
  IFC - Private Equity and Investment Funds                         7          288                                    295
  IFC – Bond Issues and ABS for Investments (excl infrastr)                    53                                     53
  WB / IFC Bond Markets Advisory                                    13                         81         21          115
  WB / IFC Housing and Mortgage securities                          21         46              63         17          147

  2. Supporting Capital Market Investors
  Insurance                                                         8          24              92         26          150
  Pensions                                                                                     34         6           40

  3. Building Capital Markets Infrastructure
  Capital Market Regulation, Supervision                            1                          23            1        25
  Capital Market Development incl. FSAP, ROSC follow up             3           2              52            4        61
  Payments / securities' clearance and settlement / securities      2           2              18            3        25
  exchanges
  Corporate Governance                                              32                         73            3        108

 4. Using Capital Markets to Support Real Sector Investment
 Financing Infrastructure                                                       6               40        6            52
Source: IEG. Note: For IFC the table excludes Projects Dropped, Terminated, or Not Yet Approved (Pipeline)
Note: Five of IFC’s projects involving bonds (two guarantees of bonds and three bond purchases) were used for infrastructure
projects while one of IFC’s asset-backed securities’ guarantees was also used for infrastructure.


Appendix Table A0.2 Desk Review Portfolio by Country Income Level (64 countries)
     Country            IFC AS             IFC        WB AAA          WB             Total          % Total
     Groups                                                         Lending
                                    Investment
 High Income                  7             23                 26          2              58           8%
 Upper Middle                24            131                121         30             306          45%
 Lower Middle                27             98                115         28             268          39%
 Low Income                   2             10                 32          7              51           7%
 Total                       58            259                289         65             671          100%
Source: IEG




14
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 1

Appendix Table A1.3 FSAP Follow up in IEG’s Capital Markets Portfolio: Advisory and Lending Services
                       WB AAA                      FIRST TA or Advisory             WB Lending
  Countries          Ref    Follow   Total     Ref to   Follow     Total       Ref to   Follow         Total Lending
                     to     FSAP     AAA in    FSAP     FSAP       FIRST in    FSAP     FSAP in        in County
                     FSAP   in 5     Country            within 5   Country              5 years
                            years                       years

  Azerbaijan                     2        3        1           2          3                                        2
  Bangladesh            1        5        5
  Brazil                         3        7                               2                       1                2
  China                 1        2       12                               2
  Colombia              1        8       11        3           5          5     2                 5                6
  Costa Rica                     2        2        2           3          3                       1                1
  Egypt, Arab Rep.               6        6                                     5                 6                6
  Ghana                          2        4                                                       1                1
  India                 1       11       17                               3                       1                5
  Indonesia             1        5       12                    2          4                                        1
  Kazakhstan            1        7        7
  Kenya                 2        9       10                    2          2     2                 2                2
  Mexico                1        8        8                                     2                 8                8
  Morocco                        4        4        2           4           4    4                 4                4
  Nigeria               1        5        9                                1    1                 1                1
  Pakistan                       2        3        1           2           2    1                 2                2
  Serbia                         3        4                    1           1    1                 2                2
  Sri Lanka                      2        3        2           4           4                      1                1
  Turkey                2        5        5        1           1           1    1                 1                1
  Vietnam                        1       10        1           1           3                                       1
  Total                12       92      142       13          27          40   19                 36              46
Source: IEG




                                                                                                                       15
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 1

Table A1.4 Country Program Support for Capital Market Development (2000-2014)




Source: IEG




16
                                                                                                                                                      APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 1

Table A1.5 FSAP References in CASs: Timeframe and Nature of Reference

 Country Name                             Timeframe of FSAP Del.                                                 Description FSAP Reference                                                  Total




                                                                                                                                    Refrs to banking or
                                                              Forthcoming FSAP




                                                                                                                                                          Reference s part of
                                                                                                                                                          work program only
                                                                                                                 mentions capital
                                                                                              Mentions capital
                                            Concurrent with




                                                                                                                 market relevant

                                                                                                                                    other areas of
                           Prior to CAS




                                                                                                                                                                                No mention
                                                                                 No Mention




                                                                                                                 Selectively
                                                                                              markets




                                                                                                                                    finance
                                            CAS
 Azerbaijan                          1                                     2                                                              1                        2                           3
 Bangladesh                          1                                     1             1           1                                                             1                    1      3
 Brazil                              2             1                                     1           1                                                             2                    1      4
 China                               1                                                   2                                                1                                             2      3
 Colombia                            2             1                                                                                      2                        1                           3
 Costa Rica                          2             1                                                 1                                    1                        1                           3
 Egypt, Arab Republic of             1             1                                                 1                                                             1                           2
 Ghana                               3                                                               1                                    1                        1                           3
 India                               1             1                                     2                                                                         2                    2      4
 Indonesia                           1             1                       1             1           1                                                             2                    1      4
 Kazakhstan                          2                                                   1                                                1                        1                    1      3
 Kenya                               1             2                                                 3                                                                                         3
 Mexico                              3                                                   1                                                3                                             1      4
 Morocco                             2                                     1             1           1                1                   1                                             1      4
 Nigeria                             1             1                                     1                            1                                           1                     1      3
 Pakistan                            1             2                                                                  1                                           2                            3
 Serbia                              2             1                                                                                      2                       1                            3
 Sri Lanka                           2             1                                                                                      1                       2                            3
 Turkey                              1                                                   2                                                                        1                     2      3
 Vietnam                                          3                                                  1                                    1                       1                            3
 Grand Total                       30            16                        5            13          11                3                  15                      22                    13     64

Source: IEG




                                                                                                                                                                                                     17
Appendixes to Chapter 2
Appendix 2.1: World Bank Group Global Advisory Contributions and Partnerships for
Local Bond Market Development

1.      WB attention to bond markets, and especially local bond market development,
accelerated after the Asian Crisis of 1997, reflecting the widespread view that an important
reason for the Asian crisis was the relatively poorly developed local capital market, leaving
these countries dependent on external capital flows. Dalla et al (1995), in the WB East Asia
department, presented a pathbreaking review of nine emerging Asian bond markets. In-depth
individual country studies were undertaken (e.g., Kumar, 1997a), together with strategies for
bond markets for infrastructure finance, including subnational and municipal finance (el Daher,
1997, Gray et. al., 1997, Dailami, 2003, Freire and Peterson 2004). Harwood (2000) also discusses,
in a conference edition, the benefits of local bond markets. More broadly, Harwood and Smith
(1997) address the sequencing of capital markets reforms. Kumar et. al (1997b) and Carmichael
and Pomerleano (2002) discuss the regulation of the non-bank financial sector and Litan,
Pomerleano and Sundararajan (2003), in a joint WB / IMF / Brookings conference, recognized
the role that local capital markets play in mitigating risks associated with cross-border capital
flows.

2.      Strong external partnerships, notably with the IMF and with the OECD, were
established to provide support for bond market development. Reasons for developing long-
term bond markets to support monetary and fiscal policy were clearly recognized even prior to
the financial crisis, in the G8 (2007) Action Plan for Developing Local Bond Markets in
Emerging Market Economies. Underpinning the G8 Action plan was a BIS (2007) report by the
Committee on the Global Financial System, discussing the benefits of local currency bond
markets for financial stability. These messages were reiterated after the crisis, with more broad
based support, in the G20 (2011) Action Plan.

3.       The OECD, in parallel to early Bank efforts, organized a review of specific issues
associated with capital markets in transition economies (OECD 1997), which later developed
into a joint OECD-World Bank -IMF Global Bond Market Forum (Blommestein and Harwood,
2011). Interestingly, during the 2008 crisis the EBRD recognized the lack of domestic financial
markets as a key cause of volatility in its client countries (EBRD 2010, 2014). The World Bank
and IMF (2001) produced a first guide to developing government bond markets. Soon after, a
series of annual conferences on government debt markets were jointly initiated, together with
the OECD. More market specific studies followed in the period under review, including a 12
country World Bank/IMF pilot program on debt management and public bond market
development (World Bank (2007a and 2007b), which emphasized the uniqueness of each
country case and the length of time needed for results. Bakker and Gross (2004) and Iorgova


                                                                                                18
                                                                        APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


and Ong (2008) examined EU accession countries’ capital markets development. An in-depth
analysis of the Brazilian public debt market was prepared jointly by the World Bank and the
Brazilian government (Silva et al, 2007). Sophastienphong (2008) investigated South Asia’s bond
markets, and Garcia-Kilroy and Silva (2011) examine government bond markets in five
countries in MENA. And most recently, the OECD World Bank Group and IMF jointly prepared
a diagnostic framework and an action plan for local currency bond market development (OECD
2013). These build upon former OECD has a long tradition of involvement in government debt
management, viewed by some as a cornerstone of any financial sector. Its original Green Book
on public debt management was first published in 1983, revised in 1993 and again in 2002,
providing an overview of trends in the markets and a discussion of important policy issues.

4.      Meanwhile, factors affecting bond market development were also explored by the
WB Treasury. Sienaert (2012) examined the role of foreign investors in local government debt
markets. From the research perspective, Claessens, Klingebiel and Schmukler (2013) show that
institutional and macroeconomic factors are related to the development of government bond
markets, as echoed, external to World Bank Group, in Rojas-Soares (2014) and Laeven (2014).
And at present, the forthcoming DEC Global Financial Development Report (2015), focused on
developing markets for long term finance, also reviews World Bank Group efforts at supporting
capital market development in client countries.

5.      Corporate bond markets also became the focus of attention although empirical
research documenting the impact of capital markets development on firms remains limited.
As early as 2001, Gallego and Loayza show that in Chile, firm investment became less
constrained as capital markets developed. Most recently, Didier and Schmukler (2013) suggest
that while beneficial, typically the larger firms have gained the most in India and China. The
IMF Financial Stability Report (2005), discussed relevant challenges and policy issues, followed
by World Bank Group research on the regulatory framework, impediments, and domestic vs.
international issuance. At the country level, the World Bank undertook a comprehensive review
of the corporate bond market in India (Marathe, WB 2006). Recent attention in the non-
government bond area has shifted toward the development of project bonds, especially for
infrastructure financing, given their prospective benefits in terms of cost of finance and
complementarity with other sources (Garcia-Kilroy, 2014, draft)




                                                                                              19
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


Appendix 2.2: IFC’s Bond Purchases and Bond Guarantees

1.     During the period covered by this evaluation, FY04-14, IFC commitments to purchase
bonds issued by clients represented $2.0 billion, in 38 projects. Of this, $1.1 billion were bonds
issued by banks, representing 18 of the 38 bonds. Another 10 ($235 million) were spread across
non-bank financial institutions, including microfinance. Finally, there were also 10 bonds
purchased from non-financial sector clients, totaling $665 million.

2.      IFC also issued 13 guarantees to support securities issuance by clients, with a total
value of $254 million. Of these, 11 guarantees (with a face value of $217 million) were issued
to enhance the credit quality of bonds, making them more attractive to investors constrained
to investment-grade securities or those who simply didn’t have an appetite for more risky
securities. Non-financial sector clients represented 7 of the 11 bond guarantees. Two were for
infrastructure finance and are discussed further in Chapter 6 of this report. The remainder were
spread across banks, microfinance institutions and other non-bank financial institutions. Local
currency instruments and local market issues accounted for all IFC’s bond guarantees.

18.     IFC’s purchase of client bonds was not uniformly spaced over time. From 2004
through 2012, there were an average of 2.1 bond purchases per year (19 in all), averaging $150
million annually. Many were clustered in 2007, with 7 purchases totaling $591 million in
volume, with much of that activity concentrated in bond issues by Indian banks, which is
discussed below. Client bond purchases by IFC became common again during 2013-14, with 19
of 38 bond issues during the entire sample period taking place in those two years for a total
commitment of $694 million. Six were issued by banks; 5 were from other financial institutions,
3 were in infrastructure (water, rail, and ports), and 5 were in other real sectors. In contrast,
guarantees of bonds were concentrated in the early part of the period. 8 of the 11 guarantees
were approved in FY07 or earlier.
19.     IFC support for the use of covered bonds in Turkey was noteworthy. Following
legislation enacted in 2009 which allowed for the issuance of bonds that were directly tied to
underlying issuer assets, IFC worked with clients to issue two covered bonds; one was the first
ever in Turkey and the other was the first to be linked to a portfolio of SME loans.

20.     India had a total of 10 bond issues placed with IFC, amounting to $491 million, until
FY14. Three of those investments were Tier 2 capital bond issues by banks in 2007 in response to
decisions made by the local regulator regarding bank capitalization requirements and options.
Those 3 issues raised a total of $295 million in new capital for the banks, all denominated in US
dollars. Subsequent issues involved both microfinance institutions and real sector clients issuing
bonds split between US dollar and local currency. In addition, in June 2015, IFC has approved
the purchase of an additional two bonds from Indian banks to use the proceeds of its offshore
Masala bond issues - $50 million of Green Bonds from YES Bank, and $100 million of
infrastructure bonds from Axis Bank.




20
                                                                              APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


Appendix 2.3: Bond Market Development and World Bank Group Interventions: IEG
Case Study Countries
VIETNAM
Relevance of Program Objectives and Design

1.     The World Bank Group has had a continuous series of interventions to support bond
market development since FY08, beginning logically with its Bond Market Development
Roadmap in FY08 (WB, $58,000), followed by a ‘flagship’ bond markets project – Vietnam
Capital Markets (FY09-14; $1.3 m) that focused on both the government and corporate bond
markets. While funded largely by an IDA grant as well as by IBRD, implementation was largely
under an IFC advisory service team. The third, follow on project, still underway today, is the
Vietnam Bond Markets Development project. Funded entirely by FIRST ($488,000) and
approved in December 2014; the project is still under implementation. The focus is now again
more narrowly on the government bond market’s current challenges.

2.       Although there was little evident World Bank Group country program guidance or
support, country client levels of commitment were high throughout. The 2004 CPS does not
mention the goal of bond market development intervention; nor does the follow on Progress
Report of 2007. The earlier projects commenced during a time of market uncertainty and
volatility, due to the global financial crisis. And since Vietnam’s first FSAP was concluded only
in 2014, it was only able to inform the last project in this series. Interestingly, the project did not
emerge from a focus on government securities and public debt management, but rather, as a
pragmatic response to pressures in the equity markets, to absorb the high level of savings and
help avoid a valuation bubble.

3.      Accordingly the program of work undertaken was also pragmatic, beginning with the
creation of core institutions and setting of standardized market practices, and was thus
highly relevant to country circumstances. Following the Roadmap, work began with support
for the creation of an institutional platform for steering the agenda – the Vietnam Bond Market
Association (VBMA), now recognized as a serious professional body by market players and
regulators. With the VBMA the project first created a Code of Conduct (2010) on market
practice, a Market Conventions handbook, that standardized operational aspects of bonds
trading (some of which is now reflected in a government regulation e.g. on issuance of
government bonds, methods of calculation of interest rates, etc.). This was followed by the so-
called Back Office Manual (BOM) which actually covers back, middle and some front office
functions. Introduced in 2011, it was piloted at some of Vietnam's largest and most influential
bond market institutions. The VBMA also serves as a mutually valued conduit for dialogue
between the government and the private sector on regulatory and market development issues.
Beginning in 2012, the project also helped the VBMA establish a treasury securities yield curve
by creating a mandatory bidding process among the designated market makers. Quotes are
published to VBMA members and reported through Bloomberg and Thompson.


                                                                                                     21
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


4.      The successor Vietnam Bond Markets Development project drew upon the 2014 FSAP
built programmatically upon the two preceding projects, and reflected strong government
dialogue. It thus exhibited a high level of relevance in its design. It includes both Government
and Corporate securities in its focus. The former includes a toolkit and training for the bond
issuance process; guidelines on developing a primary dealer system for government bonds;
guidelines for the development of new products and techniques (e.g., zero-coupon bonds,
index-linked bonds and when-issued securities) and support for new trading, clearance and
settlement mechanism for government bonds. In the Corporate bond sphere, the project reviews
issuance and approval processes with a particular focus on initial transparency and subsequent
reporting requirements.
Effectiveness: Program Outcomes

5.      IEG finds an increase in the volume of mid to long terms corporate bond issuance that
could be associated with, if not attributed to, World Bank Group interventions. 3 Mid- to long-
term corporate bonds show a relatively steady and sustained increase. Bonds with 5-9 year
maturities rose from almost zero and peaked at $2.7 billion at April 2011 stabilizing at $1.4
billion at December 2013. Bonds with maturities of 10-14 years rose throughout, to a maximum
of $1.6 billion as of December 2013. Yet, the overall corporate bond market segment remains
small.

6.      Although Vietnam’s government securities became more effective over the period
reviewed, the areas of needed improvement - while needing attention - were not defined in
the scope of the World Bank Group intervention. 4 As regards issuance, Vietnam’s government
borrowing patterns were characterized at the beginning of this period, by one observer, as
"ATM finance". When the Ministry needed financing for a certain amount and known maturity,
it placed the securities at bank(s) through "underwriting", as opposed to offering the securities
through auction. Consequently, there were a very large number of offerings per calendar
quarter, which grew through Q2 2007, but the average offering size was small and remained at
around $10 million. There was also a large number of tenors of debt on issue, and unlike other

3 There had been a strong increase in the issuance of corporate bonds from 2005, however peaking in
November 2010 (at $7 billion), with an apparent subsequent decline through December 2013 (to $3.4
billion). However, both the FSAP analysis and IEG interviews suggest that many of these issuances were
loans in the form of bonds, aimed at circumventing supervisory bank lending caps. Further, the narrative
is that the SBV recognized and closed this loophole. This issue is identified and discussed and discussed
in the 2014 FSAP. IEG illustrates the impact of separating out the part of the issuance driven by ‘bonds as
loan substitutes’ assuming these are concentrated in the shorter maturity instrument that correspond to
working capital loans, i.e., less than 5 years. Mid- to long-term corporate bonds show a more steady and
sustained increase.
4 There is credible anecdotal evidence that the Bank’s Resident Mission staff in Hanoi were heavily

involved in discussions with the VN-MoF, with the assistance of the Ministry of Finance of Japan, with
regard to developing the government securities market and a part of this dialogue may be the
underpinning of the initial Roadmap. But this assistance is not well-reflected in the documentation and is
not part of the assessed intervention.


22
                                                                                                                                                         APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


emerging markets, Vietnam did not face a challenge in developing the longer end of its yield
curve. Over the period reviewed, starting from 2007, Vietnam began the process of
consolidating its fragmented issuance pattern, evening out the range of maturities and
beginning to increase use of auction methods rather than direct placement at banks. However it
is difficult for the World Bank Group to claim direct attribution as the focus of its first two
projects was not directly on these aspects of the government debt market. It was not in the
project's remit to engage the Ministry of Finance or the Central Bank on auction methodologies,
public debt management or distribution of tenors. Moreover there are areas of the overall
capital market not covered by the World Bank Group program that could become a bottleneck,
notably the institutional investor segment.

 Appendix 2.3 Figure 1 Vietnam – Domestic Corporate and Government Bond Markets (2005-2013)

          Cumulative Net Issuances of Corporate Bonds                                                                      Corporate Bonds Outstanding - By Tenors
                    Outstanding (Bn VND)                                                                   $8
    160,000                                                                                                $7
    140,000                                                                                                $6                                                                                                                        20+ Yrs
    120,000                                                                                      Billion   $5                                                                                                                        15-19 Yrs
    100,000                                                                                                $4                                                                                                                        10-14 Yrs
     80,000                                                                                                $3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5-9 Yrs
     60,000                                                                                                $2
     40,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                          < 5 Yrs
                                                                                                           $1
     20,000
                                                                                                           $0
          0
                                                                                                                                  Apr-07



                                                                                                                                                             Apr-09



                                                                                                                                                                                        Apr-11



                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Apr-13
                                                                                                                Dec-05
                                                                                                                         Aug-06


                                                                                                                                           Dec-07
                                                                                                                                                    Aug-08


                                                                                                                                                                      Dec-09
                                                                                                                                                                               Aug-10


                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-11
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Aug-12


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dec-13
                Dec-05

                         Dec-06

                                  Dec-07

                                           Dec-08

                                                    Dec-09

                                                             Dec-10

                                                                      Dec-11

                                                                               Dec-12

                                                                                        Dec-13




             Government Bonds - Numbers of                                                                          Government Bonds: Auction Methdologies
           Treasuries Issuances and Average Size                                                       50
    70                                                                                    50
    60                                                                                                 40
                                                                                          40
    50                                                                                                 30
         US$m




    40                                                                                    30
    30
                                                                                                       20
                                                                                          20
    20                                                                                                 10
                                                                                          10
    10
                                                                                                           0
     0                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                Q2 2002
                                                                                                                Q4 2002
                                                                                                                Q2 2003
                                                                                                                Q4 2003
                                                                                                                Q2 2004
                                                                                                                Q4 2004
                                                                                                                Q2 2005
                                                                                                                Q4 1005
                                                                                                                Q2 2006
                                                                                                                Q4 2006
                                                                                                                Q2 2007
                                                                                                                Q4 2007
                                                                                                                Q2 2008
                                                                                                                Q4 2008
                                                                                                                Q2 2009
                                                                                                                Q4 2009
                                                                                                                Q2 2010
                                                                                                                Q4 2010
                                                                                                                Q2 2011
         Q2 2002
         Q4 2002
         Q2 2003
         Q4 2003
         Q2 2004
         Q4 2004
         Q2 2005
         Q4 1005
         Q2 2006
         Q4 2006
         Q2 2007
         Q4 2007
         Q2 2008
         Q4 2008
         Q2 2009
         Q4 2009
         Q2 2010
         Q4 2010
         Q2 2011




                                                                                                                # of Direct Placements                                     # of Auctions                            Unspecifed
                     Number of Issuances                     Average Issuance Size

 Sources: Vietnam Bond Market Association; IEG.


KENYA
Relevance of Program Objectives and Design




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        23
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


7.      Macroeconomic conditions in Kenya were reasonably amenable to bond market
development interventions and two country specific and one regional FSAP provided
underlying diagnostic guidance to World Bank Group’s menu of interventions. Kenya
enjoyed modest growth, only moderate inflation, stable government borrowings, though
somewhat volatile interest rates. Both government and non-government bond market
development received considerable focused attention from the World Bank Group, although
often embedded in broader programs of financial sector and capital market development,
especially in a series of multi-component loans (FY05-FY15). 5 These were complemented by a
series of GEMLOC (FY11-13) and ESMID (FY06-FY14) programs, as well as support from
FABDM on debt management. IEG estimates suggest around half of World Bank Group outlays
on capital markets development in Kenya focused directly on debt markets, with additional
large elements embedded in the areas of regulatory infrastructure development and the use of
bonds for the real sector.

8.       Country demand for the World Bank Group bond market intervention programs has
been evident since inception and has grown since then. The government’s first Medium Term
Plan (MTP) of 2008-12 had the development of efficient and transparent capital markets as one
of its objectives, and the second MTP of 2013-2017 explicitly specified developing the
government debt market, and the “consolidation of Government bonds.” However, there has
been uncertain support from the Debt Management Office in the National Treasury.

9.      As in Vietnam, recognition of this work in CASs/CPSs increased in the later part of
the review period, explicitly in both the 2010-2013 and 2014-2018 CPSs, and two country-
specific FSAPs provided guidance on design. 6 The FSAP 2004 pointed to the need for a debt
management framework, better coordination between the Ministry of Finance debt
management unit and the Central Bank, the need for a secondary market in government
securities, as well as a strengthened central securities depository. Building on this, the FSAP of
2010 called for improvements in the issuance, listing and trading frameworks, with clearer




5 Beginning with the Financial and Legal Sector technical assistance project in 2005 (FSLTAP);
Infrastructure Finance / PPP project of 2013 (IFPPP); the Second Generation Financial Deepening and
Development project (2015) and the Financial Sector Strengthening Project (FSSP, 2015). There were three
GEMLOC projects and two core plus around 5 ESMID (including ESMID East Africa) projects that also
provided support to Kenya. FABDM support is documented in
(http://treasury.worldbank.org/bdm/htm/CaseStudies.html): And bond market support elements are
also embedded in other projects, e.g., a sub-national technical assistance project (P145004) for the Kenya
Roads Board (KRB) and the Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS) to raise local currency debt finance through the
issuance of bonds, and in regional capital market development programs.
6 The CPS 2010-2013 referred to the goal of deepening capital markets by raising institutional capital and

expanding bond and equity markets. The CPS 2014-2018 stated that World Bank advisory services will
focus on strengthening capital markets through support to the Central Bank and Capital Markets
Authority as well as in developing corporate bond markets and county-level pension schemes, mortgage
markets, and financial sector regionalization in the East African Community.


24
                                                                          APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


benchmark issues, and on the investor side, for non-government bonds, increased knowledge
and capacity on to facilitate investments in this asset class.

10.    The Bank’s latter lending projects reflected and went beyond the FSAP
recommendations, as did the GEMLOC and ESMID programs. GEMLOC also included a
more detailed Roadmap, a series of actions for the enhancement of the secondary market for
government debt, and an innovative Treasury Mobile Direct program for retail government
debt. ESMID inter alia provided practical support to non-government bond market
development by seeking to enhance transparency, trading and liquidity in the secondary
market, developing trading reporting systems and rules for the market.
Effectiveness: Program Outcomes

11.     Many advances in the government bond market may reasonably be viewed as being
the impact, in part, of World Bank Group interventions in the market, though challenges
remain. The government bond market supported an increase in the amount of debt outstanding
as a percentage of GDP, from negligible levels at the start of the millennium and less than 4
percent in 2004 to a peak of 16 percent in 2013, with a parallel improvement in debt structure
and efficiency of issuance. Average auction size steadily increased, (lowering issue costs)
average maturity has progressively lengthened and there has been growing diversity of
maturities of government bonds issued (lowering rollover risk). Moreover from the proportion
of foreign currency debt of almost two thirds, the present ratio is reportedly just over 50 percent
(reducing foreign exchange rate risk). The number of active bond traders has grown from two to
10, and the types of market participants have expanded to include agents who intermediate
between brokers and small financial institutions, and fund managers (increasing liquidity and
increasing investors). And improved trading, clearance and settlement mean that 80 percent of
bond transactions are now settled in a day, compared to up to two weeks a decade before that.
Notwithstanding these advances, liquidity remains low and a reliable yield curve for the
government bond market is yet to be developed. Bond issuance is still erratic, sometimes with
rumored price collusion and critical uncertainty remains about the relative roles of the central
Bank and the Public Debt Management Office in the National Treasury.

12.     Cumulative corporate bond issuance grew tenfold, from $100m in 2007, prior to the
World Bank Group ESMID program, to almost $1,120m in 2013, and the World Bank Group
clearly served as a catalyst. Although much of the increase in 2009, was driven by two large
issues, there was also an increase in the total number of issues. Around seven were supported
by ESMID, and one issue, of around $100m, is directly ascribed to the ESMID program. But
more significant, ESMID supported regulatory reforms (e.g., significantly, support for a new
Securities Industry Act, where ESMID helped frame the section on non-government bonds,
introducing a more flexible issuance regime targeting institutional investors and moving




                                                                                                25
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


toward principles-based regulation) that paved the way for an overall increase in corporate
bond issuance, and reductions in time taken for approvals from 270 days to 45 days. 7




    Appendix 2.3 Figure 2 Kenya – Domestic Government Bond Market (1999-2014)


                              Kenya: Government Debt Outstanding                                                                                                   Kenya: Government Debt Average Issuance
                                                                                                                                                                               Size (KES billion)
      20                                                                                                                                      1,000
                                                                                                                                              800           25
      15
                                                                                                                                              600           20
      10
                                                                                                                                              400           15
        5
                                                                                                                                              200
                                                                                                                                                            10
        0                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                            5
             Dec-98
             Dec-99
             Dec-00
             Dec-01
             Dec-02
             Dec-03
             Dec-04
             Dec-05
             Dec-06
             Dec-07
             Dec-08
             Dec-09
             Dec-10
             Dec-11
             Dec-12
             Dec-13
             Dec-14




                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                                                 1999
                                                                                                                                                                 2000
                                                                                                                                                                 2001
                                                                                                                                                                 2002
                                                                                                                                                                 2003
                                                                                                                                                                 2004
                                                                                                                                                                 2005
                                                                                                                                                                 2006
                                                                                                                                                                 2007
                                                                                                                                                                 2008
                                                                                                                                                                 2009
                                                                                                                                                                 2010
                                                                                                                                                                 2011
                                                                                                                                                                 2012
                                                                                                                                                                 2013
                                                                                                                                                                 2014
                                                                                                                                                                 2015
                                  Total (%GDP, LHS)                                                   Total (KES BN, RHS)



                      Kenya: Average Maturity of Government                                                                                                          Kenya: Government Debt Outstanding by
                                   Debt Issues                                                                                                                                 Maturity (KES BN)
                                                                                                                                                             800
                                                                                                                                                             700
      9
                                                                                                                                                             600
      8                                                                                                                                                      500
      7                                                                                                                                                      400
      6                                                                                                                                                      300
      5                                                                                                                                                      200
      4                                                                                                                                                      100
      3                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                   Dec-99
                                                                                                                                                                            Dec-00
                                                                                                                                                                                     Dec-01
                                                                                                                                                                                              Dec-02
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Dec-03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec-04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dec-05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dec-06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dec-07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dec-08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dec-10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dec-11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dec-12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dec-14
      2
      1
      0
                                                                                                                                                                   <1 yr                       1-2 yr                      2-3 yr                       3-4 yr                          4-5 yr
            Dec-99
                     Dec-00
                              Dec-01
                                       Dec-02
                                                Dec-03
                                                         Dec-04
                                                                  Dec-05
                                                                           Dec-06
                                                                                    Dec-07
                                                                                             Dec-08
                                                                                                      Dec-09
                                                                                                               Dec-10
                                                                                                                        Dec-11
                                                                                                                                 Dec-12
                                                                                                                                          Dec-13
                                                                                                                                                   Dec-14




                                                                                                                                                                   5-7 yr                      7-10 yr                     10-20 yr                     >20 yr

    Sources: IEG, Bloomberg.

13.    Nevertheless, major challenges inevitably still lie ahead, demonstrating the need for
sustained long term engagement, despite very successful support from the World Bank
Group. It is difficult for corporates to compete with a very liquid banking sector that can
sometimes provide rates below sovereign to domestic blue chips. Rates on government debt are
so high that it can sometimes crowd out non-government issuers. There is limited appreciation,
among investors, of the risk-reward tradeoff, and there is poor corporate governance at some



7   Carana Corporation report (2009).


26
                                                                               APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


potential issuers, including parastatals. Finally, there is a lack of clarity about the tax treatment
of a range of securities.

INDIA
Relevance of Program Objectives and Design

14.     The WB worked with the Indian government largely in an advisory capacity, in
response to ad hoc requests made by the Ministry of Finance. It undertook some significant
work between 2004 and 2006, albeit in narrowly defined areas of bond market development.
After around 2009, the pace of engagement slowed down. The WB’s 2006 review of the Indian
corporate bond market reflected a comprehensive understanding of relevant issues for
corporate bond market reform, though its recommendations focused primarily, based on
government request, on issues pertaining to regulation and market microstructure. 8 The report
tangentially alluded to underlying structural constraints in the financial system that impacted
upon corporate bond market development, notably, the limited depth of the government bond
market and the absence of a well-defined yield curve. Within its scope and sphere, the study
has been recognized by market participants as a quality contribution that influenced internal
government decision committees on corporate bond market development.9

15.     However the WB did not work to both IBRDengage the government on the full
spectrum of issues affecting the corporate bond market, and did not take up more
fundamental issues underlying the government bond market, although these had been
pointed out in India’s first and second FSAPs (2001 and 2013). The World Bank Group may
have been limited in its ‘space’ for dialogue on these issues, given that the government tended
to rely on its own internal committees in critical areas. These issues refer to the ‘placement’ of a
large part of government debt within a banking system that was required to hold a significant
part of its government bonds to meet mandatory liquidity requirements, without ‘marking-to-
market’ with consequent ‘crowding out’ impact on corporate bonds. 10 In light of these ground
realities, it appears that the WB work on developing the Corporate Debt market in India may
have been premature, without a significant commitment from the government to contain its
fiscal deficits, moderate inflation, and move to a more market based mechanism for the issuance
of government debt.

16.  The FSAPs also pointed out the conflicts between the role of the central bank as the
manager of government debt, and implied conflicts of interest with monetary policy. The


8 Thus it highlighted, e.g., issues such as the high costs and time for issuance, poor transparency and
disclosure, limited credit information, lack of clarity on regulatory oversight for corporate bonds, poor
enforcement of creditor rights, and the limited development of hedging instruments.
9 Finance Ministry of Government of India (2005). Report of High Level Expert Committee on Corporate

Bonds and Securitization (Patil Committee). New Delhi. http://finmin.nic.in/reports/Report-Expert.pdf
10 Statutory Liquidity Requirements and Cash Reserve Requirements. See e.g., Ila Patnaik, Indian Express,

20 February 2009.


                                                                                                      27
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


World Bank attempted to provide technical advice to the Government of India for debt
management, and organized a conference on this theme in 2008, in which the Treasury
participated. 11 The conference discussed how India could transition from central bank oversight
to an independent public debt management agency. The issue remains unresolved, although it
has come to fore once again in 2015.

17.     Likely reflecting limited government demand, the findings of India’s FSAPs were
poorly reflected in its Country Assistance Strategies. There was sporadic, but limited, mention
of work in the bond market area specifically. The 2001 to 2004 CAS noted that India's capital
markets are deep for a low income country, but observed that the country's long-term debt
market was underdeveloped. It mentioned that World Bank Group would work with the
government on selected areas of capital markets supervision and regulation, with no direct
allusion to the corporate bond market report. The 2005 to 2008 CAS made little mention of
capital markets development, although it noted that the Indian authorities have increasingly
drawn on “just-in-time” support from World Bank staff to provide informal, but technically
demanding in puts into important national High Level committees. 12 The most recent Country
Partnership Strategy for India for FY2013 to 2017 noted broadly that World Bank Group would
explore the possibility of strengthening India's capital markets, developing a long-term
corporate bond market and enabling securitization of assets.
Effectiveness: Program Outcomes

18.     Following WB interventions, there appears to have been some increase in the
proportion of small corporations in the Indian corporate bond market. Appendix 2.3 Figure 3
suggests some decrease in the share of the largest corporations, in terms of the numbers of
issuances. However, banks and financial institutions continue to dominate issuance and real
sector issuers are few. The maturity structure of corporate bonds on issue has not changed
noticeably, and the overall impact on patterns of corporate finance in India, even for the larger
firms, appears to be negligible. 13 Overall, it appears that the relevance of World Bank Group
bond market development advisory interventions in India was necessarily limited by their
scope. Although individual interventions were of good quality, the World Bank Group did not
have adequate engagement with dialogue in this area to go into fundamental underlying
aspects.




11 The Ministry of Finance formed an Internal Working Group (the Jahangir Aziz Committee) to
determine how best to move forward on establishing an independent Debt Management Office (2008).
http://finmin.nic.in/reports/Report_Internal_Working_Group_on_Debt_Management.pdf
12 This CAS indicated that the Bank and IFC may issue Indian rupee bonds, which would contribute to

the development of the long-term bond market. These are discussed in Part III of the present chapter.
13 Data on sources of funds are from the Center for the Monitoring of the Indian Economy, which focuses

on large and medium enterprises.


28
                                                                                                   APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2




 Appendix 2.3 Figure 3 India – The Domestic Corporate Bond Market
                       India Corporate Bond Issues:                        India Corporate Bonds Outstanding by Local
      2,500                                                   50
                Numbers of Issues / Shares of Top Ten Issuers                                 Entities
                                                                                         (Trillion Rupee)
      2,000                                                      40   15


      1,500                                                      30
                                                                      10
      1,000                                                      20
                                                                       5
        500                                                      10

          -                                                      -     0
              200420052006200720082009201020112012201320142015
                                                                        2003      2005    2007     2009       2011   2013

                       Total Corporate Bond Issuance (LHS)
                                                                           Bank     Financial    Industrial     Service     Utility
                       Top 10 Corporate Share (RHS)

   Sources of Funds for Indian Companies (2000-2011)
                                                                               India Corporate Bonds Average Maturity
                                                                                               (Years)

                                                                      8

                                                                      6

                                                                      4

                                                                      2

                                                                      0
                                                                       2003       2005   2007     2009        2011   2013

                                                                                         Overall Average Maturity
                                                                                         Local Issuer Average Maturity


  Sources: Banerji et. al, 2011, Bloomberg, IEG.




COLOMBIA AND MOROCCO
Morocco

19.     IEG’s field visits also included Morocco and Colombia, and in the former, there were
unusually limited reference to bond market related issues in early FSAPs. The Morocco
FSAPs of 2003 and 2008 noted the vast crowding out of corporate debt by government bond
issues, and recommended improvements in the government debt issuance process. The 2008
FSAP described some improvements, though the market still fell short of creating benchmarks



                                                                                                                                      29
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


for a yield curve. A third FSAP, in 2015, has still to be finalized though drafts suggest it may
have a bond market recommendation, for electronic trading of government bonds.

20.     Despite the limited reference to bond market development in the FSAPs, a bond
market development program took shape, based on a 2011 FIRST program, and a closely
related 2012 GEMLOC intervention. These followed the early FSAP observations and provided
advice – and impetus – to the government on how to improve debt management and develop a
reliable benchmark through better issuance timing. The 2011 FIRST project also included the
design of a money market reference rate. Morocco’s ongoing series of DPLs then put in place
targets for issuance activity in line with the recommendations from the FIRST advisory work, in
the 2012 DPL. These included both improved issuance plans as well as the design of a
secondary market architecture. A subsequent DPL (2014) includes further details on secondary
markets through conditions on primary dealers. 14 There was little coverage of corporate bonds
although the 2010 FIRST operation provided for support for legislation on covered bonds
(introduced as a policy action in the 2010 DPL) as well as Sukuk bonds and interest rate
derivatives.

21.     Although evidence is limited, it appears that the advisory work on developing the
government yield curve has had the intended impact on the market. The completion report of
the 2012 DPL describes an increase in the share of medium and long-term government debt
issues to 36 percent, up from just 5 percent in 2008. Tenors of Treasury bills are reported to have
decreased from 170 (2008) to 115 days (indicating reduced fragmentation). IEG interviews with
both the government debt management office and with primary dealers confirm that the FIRST
program has fundamentally changed the issuance process and resulted in a well-regarded and
well-established issuance process that is better for both the issuer and for investors. Meanwhile,
implementation of the electronic quotation system is in process, and its use is expected to
increase with more specific requirements for primary dealers (as required in the 2014 DPL).
Overall, Morocco represents an example of a relevant and so far effective program, developed
largely through a range of Bank advisory instruments (GEMLOC, FIRST) that have contributed
toward detailed DPL design. It also demonstrates the time that such programs can take and the
need for sustained engagement over a long period of time.
Colombia

22.     The World Bank Group extended sustained support to Colombia on a broad front for
building financial markets, with a special emphasis, in recent years, on bond market
development for infrastructure finance and now with its comprehensive “Deep Dive”
initiative. Underpinned by two FSAPs in 2005 and 2012, and explicitly supported by
Colombia’s Country Partnership Strategies of 2002, 2008 and 2011, the program of financial
market development was continuously reflected in broadbased policy lending (2005, 2006, 2007,

14The 2014 DPL Results matrix required primary dealers to quote continuous and tradable prices for
government bonds; with the expected result to be observed in Bloomberg.


30
                                                                               APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


2010, 2013 and 2015). And both IBRD and IFC have issued bonds in Colombian peso, locally
and offshore, for their own funding requirements. World Bank Group’s approach toward
Colombia’s bond market development was thus more than usually integrated in a broader
financial sector and capital market context, relative to other countries. Although the 2005 and
2012 FSAPs did not raise major issues with the government bond market, noting its sound
primary and secondary structure, they noted the need to improve liquidity. Issues were also
noted in the related areas of money market development and the links between debt
management and debt markets. Colombia’s 2005 2nd Programmatic FSAL noted that the
“regular issuance program of domestic government securities and their increased trading leads
to a reliable estimate of the yield curve” and its policy loans of 2006 and 2007 referred primarily
to the need to strengthen money markets and secondary government debt markets. These were
followed by further support to strengthen money markets through FIRST (2007). Public debt
management was supported through a SECO-funded Debt Management department
intervention (2013), and reflected in the 2nd Programmatic Fiscal loan of 2013, that called for
higher efficiency of debt and cash management. The inclusion of such areas in the scope of
policy loans, especially in the relatively sophisticated environment of Colombia, likely reflects
the government’s own reform agenda, as much as Bank guidance.

23.     The World Bank Group’s core focus of support for corporate bond market
development was reflected in a series of interventions under the SECO-financed ESMID
program (2011-2014) extended in the context of large scale infrastructure finance, especially
for the ‘4G’ concessions. Colombia’s ambitious program for a network of ‘fourth generation’
toll highways has been a key theme of the government, which has sought support through
targeted infrastructure project bonds. Both FSAPs noted the generally lagging corporate bond
market, with its high issuance costs (partly due to a financial transactions tax), limited investor
appetite for all but the most highly rated paper, and constraints on institutional investors’
portfolios.

24.     In terms of results of World Bank Group interventions for government bond market
development, there has been some progress, mainly on the regulatory front. In the areas
related to government bond market development, FABDM’s work with the Debt Management
Department led to a consolidation toward benchmark issuance and the publishing of an auction
calendar. The WB also helped facilitate development of the money market by helping create a
reference rate (the IBR) and encouraging better cooperation between the Central Bank and the
Debt Management Department, including communication and unification of short term debt
instruments. 15
25.   Results, especially on the regulatory front, are also noted in the area of the ESMID
program, for corporate bonds. They include (as noted in the 2015 Sustained Growth DPL)


 Yet challenges remain in terms of the ability of money markets to provide adequate liquidity for capital
15

markets (FSAP 2012, IMF Article IV consultation, June 2015).


                                                                                                       31
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


expanded issuer and investor access to capital markets through better mutual fund guidelines
and stronger custodial arrangements. A significant outcome for the overall corporate bond
market, supported by the WB, was a simplified alternative issuance platform for corporate
bonds as well as equities. 16 However while the regulations are now in place, there has been
limited issuance under this new hybrid regime so far. 17 Meanwhile, the government’s
previously approved phase-out of the financial transactions tax by 2018 has now been set back
to 2022. The World Bank Group also tried to support revised pension sector policies (with
FIRST support, 2014) including the establishment of “Multifondos”, various pension investment
schemes of different risk levels; easing pension fund investment in corporate bonds and lower
rated paper. Investment limits were raised to 10 percent through infrastructure focused private
equity funds and a further 10 percent in specific project bonds for the 4G Concession Program.
However incentives for the pension funds remain poor. As an asset class, the appetite for
corporate bonds in Colombia, especially those below investment grade, is limited.

26.     On the transactions side, results are not conclusive, as it is still too early to know the
outcomes. The ESMID program’s indicators for regulatory reform were largely met, but the
ones related to transactions were not, due to delays in timing. ESMID had some success with
helping “Credifamilia” issue a bond through the new hybrid platform, but there have been
more difficulties with the infrastructure sector. World Bank Group supported the rating of an
infrastructure bond by Fitch, which was awarded a rating of AA+ for a senior tranche, after
including a partial credit guarantee from the National Development Fund (FDN), for up to 15
percent of the value of the bond, thus meeting the AA threshold for most local investors. No
project bonds have been issued yet, but it seems likely to happen once the second round of 4G
concessions come to market. 18

27.     Overall, World Bank Group’s objectives related to Colombia’s bond market have
been partially met. It could be argued that the agenda was intrinsically more difficult.
Government bond markets were already quite developed. World Bank Group Treasury bonds
in Colombian peso were issued largely for their own funding needs, and cannot be said to have
shaped or significantly influenced local markets. Issues facing corporate bonds are complex and
involve broadbased actions on a number of fronts including investors and the tax regime,
against the backdrop of an economy dominated by financial conglomerates. Important
incremental steps have been achieved under ESMID toward capital market financing of
infrastructure investment, but it is too early to determine outcomes in this area as it is a recent
priority and the transactional focus will be sustainable only if market conditions support
corporate bond finance. IFC has had a major impact on the government’s push for increased

16 Referred to as the ‘Segundo Mercado’, the scheme provides for simplified listing for newer companies,

and resembles well-known US SEC ‘Section 144a’ investment provisions only available for qualified
institutional buyers.
17 Although IFC and a client (Bancamia) are supporting the initiative. IFC Treasury is also planning to

issue a local currency bond,under its Global Medium Term Notes program, through this mechanism.
18 Discussed further in Chapter 6, on support to real sector finance.




32
                                                                        APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


capital market financing for infrastructure investment, primarily through its equity investment
in FDN. However, FDN is yet to provide any infrastructure financing for 4G concessions. The
design of the World Bank Group program in Colombia, rather than focusing broadly on
improving the corporate market, made a concentrated bet on bond financing for real sector
investments, especially through the ESMID program, and through considerable support for the
public sector’s National Development Fund. It remains to be seen whether such an approach is
successful or sustainable.




                                                                                             33
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


Appendix 2.4: Monitoring Local Debt Markets: Notes on FinDebt and Bloomberg

1.     During the course of the Capital Markets Evaluation, the evaluation team built a
database of bond issues across the case study countries (Colombia, India, Kenya, Morocco,
Nigeria, and Vietnam) including Nigeria, where a mini-mission was conducted; using data from
Bloomberg, both for government as a well as corporate issuance. When FinDebt’s Global Bond
database was first published in 2015, the team tried to use this more readily available data but
found significant differences that prompted a more detailed comparison.

2.     Looking at the local currency government bond markets, Bloomberg’s data has more
issues and a greater volume in each market during the period under review, 2004 through
2014. Though data on the corporate side is closer, the conclusion is similar.
Appendix 2.4 Figure 1 Local Currency Government Bonds, 2004 through 2014, FinDebt vs Bloomberg

                          FinDebt            Bloomberg            FinDebt              Bloomberg
                           US$m                US$m             Nos. of Issues        Nos. of Issues

 Colombia                  6,060              110,400                18                    42
 India                    186,560            1,350,345               207                   913
 Kenya                       0                 14,651                 0                    118
 Morocco                     0                 60,877                 0                    123
 Nigeria                  34,187               55,562                189                   63
 Vietnam                    127                34,288                 5                    452
Source: IEG

Appendix 2.4 Figure 2 Local Currency Corporate Bonds, 2004 - 2014, FinDebt vs Bloomberg

                        FinDebt             Bloomberg             FinDebt              Bloomberg
                         US$m                 US$m              Nos. of Issues        Nos. of Issues

 Colombia                24,809              30,637                  72                   983
 India                   307,529             383,761                 291                  7371
 Morocco                   631                8,400                   4                   184
 Nigeria                  1,011               5,331                   7                   197
 Vietnam                  3,198               8,535                  33                   153
Source: IEG

3.      Regarding corporate bonds, and unlike government bonds, the total value of bond
issues, in some markets, is close across the two data sources, but the number of bonds issued
is quite different. One possible explanation is FinDebt may be counting slightly different
tranches (Regulation S vs 144A for example) 19 or reopenings of previous issuance as only one
bond whereas Bloomberg may be counting them twice. Also, currency conversions can lead to

19Regulation S provides for exemption from registration for certain offerings made outside the United
States; the SEC’s Rule 144A eases requirements for privately placed securities by permitting only
Qualified Institutional Byuers to trade these positions among themselves. RegS and 144A Bonds are
generally assigned two separate sets of securities identification codes.


34
                                                                          APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


small discrepancies in the US Dollar value since the database constructed from Bloomberg data
uses the exchange rate at the end of the month to convert the amount issued in local currency to
dollars, which may be different from the method used by FinDebt.

4.      A bigger complication is the filters used and different types of classification, which
make it difficult to be sure the same types of bonds are isolated from each database. The type
of issuer was identified in FinDebt by Borrower Type with government bonds classified as
Public – Local whereas corporate bonds were classified as either Non-Public and Public – Other.
In both cases, Local Currency, both Domestic and Cross-Border issues are included.
Government bonds in Bloomberg were identified by Ticker while corporate bonds were
identified by currency and then government bonds were netted out.

5.     Since issue level data is not available from FinDebt, a deeper investigation into the
cause of these differences is difficult. There clearly are advantages to using FinDebt vs
Bloomberg, specifically that it is readily available to anyone with the World Bank Group
whereas Bloomberg terminals are limited. In the end, perhaps the most pertinent advice comes
from IOSCO’s 2014 report on corporate bond issuance, “Individually, these data sources
provide only partial information and so the authors have combined data sources where
appropriate to create as complete a dataset as possible.” 20




 Rohini Tendulkar and Gigi Hancock, “Corporate Bond Markets: A Global Perspective, Volume 1”
20

OICV-IOSCO, April 2014.


                                                                                               35
                                                                                                 APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2



Appendix 2.5: Experience of Other MDBs in Local Currency Financing

 Appendix 2.5 Box 1 Local Currency Bond Issues by Multilateral Development Banks
 Prior to 1970, Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) met their funding requirements exclusively through the issuance of
 bonds and derivatives denominated in currencies of United States, United Kingdom and European countries. IBRD and ADB
 then began issuing Yen denominated bonds in the emerging Japanese market (Samurai Bonds), later expanding to bonds in
 the currencies of Hong Kong SAR, China, Taiwan, China, and South Korea. Some of these, especially the Hong Kong
 currency issues, were off-shore, in major financial centers (New York, London and Tokyo) and were not subject to the
 regulatory controls associated with issuing in the on-shore markets of the concerned countries. Gradualy the spectrum of
 “non-core currencies” expanded. IBRD was the largest issuer followed by the EIB. The IDB did not issue any local currency
 bonds until its global (off-shore) Mexican Peso bond in 2005. EBRD has been active in issuing local currency bonds in
 Eastern European countries since its inception and it has a clear mandate in its Charter to support local capital market
 development. The primary aim of all MDB Treasuries is to raise funds on the most cost effective basis, and most do not take
 on foreign exchange risks.However, as IFC and EBRD have a mandate to assist the private sector and this can involve
 investing and lending in local currency without government guarantees within internal prudential financial limits.

 Support for local bond market development and local currency financial markets grew after the 1995 Mexican crisis, the
 Russian default in 1996 and the 1997 Asian financial crisis. Currency and maturity mismatches in Asian countries led to
 massive defaults in their corporate and banking sectors, forcing them to issue large volumes of government bonds for banking
 and corporate restructuring. The need to develop local capital markets, especially bond markets, to avoid future crisis became
 apparent and concerted efforts were made by their governments individually and collectively to develop these markets
 through the Asian Bond Market Initiative (ABMI) which included ASEAN countries, China, Japan and Korea (also known as
 ASEAN+3), under the aegis of ADB. Several working groups were set up to address regulatory and infrastructure
 impediments that were holding back development of these markets. One of the recommendations of the ASEAN+3 initiatives
 was to encourage MDBs to issue their bonds in these markets as a good role model for others issuers.
 Sources: IEG, IFC (2004), Garcia and Dalla(2005), Wolf-Hammacher(2007), EBRD (2013), Hoschka (2005)

1.      Among other MDBs, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)
and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) are relatively active local currency bond issuers. The
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and the African Development Bank (AfDB) have thus
far concentrated largely on issuing bonds in non-core including emerging market currencies on
a fully hedged basis, mainly through currency swaps. 21 EBRD has been active in this area since
its inception as most of its client countries were transition economies with rudimentary
financial systems and building domestic financial markets is a part of its mandate. EBRD also
lends to private sector and has a financial profile similar to IFC. It has a low gearing ratio and
callable capital from its shareholders, which could arguably help it to take prudent risks,
though this eventuality tends to be discounted by rating agencies and is not taken into account
by EBRD itself. IFC has the ability to take some risks, and a well-diversified portfolio, though no
callable capital (for what it is worth) unlike EBRD. ADB became involved in local currency



21
  Although, in 2014, the African Development Bank established a program for issuance of US$ 1 billion
in Medium Term Notes in Nigeria. The AfDB’s first issue raised around US$80 billion with a 7-year
bond, issued at a discount of about 75 bps below the comparable reference point on the government yield
curve. It was the longest maturity instrument in its asset class to be introduced to the Nigerian market.




                                                                                                                               37
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


operations following the Asian crisis of 1997 with devaluation of the Thai Baht. ADB acts as the
secretariat of the ASEAN+3; a joint initiative of ASEAN countries plus China, Japan and Korea.
The ASEAN+3 group has been at the forefront in building bond markets in the ASEAN+3
countries by addressing impediments both on demand and supply sides through several
committees that address policy, structural and market related issues that impede development
of local currency bond markets.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)

2.      The Articles of Agreement establishing the EBRD includes an article which mandates it
to stimulate and encourage the development of capital markets (Agreement Establishing the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, (Chapter 1, Article 2. Functions). As a
result, EBRD has been active in assisting its member countries in developing domestic capital
markets through investment operations and advisory works. Its capital market development
program through local currency bond issues is closely associated with its local currency lending
program, first launched in 1999, following the 1997 Asian financial crisis, which clearly
demonstrated the risk of currency and maturity mismatch.
3.       Local Currency Lending Program (Phase 1). During 2000-2010, EBRD approved 93 loans
denominated in 16 local currencies amounting to €4.8 billion, or about 10 percent of its total
loans. 22 Since financial markets in most of its countries were “dollarized”, EBRD concentrated
its investment operations in countries which were less dollarized and its operations by value
were concentrated in Russia (45%), Poland (20%) and the Czech Republic (4%). During this
phase, EBRD also issued several bonds in domestic markets with Russia accounting for a major
share. Since borrowing in foreign currencies was much cheaper than in local currencies, about
ninety percent of EBRD’s clients borrowed in foreign currencies. As a result, a large number of
EBRD’s client countries and clients were badly hit by the 2008 global financial crisis. The
financial crisis exposed two serious shortcomings in the region’s economies: excessive reliance
on foreign capital and excessive use of foreign exchange borrowing.
4.       Consequently, in May 2010, EBRD launched Local Currency and Local Capital Markets
Initiative (Phase 2). A new Capital Market Development Department dedicated to local
currency lending was created in the treasury department. EBRD lending in local currencies has
steadily increased and stood at Euro 7.2 billion the end of January 2015. The Phase 2 (LC2)
initiative focuses efforts to increase the share of EBRD investments in local currencies and to
identify and support sequenced reforms in local currency markets across five major themes:

      •   Building stable and sustainable macroeconomic frameworks
      •   Improving the legal and regulatory environment to support capital market activity
      •   Developing financial market infrastructure including clearing and settlement
      •   Developing the institutional investor base


22   EBRD (2013) Local Currency and Capital Markets Development


38
                                                                                  APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


     •   Promoting a more efficient transaction environment and expanded product range.

5.      Early Transition Countries (ETCs) Local Currency Program. In 2011, EBRD set up a local
currency program for early transition countries (http://www.ebrd.com/what-we-do/sectors-
and-topics/local-currency-early-transition-countries.html). The US$320 million program was
set up by EBRD and its donors to address over-reliance on foreign exchange financing in the
ETCs, exacerbated by the lack of conventional sources of local currency funding. 23 To address
this problem and to support the development of local capital markets in the ETCs, EBRD
provides local currency loans through procuring local currency funding or hedging, by entering
into currency swaps with third party providers, such as the Currency Exchange Fund called
TCX. However, the differential between funding/hedging in foreign currency (US dollars or
euros) and local currencies in these emerging markets is very high. As a result, local currency
interest rates are too high for small and medium-sized enterprises. To reduce interest rates on
local currency loans, EBRD and donors have entered into a risk-sharing arrangement, which
allows for affordable interest rates. The current size of risk sharing fund is US$ 37 million.
6.      Under this program, local currency loans are made available to small and medium
clients only in those countries that have explicitly committed to improving their policy and
regulatory framework and to introducing primary elements of a domestic capital market.
Governments of six countries (Armenia, Georgia, the Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Mongolia
and Tajikistan) have made such a commitment by entering into a Memorandum of
Understanding with EBRD. EBRD and the countries review on a regular basis the progress with
reforms and improvements in local capital markets, and whether funding conditions have
improved to the extent that the program is no longer required in the country. The ETC Local
Currency Program has already supported US$ 185 million of local currency loans, which have
been on-lent to around 81,000 micro, small and medium-sized sub-borrowers.
7.      In addition to lending and providing financial solutions, EBRD also offer extensive
advisory services some with internal budgetary resources and some with donor support,
especially in new member countries and transition countries. The new department has
conducted first assessments (of capital markets and financial sector) for about 20 countries,
sometimes joint with other IFIs. These assessments cover payments and settlement systems and
institutional investors. Findings of these assessments and other associated technical supports
are then used as a basis for investment program in these countries.

8.     In some countries, EBRD has played a lead role in helping its client countries build basic
financial market infrastructures that are required for development of capital market. In Russia,
EBRD help established the Ruble Overnight Index Average (RUONIA), which is a money


23Especially in low-income ETCs small and medium businesses often borrow in foreign currency while
selling their goods and services in local currency, due to the low nominal interest rates of foreign
borrowing. This practice has led to increase in currency risks for borrowers and to systemic risks for their
financial sectors.


                                                                                                          39
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


market index. RUONIA is an effective overnight interest rate computed by the Central Bank of
Russia (CBR) as a weighted of overnight unsecured lending transactions entered into by banks
with high credit quality. RUONIA is used by the CBR for internal benchmarking purposes as
well as by market participants for pricing of Overnight Index Swaps.
9.      In April 2005, EBRD helped National Foreign Exchange Association (NFEA) of Russia
launched a new Ruble money-market reference rate- the Moscow Prime Offered Rate
(MosPrime Rate). 24 MosPrime is the yield for money-market time deposits offered by first-tier
banks in the Russian market to financial institutions of comparable credit standing. MosPrime is
calculated daily for O/N, 1W, 2W, 1M, 2M, 3M, and 6M tenors provided by thirteen contributor
banks. A minimum of six banks contribute reference rates, and are selected on the basis of
reputation, credit standing, scale of activity and experience in the Russian money-market. The
development of a credible money-market index enables (i) greater pricing transparency and
consistency in the pricing of all MosPrime linked loans; (ii) the interbank money-market to
develop greater liquidity, increasing efficiency, and lengthening the maturity of interbank
activity; and (iii) the pricing of derivatives including futures and swaps. In January 2008,
MosPrime was included into ISDA 2006 Definitions. 25 EBRD has thus far arranged RUB 150
billion of MosPrime-linked loans to financial, corporate and municipal institutions. MosPrime is
used by banks for long term mortgage lending, syndicate loans and bonds. To date, EBRD has
issued five RUB Floating Rate Notes totaling RUB 40.5 billion, with a coupon linked to 3 month
MosPrime on every calendar month of the year.
Asian Development Bank (ADB)

10.     In 1997, ADB’s member countries and its operations were very much affected by the
Asian financial crisis which started with the devaluation of the Thai Baht in July 1997. The
contagion of devaluation was felt in all major countries (South Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia and
Thailand) and globally. The danger of currency and maturity mismatch was appreciated by the
key decision makers in the region. In response, concerted efforts were made by central banks
and governments to develop local currency bond markets in the region to address both demand
and supply side issues. In this connection, central banks helped launched two Asian bond funds
to create demonstrative effects. On the government side, ASEAN+3 initiatives was launched in
2003. Several committees were established to address all facets of bond market development.
ADB provides secretariat supports to the ASEAN+3 and also provides information on the Asian
bond markets through a dedicated website: asianbondsonline
(http://asianbondsonline.adb.org/).
11.    ADB and other MDBs have issued bonds in local currencies in most of ASEAN+3
countries to help create domestic benchmarks. Under the Asian Bond Fund II (managed by


24EBRD Treasury, MosPrime Rate, November 2011
25International Swaps and Derivaives Association’s list of standardized and recognized credit derivatives
related standards.


40
                                                                         APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


State Street), eight fixed income exchange traded funds (ETFs) have been created to enable local
investors to participate in their domestic fixed income markets. Since 2003, ADB has provided
substantial support to help its member countries develop domestic capital markets through
policy loans and technical assistance projects. As far as the treasury operation is concerned, it
has established a US$10 billion equivalent Asian Currency Note Program (ACNP), which is
dedicated to note issuances in regional currencies. To date, five regional currencies have been
approved for inclusion under the ACNP: the Hong Kong dollar, Malaysian ringgit, Philippine
peso, Singapore dollar, and NT dollar. ADB has also established a MYR3.8 billion Medium-
Term Note Program in Malaysia. The medium term note program is similar the one used by
IBRD and IFC in issuing multi-currency notes. The issuance of these notes by ADB has been
modest as capital markets in most East Asian countries have rebounded and grown rapidly
since 1997. Interest rate and currency swaps are readily available in South Korea, Malaysia,
Indonesia, Thailand and the Philippines. Therefore, the need for local currency issuance by ADB
has largely disappeared.

12.     ADB’s main funding objective is to ensure the availability of funds for its operations at
the most stable and lowest possible cost. As shown in the Figure 6, almost all of ADB’s
outstanding borrowings at the end of 2014 were swapped into US$. ADB’s strategy is to issue
few large benchmark bonds to maintain its strong presence in key currency bond markets and
raise remaining funds through opportunistic financing, private placements and structured
notes, which provide ADB with cost-efficient funding levels. This funding strategy is almost
identical to IBRD. Out of US$14.2 billion raised in 2014 in 11 currencies (Australian dollar,
Brazilian real, Canadian dollar, yuan, Euro, Hong Kong dollar, Indian rupee, New Zealand
dollar, pound sterling, Turkish lira, and US dollar), $12.1 billion was raised through 26 public
offerings, including two global benchmark bond issues denominated in euro and US dollars
totaling $3.6 billion. The remaining $2.1 billion was raised through 24 private placements.
Proceeds of the 2014 borrowings were swapped into US dollar floating-rate liabilities, except for
two local currency notes which remained in local currency. The average maturity of these
borrowings was 4.3 years.




                                                                                               41
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2



 Appendix 2.5 Figure 1 ADB Currency Composition of Outstanding Borrowings – Before and
 After Swaps (2014)

                            Before Swaps (%)                                 After Swaps (%)
                                                                      95.5
       100                                                      100

        80                                                       80
              59.0
        60
                                                                 60
        40
                                                                 40
                     15.4
        20                                                9.3
                            4.3   3.7   2.9   2.7   2.7          20
         0                                                                           2.5        1.9
                                                                  0
                                                                      USD            JPY       Others

     Source: IBRD, IFC



13.     The experience of ADB clearly confirms that the success of building domestic bond
market requires a lot more than issuance of bonds by MDBs in domestic market. These include
favorable macroeconomic condition and consistent policies, sound financial sector strategy, well
developed regulatory frameworks, domestic investor base, efficient financial intermediaries,
efficient market infrastructures, relatively open capital account that enable development of risk
management products and confidence of international portfolio managers in these countries.
When most of these conditions are in place and confidence returned to these markets, the need
for local currency bonds by MDBs is no longer required.




42
                                                                   APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2



    Appendix Figure A2.1 IFC’s Local Currency Bond Issue Program




Source: IFC




                                                                                       43
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2


Chapter 2 Appendix Tables A2.1 to A2.4

 Appendix Table A2.1. Total World Bank Group Outlays on Bond Market Projects– IEG Core 100 Interventions by Type of Intervention:
 2004-2014
     Instrument/FY   2004     2005   2006    2007     2008    2009     2010      2011        2012            2013          2014         Total    % Total

        IFC AS        -        -     1,223    780     866     1,104    1,104     1,419       1,419           2,076         1,190       11,181    44.1%

       WB AAA        290      348     9      1,376   1,319    1,219     479          934         776         463           1,115       8,328     32.9%

     WB Lending       -       187    504      504     504      504      504          936         936         813            432        5,824     23.0%

         Total       290      535    1,736   2,659   2,689    2,827    2,087     3,289       3,131           3,352         2,736       25,333    100.0%

 % Total Spending    1.1%     2.1%   6.9%    10.5%   10.6%    11.2%    8.2%     13.0%        12.4%       13.2%             10.8%      100.0%



 Appendix Table A2.2. Total World Bank Group Outlays on Bond Market Projects– IEG Core 100 Interventions by Region: 2004-2014
        Region       2004     2005   2006    2007    2008    2009     2010     2011        2012        2013          2014          Grand Total   % Total
          AFR             -   187    1,324   1,284   1,284   1,694    1,549    1,686       1,721       1,471         1,064           13,263      52.4%
          EAP             -    46      -      214      -      41        -       570         432         460           691            2,453        9.7%
         ECA          95        -      -      158      -      118     215       191          -           -             -              776         3.1%
          LCR             -     -      -       -       -      86        -       531         619         500           397            2,132        8.4%
         MNA          195      86    404      58      163     113      86       86          86          80            179            1,538        6.1%
         SAR              -   183      9      586      -      82        -        -          45           -             -              904         3.6%
         World            -    33      -      360    1,243    693     238       225         228         841           406            4,267       16.8%
         Total        290     535    1,736   2,659   2,689   2,827    2,087    3,289       3,131       3,352         2,736           25,333      100.0%
 % Total Spending    1.1%     2.1%   6.9%    10.5%   10.6%   11.2%    8.2%     13.0%       12.4%       13.2%         10.8%          100.0%




44
                                                                                                              APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2




 Appendix Table A2.3 Total World Bank Group Expenditure on Bond Market Projects– IEG Core 100 Interventions by Income Level: 2004-
 2014
    Income Level     2004   2005   2006    2007     2008    2009    2010     2011    2012    2013     2014     Grand Total   % of Total
                                                                                                                             Spending
         LI           -     187    504      504     504      504     504     590      568     414      38        4,316        17.0%

        LMI           -     183     40      192      86      497     539     553      369     337     179        2,975        11.7%

        UMI          195    132    404      183      77      153      -      712      671     641     707        3,875        15.3%

         HI           95     -       -      158      -       118      -       40      87       -        -         498          2.0%

      Regional        -      -     788     1,262    780      862     806     1,170   1,207   1,121    1,406      9,403        37.1%

       Global         -      33      -      360    1,243     693     238     225      228     841     406        4,267        16.8%

       Total         290    535    1,736   2,659   2,689    2,827   2,087    3,289   3,131   3,352    2,736      25,333       100.0%

  % Total Spending   1.1%   2.1%   6.9%    10.5%   10.6%    11.2%   8.2%    13.0%    12.4%   13.2%   10.8%      100.0%

Source: IEG




                                                                                                                                       45
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2

Appendix Table A2.4a Bond Market Project Lists: GEMLOC


 GEMLOC Projects Examined by IEG
 Project ID   Country/Region   Amount ($000)   Year                        Name
 P106935          World                316     2007      GEMLOC-Investmt Mgr Criteria & Implemtn
 P108952          World                786     2008           GEMLOC-TA Forum/Survey Ph I
 P108953          World                457     2008         GEMLOC-Investability Scoring Phase I
 P108955          China                 77     2008       GEMLOC-CHINA Country Policy Dialogue
 P112316          World                586     2009       GEMLOC-Investability Ind Scoring Phase II
 P115405         Nigeria               172     2009       GEMLOC: Nigeria country policy dialogue
 P115512          World                 48     2009        GEMLOC ASP -TA Forum/Survey Ph II
 P115514          World                 59     2009         GEMLOC ASP: Peer Group Dialogue
 P124399          World                 64     2011       FY11 GEMLOC ASP Peer Group Dialogue
 P124402         Morocco                57     2011              GCMGL GEMLOC Morocco
 P124403         Nigeria                37     2011            GCMGL GEMLOC TA Nigeria II
 P124404          Kenya                 86     2011             GCMGL GEMLOC TA Kenya
 P124405          Brazil               142     2011              GCMSM: BR GEMLOC TA
 P124406          World                118     2011          FY11 GEMLOC Annual Conference
 P124407          World                 43     2011                   GEMLOC Tools
 P124409         Uruguay                40     2011       GCMGL GEMLOC Uruguay Country Policy
 P127361          Kenya                 63     2012         FCMGL Kenya II (Retails bonds, CSD)
 P127363          Brazil               100     2012           CMPGL Brazil II (non lending TA)
 P127367          World                 90     2012                     CMPGL ETF
 P129987        Costa Rica              35     2012      GCMGL GEMLOC Costa Rica Country Policy
 P130237         Uruguay                87     2012          GEMLOC Uruguay Country Policy II
 P131060          World                112     2012      FCMGL: FY12 GEMLOC Annual Conference
 P131301          World                 27     2012       FY12 GEMLOC ASP Peer Group Dialogue
 P133151          Kenya                 33     2013                  GEMLOC Kenya III
 P133209          World                163     2013                   GEMLOC ETF II
 P133212          Brazil                28     2013         GEMLOC South-South: Brazil-Turkey
 P133297          World                 20     2013       FY13 GEMLOC ASP Peer Group Dialogue
 P146864          Brazil                16     2014      GEMLOC South-South Phase 2:Brazil-Turkey
 P147198          World                 19     2014      FCMGL: FY14 GEMLOC ASP Peer Grp Dial
 P148390       Kazakhstan              105     2014              GEMLOC Kazakhstan FY14
Source: IEG




                                                                                                      46
                                                                                            APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 2

Appendix Table A2.4b Bond Market Project Lists: ESMID & FABDM
 ESMID Projects Examined by IEG
 Project      Country/Regio         Amount       Year                                Name
 ID                  n              ($000)
 P125844      Latin America                34     2011              GCMSM Support to ESMID in Latin America
 P129766      Latin America                81     2012              FCMSM Support to ESMID in Latin America2
 P143049      Latin America                 7     2013                     FY13 ESMID support in MILA
 P149833      Latin America                66     2014           FY14 Non-Government Bond Markets in LAC Reg.
 P121995          Africa                   27     2010                      GCMSM Support to ESMID
 P124057          Africa                   42     2011                  GCMSM Support to ESMID in Africa
 P129763          Africa                   32     2012                 FCMSM Support to ESMID in Africa II
 P143456          Africa                   20     2013                    ESMID support in Africa FY13
 P149828          Africa                 151      2014          FY14 Non-Government Bond Markets in AFR Region
   545164     Eastern Africa           5,457      2006                                East Africa
   562707        Nigeria               1,192      2009                                  Nigeria
   578507     Latin America            1,259      2011     Peru and Colombia: Non-Government Bond Market Development
                                                                                       Program
   599872        World                   657      2013                    Non-Government bond markets
   600053     Eastern Africa           1,750      2014               East Africa II - Bond Market Development
Source: IEG


 Appendix Table A2.4c
 FABDM Projects Examined by IEG
 Project ID         Country/Region         Amount ($000)    Year                          Name
 P113893               Jamaica                  200,000     2010        1st Programmatic Debt & Fiscal Sustain. DPL
 P117982        Egypt, Arab Republic of            536      2010      RTA Market Development and Debt Management
 P123241               Jamaica                  100,000     2012           2nd Programmatic Debt & Fiscal DPL
 P127332               Panama                   100,000     2013                  2nd Programmatic DPL
 P129817             South Africa                  522      2012          Government Debt and Risk Management
 P129818                 Peru                      212      2013          Government Debt and Risk Management
 P129819               Colombia                    543      2013          Government Debt and Risk Management
 P148036             Kazakhstan                    100      2014         JERP Government securities follow-on TA




                                                                                                                      47
Appendixes to Chapter 3
Appendix 3.1: The World Bank Group and Public and Private Equities Markets
ANALYTICAL WORK ON EQUITIES MARKETS AT THE WORLD BANK GROUP

1.      The Capital Markets Department was established at IFC as a jointly funded World Bank
Group department in the 1970s with the mandate of providing technical assistance, advisory
services and institution building investment. Its initial investments included several stock
exchanges, its technical assistance to Korea and then the launching of a Korea country fund
helped to put the country on the investment map. IFC’s Emerging Market Growth fund was a
pioneering success despite early skepticism. IFC helped the emergence of a new asset class, as
well as the most comprehensive source of emerging markets stock market data in its Emerging
Markets Database, and additionally, the construction of early emerging markets indices. IFC’s
Antoine van Agatmael has been credited with coining the term ‘emerging markets’ in the 1980s;
later described in his pioneering volume ‘the Emerging Market Century’ (van Agatmael, 2007).
Barger (1998) documents the IFC’s early contributions in this area.

2.      More limited attention has been paid to the development of stock markets at the World
Bank Group, of late, although there was a rich body of World Bank Group research in this area
a decade or more ago, including the impact of market restrictions on share issuance and
trading. Domowitz, Glen and Madhavan (1997) show that firms segment the market in order to
discriminate between different shareholder groups. Also in Mexico, Domowitz, Glen and
Madhavan (1998) show that cross-listing shares on international markets brings both costs and
benefits that vary by investor class. Primary market issuance activity, the actual raising of
capital, is documented in Aylward and Glen (1999), who show a dramatic increase in issuance
activity over 1980-1995. Claessens, Klingebiel and Schmukler (2002) examine the migration of
listings from emerging markets to international financial centers and document policy factors
that increase stock market development. Finally Glen (1995) also looked at issues related to
trading infrastructure for securities exchanges, and market microstructures in emerging
markets, following early activities of IFC in this area. A new interest is emerging however in the
use of stock markets especially for small firms in emerging markets (Harwood and Konidaris,
2014). And overall securities market regulation is a foundation upon which most capital
markets development is based, as recognized in Carvajal and Elliott (2007), who discuss issues
of enforcement and compliance in emerging economies.




                                                                                                48
                                                                              APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 3


Appendix 3.2: A Variant of Private Equity - Distressed Assets and the DARP
Program 26

1.      IFC’s approach to developing fund managers is also being applied to a new asset class,
distressed assets, which is being developed now in a few markets using a format that is very
similar to traditional private equity

2.     These distressed assets emanate from the large and growing stock of non-performing
loans (NPL) on the balance sheets of banks in IFC client countries, partly reflecting rapid credit
growth, and partly in the aftermath of the crisis. IFC’s global network of investee banks
reported NPLs of more than $2 trillion dollars in 2013. The Debt and Asset Recovery Program
(DARP) aims to create a programmatic and strategic response to the ongoing generation of
NPLs and distressed assets (DA) in financial systems, and thereby have a systemic impact on
maintaining the health of the financial systems. DARP’s strategy consists of the creation and
consolidation of platforms specialized in the resolution of non-performing assets.

3.      DARP’s main avenue to support distressed assets pools is through the creation of
investment facilities in partnership with other investors and work-out specialists. A typical
DARP project consists of the creation of a legal entity to hold the assets. A fund manager with
experience in handling distressed assets solicits capital from investors, who fund the entity,
often with the use of private equity. With the capital in place, portfolios of distressed assets are
purchased from sellers, typically banks. The assets are purchased at fair value, which is usually
below face value, allowing the fund manager an opportunity to manage the assets and earn a
positive return on capital for the investors. For the seller, the assets have already been written
down and the sale involves no loss of capital and often involves a gain as the assets have more
value for an experienced manager than they do for the bank. This transaction typically frees
bank capital for other uses, as well as reduces bank administrative expenses. It also allows the
original loan recipients a chance to regularize their position as borrowers and salvage their
credit standings. The collection methods are less severe than traditional collection methods as
they have to be in line with World Bank Group policy by working directly to reinstate their
access to finance.

3.       To date, IFC has committed 31 projects in the program for a total of US$4 billion (US$1
billion for IFC’s account plus an additional US$3 billion mobilized from investors). The
portfolios of assets involved are mainly retail bank loans (76 percent by number and 78 percent
by volume) and mostly located in LAC (60 percent), Asia (20 percent) and Europe (17 percent).



26Based on: Debt and Asset Recovery Program Board Paper, Project No. 27890, August, 2009; IFC Debt
and Asset Recovery Group (Darp) presentation, presentation November 2014; FC Debt and Asset
Recovery Group (Darp) presentation, Presentation Oct 2014, Financial Institutions Group Knowledge
forum 2015 presentation.


                                                                                                     49
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 3


4.      In Colombia since 2007, IFC together with an NPL service company assisted the
Government of Colombia in selling the non-performing assets it acquired following the 1999-
2000 financial crises. Before IFC became involved there was no formal market for buying NPL
portfolios. Since then, IFC has supported a specialized NPL servicer, with the objective of
establishing a NPL platform in the Andes Region. As of December 2014, the client has acquired
8 portfolios (6 in Colombia and 2 in Peru), which are composed of 401,000 loans with a total face
value of US$267 million. The acquired portfolios are performing well and the expected IRR of
this investment is 15-20 percent.

5.       In Brazil, with an improved legal framework and significant credit growth, the NPL
market is ripe with opportunities. NPLs have increased from US$43 billion in 2007 to US$76
billion in 2013. KPMG estimates sales of loan portfolios in Brazil are 15-30 percent of total NPLs
(equivalent to US$11-23 billion) per year. Since 2010, IFC partnered with an existing client with
NPL servicing expertise in a platform with a leading local investment bank. As of December
2014, the DARP Brazil platform has invested in NPL portfolios with a face value of US$10.9
billion. Actual collections are in line with expectations at approval and an expected IRR of 27
percent. The market in Brazil is still nascent, but is becoming more active with additional
interested investors.

6.      While too early to evaluate results, the LAC program has helped banks to off–load
US$21 billion in NPLs and about 5 million individuals (and SMEs) have normalized their loan
obligations through the program. While a new asset class is emerging with progress in
transparency and better practices, establishing a vibrant secondary market with an active
trading of NPL portfolios remains a challenge.




50
                                                                                                                         APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 3


Chapter 3 Appendix Tables A3.1 and A3.2
Appendix Table A3.1 Evolution of IFC Investments in Capital Markets Intermediaries and Infrastructure
(1970s to 2014)

                                Numbers of Projects (Nos)                                              Value of Projects - Total Funding ($ m)
  Tertiary               1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s          2010s                         Total        1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s *2010s                             Total
  Sector group
  Broker / Dealer         6          11             20            6                      43           12.8      25.7        108.8       109.0                    256.2
  Cap. Mkts /                         1              6            6             6        19                                 22.3        147.1      443.0         632.3
  Finance Co
  Credit Ratings                                     7            5                      12                                   1.9         0.8                     2.7
  & Information
  Derivatives                                                     1                        1                                            100.0                    100.0
  Mgmt Entities
  Exchanges,                                         6            3             1        10                                 22.7          2.6                    26.3
  Trading
  Systems Other
  Infrastructure
  Other                                                           4                       4                                             43.2                     43.2
  Portfolio Mgmt                                     8            5                      13                                 20.7        20.5                     41.2
  Cos
  Total                   6          12             47          30              7        102          12.8      45.7        176.3       423.1      444.0        1101.9


Source: IEG analysis. *2010s: Only to the first half of the decade from 2010 to 2014.

Appendix Table A3.2 IFC: Types of PE Investment (1980-2014)

  Types of Funds                                                      1980-1989          1990-1999               2000-2009                2010-2014
  Fund Management Companies                                                 0                43                      12                         5
  Public Equity Funds                                                     15                 34                      12                         2
  Private Equity/Growth                                                   10                 71                      84                       75
  Small Business and Venture capital                                        2                 9                      22                       20
  Other Funds                                                               0                 8                      29                       34
  Total                                                                   27                165                     159                      136
Source: IEG.
Note: Other funds include Distressed Assets, Leveraged Buy Out, Sector funds (microfinance, real estate, forestry), Reinsurance and Secondary funds.




                                                                                                                                                           51
Appendixes to Chapter 4
Appendix 4.1: Housing Finance Projects Reviewed.

1.      During the period between 2000 and 2014, IEG identified, in consultation with World
Bank Group staff, 129 housing finance interventions by the World Bank Group that were
potentially relevant to its evaluation (see Approach Paper). The analysis below covers a smaller
set of 112 country level interventions spanning 23 countries throughout all five regions as
shown in Appendix A3.3 Appendix 4.1Table 1 below (excluding global and regional
interventions and also excluding some interventions of marginal relevance to housing). 27 The
Latin America & Caribbean (LAC) region had the greatest number of interventions. IFC had
more interventions than the WB, (58 percent); WB had relatively more advisory interventions
(68 percent of its interventions).

Appendix 4.1Table 1. IEG Review of World Bank Group Housing Interventions Region and Institution (2004-
2015)

 Region                                  IFC                  WB            Total (Nos)            Total (%)
 Africa                                  10                   8                18                   16%
 Asia (S and E)                          10                  11                21                   19%
 Europe and Central Asia                 11                   2                13                   12%
 Middle East And North Africa             7                  10                17                   15%
 Latin America                           27                  16                43                   38%
 Total                                   65                  47               112                  100%
                                       58%                   42%             100%
Source: IEG.

Appendix 4.1 Table 2 IEG Review of World Bank Group Housing Interventions: by Region and Instrument
(2004-2015)

                                               IFC                          WB            Total
 Region                         IFC AS         Investments         WB AAA   Lending       (Nos)     Total (%)
 Africa                            3                 7               5          3             18       16%
 Asia (S and E)                   6                 4                9          2            21         19%
 Europe and Central Asia          9                 2                2          0            13         12%
 Middle East And North            3                 4                7          3            17         15%
 Africa
 Latin America                    3                 24               9          7            43         38%
 Total (% advisory)              37%                                68%                      112       100%


27E.g., Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSCs) on insolvency and creditor rights,
broad based financial sector projects, projects that were miscoded, and a small number of projects on
which information was very limited.



                                                                                                                53
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6
INVESTORS: INSURANCE AND PENSION FUNDS

Source: IEG




54
Appendixes to Chapter 5
Appendix 5.1: Institutional Investors – Investing in Long Maturity Capital Market
Instruments?28

1.      In terms of volumes of global financial assets, institutional investors have become
increasingly important participants in global financial markets. The proportion of household
savings channeled through such investors has grown significantly over the last two decades
and their assets under management are rapidly catching up with those of the banking system.

2.       In the insurance industry, assets under management worldwide accounted for $24.1
trillion in 2012, representing an expansion of 36 percent from $17.7 trillion in 2004. Over the
review period of this evaluation, the insurance business grew much faster in emerging markets
(at 12 percent per year) than in advanced markets (4 percent per year), with premia estimated at
around a fifth of the global total. The assets of insurance companies in advanced countries
have been invested primarily in fixed income securities. In 2013, government bonds accounted
for the largest share (31 percent) followed by corporate bonds (27 percent). Mortgages (7
percent) were also significant. Equities, which represented the largest asset class for pension
funds, took up a relatively small share of the insurers' portfolio (8 percent). Insurers in
emerging markets typically hold more cash (15 - 35 percent) in the portfolio, due to the lack of
depth in local capital markets.

19.     Global pension funds assets, at US$36 trillion in 2014 are ahead of insurance during the
decade under review (2004-2014), global pension assets expanded at an average rate of 6.9
percent per annum, faster than world GDP, raising the share of pensions assets to GDP from 68
percent in 2004 to 84 percent in 2014. Among advanced pension markets, asset allocations in
2014 were: 42 percent equities, 31 percent bonds, 25 percent alternative assets and 2 percent
cash. Global pension assets are highly concentrated, with the seven largest markets accounting
for 94 percent of the total.

20.     Research at the World Bank Group cautions that the availability and accumulation of
institutional investors’ assets alone may not guarantee their investment in longer dated capital
markets instruments. As discussed in World Bank (2015), investment decisions of institutional
investors are governed by complex factors. While generally expected that such investors would
have long investment horizons, which would include investments in longer-maturity capital
market instruments, this is not always the case, according to recent evidence from Chile, where
institutional investor accumulations have been significant. The average fixed income portfolio

 Sources: Swiss Re, Sigma World Insurance Database National Association of Insurance Commissioners;
28

Asian Development Bank (2013); AM Best (2015); Tower Watson (2015); World Bank (2015) Global
Development Finance Report; Opazo, Raddatz, and Schmukler (2015); and Randle and Rudolph (2014).


                                                                                                 55
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 5


maturity for insurance companies in Chile (9.77 years) is almost double that of pension funds
(4.36 years). The shorter maturity of pension funds is not constrained by the supply side of
instruments; research suggests it may be due to additional factors. First, pension plan
contributors, in apparent efforts to “time the market,” frequently switch their holdings within
funds in response to market events. Second, there are regulatory needs to match short term
performance benchmarks. Due to such factors, pension fund managers have significantly
reduced their holdings of longer date bonds and have replaced them with cash. By contrast,
insurance companies are not evaluated on a short-term return basis by investors who can
redeem their shares on demand, and there is no regulatory requirement on companies to
perform close to short term industry averages. Instead, the maturity structure of the insurance
companies’ fixed income assets seems to be determined by that of their liabilities, which,
especially for those that provide annuities to pensioners, are longer term.

21.     Perhaps even more important, from the standpoint of design, Chilean pension funds,
which are individual plans (similar to US 401k schemes), are individually relatively small, and
as such there are limits to their diversification or ability to assume large positions. This also
limits their ability to invest in infrastructure projects or longer dated debt securities. By contrast,
the Employee’s Provident Fund of Malaysia pools funds so that there is a greater ability to
invest in long dated securities and riskier projects. Similar pooling in South Korea and
Singapore have enabled their pension funds to also play a larger role in investing in longer
dated instruments. This underscores the role of the regulator in terms of design and incentives.

22.    The implications are that for support to capital markets development, looking at the
accumulation and investment phases of institutional investors is only a beginning; ideally, the
application of the findings above into practice suggest that there is also a need to take a
thoughtful look at regulations and incentives.




56
                                                                          APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 5


Appendix 5.2: Specialized Insurance –Disaster Risk Reduction, Agriculture and Trade
Insurance


1.     In partnership with the Global Fund for Disaster Risk Reduction (GFDRR), the World
Bank Group implements the Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance (DRFI) program to broaden
member countries' access to sovereign catastrophic insurance, property catastrophe insurance
and agricultural insurance. In addition, the IFC has offered a Micro Insurance Development
Program to broaden access to health and catastrophe coverage for the poor.
2.     Most of the assistance has been in the area of technical and advisory services. In India,
for example, the World Bank Group assisted the Government in the reform of the National
Agricultural Insurance Scheme, a program covering more than 25 million farmers, and in the
development of the Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme, which covers 9 million farmers.
This experience is being used to develop agricultural insurance schemes in other countries. The
insurance team also helped the Caribbean community establish the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk
Insurance Facility, a multi-country risk pool that provides US$625 million of coverage to 16
Caribbean governments against hurricanes and earthquakes. Many WB loans were also
extended to provide the start-up funding of the facility.
3.      In Africa, the WB helped launch the African Trade Insurance Agency, which today
provides political risk and export credit insurance to 10 member countries. In addition, some of
the financial sector development loans included a small component involving restructuring of
the insurance sector, including reforms of the legal framework and state-ownership of insurers.




                                                                                              57
Appendixes to Chapter 6
Appendix 6.1 Capital Market Regulation and Development: Projects Reviewed
Country          Projects Title                              Year          Project   Project Value      Lending         Funding
                                                                           codes                        (TAL, DPL)
                                                                                                        or AAA
ECA –            Capital Market Development.                 2010 – 2011   P121468   $118,743           AAA             FIRST,
Azerbaijan - 2
                 Financial Sector Modernization              2012 – 2016   P12546    $2.15 million      Lending         SECO
                                                                                                        (RETF)
                 Money market development                    2004- 2008    P105418   $340,000           AAA             FIRST
                 Regulation of Agriculture Commodity         2012-2014     P143647   $127,493           AAA
LAC –            Exchanges
Colombia – 5     Support for Capital Markets Development     2014          P149769   $64,309            AAA             World Bank
                                                                                                                        Group
                 Strengthening SROs Framework                2013-         P148637   $124,208           AAA             FIRST
                                                             ongoing
                 Sound Financial Sector Development          2013-         P133789   $243,540           Programatic     World Bank
                 Programmatic Approach                       ongoing                                    Approach        Group
                 Country Policy Dialogue                     2010          P124287   $38,000            AAA             Gemloc
LAC              Development of Capital                      2012          P132213   150,000            AAA             FIRST
Costa Rica - 2
                 Capital Market Development                  2008          P109073   $258,000           AAA             World Bank
MNA –                                                                                                                   Group
Egypt - 2        Egypt Country Policy Dialogue               2008          P112367   $59,000                            GEMLOC
                                                                                                        AAA
                 Morocco Strategy and Instruments to         2011          P129990   $422,500           AAA             World Bank
                 Establish Reliable Interest Rate                                                                       Group $14,000;
MNA              Benchmarks.                                                                                            FIRST $258,000
Morocco – 3                                                                                                             and client
                                                                                                                        $63,600.
                 Introduction to Covered Bonds               2010          P123550   $180,870           AAA             FIRST
                 Capital Markets Legal & Regulatory          2014-         P149407   $414,354           AAA             FIRST
                 Enhancing the Capacity of SEC.              2010          P126659   $162,000.          AAA             FIRST
AFR - 3          CMPGL Nigeria III                           2011          P127365   $7,012             AAA             GEMLOC
Nigeria
                 Nigeria: Financial Markets (                2012          P133013   $70,000            AAA             World Bank
                                                                                                                        Group
                 Capacity Building for the SECP              2005          P096372   $454,000           Lending (IDF)   World Bank
SAR – 2                                                                                                                 Group/IDF
Pakistan         Capacity Building of Institute of Capital   2011          P125968   $380,000           Lending (IDF)   World Bank
                 Market                                                                                                 Group/IDF
                 Securitisation Act                          2007          P105435   $27,678            AAA             FIRST
SAR -            Amendment to SEC Act                        2011          P126528   $242,200                           FIRST
Sri Lanka - 3
                                                                                                        AAA
                 Development of Non-Bank Financial Sector    2013          P147366   $100,000           AAA             World Bank
                                                                                                                        Group
                 Accelerating Capital Market Development     2004          P088804   $650,000           Lending         No
                                                                                                        (RETF)
                 Overview of the Capital Markets and         2005          P097913   $0                 AAA             No
EAP –            Directions for Development
Vietnam - 4      Regulation and Guidance for Management      2007          P106405   $334,000 FIRST     AAA             FIRST
                 of Investment Funds                                                 + $58,893
                                                                                     extension.
                                                                                     $449,100. Final:
                                                                                     $ 507,993
                 Vietnam's Capital Markets                   2008          P111430   $21,000            AAA             No




                                                                                                                                59
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 8

                   Capital Market Development Project   2009   P117420   $118,000   AAA   World Bank
 MNA – West Bank                                                                          Group
 Gaza - 3          World Bank Group CMA & PMA TA        2009   P117448   $38,136    AAA   World Bank
                   Supervision                                                            Group
                   Cap. Mkts Development 2              2012   P131009   $195,560   AAA   World Bank
                                                                                          Group

Source IEG




60
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6




Appendix 6.2: Supporting Good Corporate Governance
1.       Capital markets, especially equities markets, depend fundamentally upon good
corporate governance for expansions in size and liquidity. This increases market capitalization -
the listing of companies – and market liquidity - the trading of their shares. Even in companies
with highly dispersed shareholdings, it is a challenge to protect the rights of ‘outsider’ minority
shareholders from ‘insiders’ such as managers, who have an advantage in directing and
controlling the corporation. In countries with less dispersed shareholdings, publicly-held
companies may include large controlling block holders, whether family or other institutional
groups, who themselves act as insiders. 29 IEG assesses World Bank Group contributions to
improving corporate governance in client countries.

2.      World Bank Group and IMF involvement with corporate governance issues grew in the
1990s, in partnership with the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (the
OECD). The jointly prepared Principles, first compiled in 1999, and revised in 2004 and again in
late 2015, led to the formulation of a set of of corporate governance standards in both OECD
and non-OECD countries that were adopted as one of the twelve Key Standards for Sound
Financial Systems by the Financial Stability Forum. Reports on the Observation of these
Standards and Codes for corporate governance standards (Corporate Governance ROSCs, or
CG ROSCs), have since been a principal instrument of WB support for diagnostics of
countries’corporate governance, thus providing potential guidance to other World Bank Group
interventions in this area. In some countries, the World Bank also undertook freestanding
advisory work on corporate governance, or included a corporate governance component within
lending operations. A considerable body of analytic work, and global fora on corporate
governance, began to take shape. Starting in 2000 and until end-2014, 52 CG ROSCs were
completed. 30 For each country, ROSCs analyzed and rated each of the 32 sub-components of
each of the main Principles on a five-point scale: Observed; Largely Observed; Partly Observed;
Mostly not Observed; or Not Observed. 31

3.     IFC’s approach to corporate governance centers on the role and functioning of the
corporate board of directors and related governance bodies reflecting its interest in both
safeguarding its investments as well as in developing institutional capacity among its private




29 Claessen and Yurtoglu, Corporate Governance and Development – An Update. IFC 2012.
30 Six additional CG ROSCs have been completed but had not been disclosed within the World Bank
Group by September 2015.
31 The rating scale underwent some change over time. In some cases ROSCs conducted before 2004 were

also reviewed, as a reference point, in order to compare findings and make assessments of progress over
time. In such cases, ROSCs before 2004 were based on the then prevalent five key areas.


                                                                                                      61
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


sector corporate clients. 32 Its work is undertaken at different levels: with companies themselves,
with educational bodies, corporate governance associations, institutes of corporate directors
and the media, as well as with regulatory bodies. IFC’s Corporate Governance Unit conducts its
own corporate governance assessments focused primarily at the company level, provides a
variety of training modules, and prepares, publishes and disseminates materials in the form of
tool kits, manuals, and case studies on a broad range of corporate governance topics. In 2010,
IFC’s corporate governance assistance program covered only two regions. Reflecting recent
rapid program growth, it now (2016) covers all regions.

The 2004 OECD Principles of Corporate Governance and World Bank Group Contributions

4.     As stated in the Preamble to the 2004 Principles: “The Principles are intended to assist
…governments in their efforts to evaluate and improve the legal, institutional and regulatory
framework for corporate governance in their countries and to provide guidance and
suggestions to stock exchanges, investors, corporations, and other parties that have a role in the
process of developing good corporate governance. The Principles focus on publicly traded
companies...”

5.      The Principles have evolved over time and their fine tuning continues. A new version
has come out in the fall of 2015, but this evaluation uses the former standard, which was in
effect over the evaluation period. Initially, they highlighted five main areas: (1) shareholders
rights and key ownership functions; (2) equitable treatment of shareholders; (3) the role of other
stakeholders; (4) disclosure and transparency; and (5) responsibilities of the board. In 2004, a
new category was added to address issues in the sphere of economic authorities and regulatory
bodies; the overall governance framework, its legal enforceability, the clarity of regulatory
responsibility and regulatory authority, integrity and resource commitments.

6.     Further reviews are underway especially with regard to the financial crisis which
revealed weaknesses where existing standards failed to provide adequate checks and balances.
Consequently, the OECD launched an ambitious action plan to develop a set of
recommendations to improve areas such as risk management, board practices, remuneration,
and the exercise of shareholder rights. Peer reviews of these additions have also been
conducted.

World Bank-IMF Contributions to Improved Corporate Governance: FSAPs and ROSCs

7.     Beyond regulatory frameworks, developing good corporate governance frameworks is a
cornerstone of building the ‘soft’ aspects of sound capital markets infrastructure. Both IFC and
the Bank have supported good corporate governance principles, essential for building investors’

32IFC’s support to state enterprise privatization in the 1990s led to its support for establishing sound
corporate governance in newly-created private sector companies. Today, its most recent strategy, the
“Road Map for 2015-2017”, also emphasizes inter alia the promotion of good corporate governance.


62
                                                                           APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


confidence and deepening equities markets. Corporate governance in a capital market context
deals with the way in which holders of corporate stock in listed companies, especially minority
shareholders, are fairly treated and protected from predation by management and majority
shareholders.

8.     World Bank Group built upon early work in this area by the OECD, which developed
the cornerstone for principles of corporate governance (2004). And a good example of
collaboration between the IFC and WB is the Global Corporate Governance Forum, a multi-
donor trust fund facility located within the IFC, co-founded in 1999 together with the World
Bank and the OECD. Financed by the World Bank, OECD, bilateral donations and trust funds,
IFC and other institutional partners have benefitted from its array of services

9.      Fremond and Capaul (2002) reviewed 15 corporate governance Reports on Observance
of Standards and Codes (ROSCs); a framework itself based on the OECD principles. Corporate
governance was also the subject of a joint WB/IMF/Brookings conference, (Litan, Pomerleano
and Sundarajan 2002) who concluded that there is a need to enhance transparency and
contestability of markets. Carson (2003), in a Bank commissioned paper, discussed corporate
governance of stock exchanges in the context of demutualization (the transition of an exchange
from a not-for-profit to a for-profit form), a topic also discussed by Elliott (2002) in an IMF
paper. A recent scholarly overview of corporate governance in emerging markets (Pargendler
2014) points out why this has risen to importance with the increase in prominence of cross
border investments, and Grimminger and Bendetta, with the World Bank and IFC (2013)
summarize attempts made by 8 stock exchanges to create indices of ‘good governance’ firms.
Corporate governance programs at the World Bank Group finance and markets practice
encompass banks, SOEs as well as general corporate entities – ROSCs are the standard form of
support to the latter, and are the only form of the corporate governance activity included in the
World Bank Group portfolio. IFC’s corporate governance development program today focuses
on a number of broad areas, ranging from ‘due diligence’ of proposed investee companies,
legal and regulatory issues, training fora, and public awareness campaigns.

IFC Contributions to Corporate Governance

10.    A special area of comparative advantage of IFC’s corporate governance staff, within the
World Bank Group, across the spectrum of OECD Principles, lies in its advice on corporate
boards of directors, especially though a significant focus on board committees.

11.     The rationale for board committees as distinct from management committees is that
smaller groups of board directors, operating in select key committees, can best oversee the
preparation of papers and reports on matters requiring board decisions; reducing the
unwieldiness of involving the full board on matters requiring a significant amount of technical
detail, while at the same time safeguarding the process from any self interest that management



                                                                                                63
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


committees may exhibit. Board committees, comprised exclusively of independent members
have been encouraged by recent mainstream thinking, on key topics like the Financial
Committee and Audit Committee. And the eligibility criteria for a director to be deemed
independent have tightened considerably in recent years.

12.     In countries where important IFC corporate clients are publicly listed but predominantly
family-owned, it can be difficult to find sufficient independent external board members. For
example, in India there has been recent debate as to whether or not government-appointed
nominee directors to corporate boards are truly independent. Board independence can be
materially diluted in many countries when interlocking corporate ownership patterns provide
opportunities for circumventing director (and thus board) independence. Cross directorships
and tiered directorships are sometimes examples.

13.     IFC’s advisory modules for CG support encompass a wide spectrum of areas. Popular
modules in its advisory work include corporate governance for the family owned business;
training modules for regulators and board directors; information on mediating corporate
governance disputes; a two-volume manual for setting up and conducting the essential function
of the board secretariat; and developing corporate governance scorecards. Additionally, the unit
pioneered a web-based portal dedicated to collaboration on corporate governance, to which
some 34 development finance institutions (DFIs) currently subscribe. This unit also supports
IFC’s nominee board directors in the Corporation’s investee companies. While the AS projects
and knowledge products rolled out gradually, its commitment to better corporate governance
through its network of nominee directors has been in place for much longer.


 Appendix 6.2 Box 1 Country Use of WB CG ROSC Diagnostics – Progress and Areas of Difficulty
  Brazil is one example where progress in corporate governance was realized, following its CG ROSCs (2000, 2002, 2005 and
 2012), largely on its own, although it did benefit from earlier WB development policy loans (DPLs). Reforms were noted in the
 strengthening of shareholder rights, exercise of control, board director and manager disclosure and ethical standards.
 Stakeholder disclosure and disproportionate control disclosure however showed deterioration. Brazil’s Novo Mercado, an
 alternative listing tier on the Bovespa stock exchange, for good governance companies, demonstrates the success of an
 informed voluntary approach. Brazil’s market capitalization and number of listings grew materially.
 In Croatia the World Bank undertook CG ROSCs in 2001 and in 2008. The 2001 CG ROSC recommended tighter disclosure
 of ownership and control structures, introducing a CG Code of best practice, strengthening the requirement for auditor
 independence, requiring boards to have audit committees and harmonizing existing disclosure laws. The 2008 CG ROSC
 found several framework enhancement, a single regulator, and as recommended, a CG Code. Other reforms were also
 introduced many of which addressed earlier issues identified - partly propelled by Croatia’s aspiration of joining the European
 Union.
 Ghana – The first CG ROSC undertaken for Ghana in 2005 found that Ghana needed to address raising awareness of
 transparency and accountability, including director training; continuing the process of legislative review and modernization;
 insider trading, ownership disclosure, management conflicts of interest, and shareholder redress. The 2010 CG ROSC found
 that basic shareholder rights were in place, transparency and disclosure with respect to accounting and auditing had improved
 and board practices had been strengthened with explicitly defined board member roles and duties and partly-independent




64
                                                                                                     APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


 audit committees. However, it also found that weaknesses remained with respect to shareholder redress, regulation of related
 party transactions and conflicts of interest, and some remaining weaknesses regarding board member powers and training.
 Philippines – The World Bank CG ROSCs took place in 2001 and 2006. Disclosure was a major issue in the first, including
 beneficial ownership, regulation of related party transactions and conflicts of interest, strengthening the role and influence of
 minority shareholders, and several areas related to board structure, roles and responsibilities. The 2006 CG ROSC found that
 in the interval, the regulators had undertaken significant reforms, including issuance of a Code of Corporate Governance, the
 adoption of IFRS and a new requirement for the training of directors. During the interval between the two CG ROSCs,
 significant reforms were introduced but the main challenges have been and continues to be in the areas of monitoring and
 enforcement.
 Source: IEG.



Limitations of a ‘Core Principles’ Based Analysis

14.    IEG recognizes that the Core Principles themselves may not provide the full picture of
improvement or deterioration, due to interrelationships among some of the Principles and also
due to concomitant precedence or simultaneity requirements. For example, to improve
information to minority shareholders, countries may take actions to improve how annual and
extraordinary shareholder meetings (AGMs and EGMs) are announced, convened and
conducted. But these may have little consequence if the information shared with minority
shareholders is itself not subject to adequate standards of accounting, disclosure and timeliness.

15.     Country officials and company executives may take credit for improving lead times for
notifying shareholders about the holding of annual or extraordinary general meetings,
providing board papers to shareholders in advance, and extending meeting agendas to cover
more topics. But by omitting crucial topics from agendas or by withholding essential
information on those topics tabled for discussion, the ostensible improvements may, in fact, be
illusory.

16.     Similarly, if ownership patterns are skewed, actions to strengthen shareholder rights,
such as the right to elect and remove directors, may be ineffective if devices, such as cumulative
voting, are not put in place to give minority shareholders a chance of exerting their influence.
Or, efforts to strengthen the appointment of directors may be of little avail if directors are not
held accountable to clear standards of fiduciary responsibility, or if directors are permitted to
act on a representative basis instead of for the best interests of the corporation and its
stakeholders.

17.     Such deeper issues have also been noted by the authors of the Core Principles, especially
after some spectacular failures in governance came to light in the US and elsewhere in the last
decade. A new version has just been agreed.




                                                                                                                                 65
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


IEG’S EVALUATIVE APPROACH – MEASURING CHANGES OVER TIME AGAINST THE ROSC YARDSTICK

18.     IEG’s evaluation focuses on the influence of World Bank Group work on countries’
corporate governance. IEG does not attempt to evaluate the ROSCs themselves - the Bank’s
major instrument of intervention - given that ROSCs are broadly uniform and standardized
diagnostics that follow a standard template. And IEG reviews but does not attempt to
individually evaluate individual WB or IFC interventions, given the small share of CG elements
in many interventions, and the paucity of evaluative material.33 Instead, a three-pronged
approach has been adopted, that uses the standardized yardstick offered by assessments of
‘good governance’ in CG ROSCs to measure outcomes, in terms of changes achieved in
corporate governance. IEG measures changes in corporate governance in World Bank Group
client countries by undertaking comparative assessments over periods of time in those countries
which had sequences of assessments over time. IEG assesses the extent to which such changes
may at least be associated with, if not attributed to, World Bank Group interventions, i.e., to see
whether later ROSCs reflect any changes in the observation of good governance principles.
Next, IEG compares the timing and content of World Bank Group lending or advisory
interventions, to see whether they follow from and reflect the diagnostics of the ROSCs – that is,
to see whether they responded to known corporate governance issues in the countries
concerned. Finally, IEG triangulates these findings with information obtained from desk
reviews of relevant clusters of projects, field visits and interviews with CG staff.

19.     IEG reviewed the full portfolio of corporate governance activities in all countries where
there had been CG related activities, and then identified those countries where at least two
World Bank Group CG support interventions were provided, at different times. The full
portfolio yielded a set of 124 CG related activities in 35 countries and 3 regions (Appendix 6.2
Annex Tables A6.2.1 A6.2.2, and A6.2.3). CG ROSCs accounted for two fifths of all interventions
and formed the bulk of WB support. Thirty one countries had at least one CG ROSC over the
period of review. For 17 of these countries, two (or more) CG ROSCs were completed, and
therefore scores over time were available. Findings are summarized in Table 1 below. 34




33 The few available self-evaluations, mostly for IFC, are in terms of numbers of persons reached, trained

etc., and are largely based on outputs and not outcomes.
34 Details at the level of each sub-principle are provided in Appendix 6.2 Annex Table A6.2.4. The analysis

was complicated by changes in the rating point system over time and efforts were made to ensure
consistency. The analysis includes only those indicators for which there were ratings in both periods.


66
                                                                                                                      APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


Appendix 6.2 Table 1 Improvements over Time in Corporate Governance: Pairwise Analysis of CG ROSCs
(2004-2015)

   Country                   Numbers of Ratings                               Percent of Total Ratings                 All Inter   Total Inter
                                                                                                                       ventions     ventions
                   Impro-      Unch--        Deteri       Total       Impro        Unch-        Deteri          Tot   Sequence
                     ved       anged         orated       (Nos)        ved         anged        orated           al   and Type
                    (Nos)      (Nos)         (Nos)                     (%)          (%)          (%)
 Azerbaijan          20           12            0           32          63           38            0            100     R AS R         3
 Brazil               7           14            2           23          30           61            9            100    RRRR            4
 Colombia            13            4            6           23          57           17            26           100     RLR            3
 Croatia             12            3            8           23          52           13            35           100      RR            2
 Egypt                1            8           13           22           5           36            59           100    RRLRL           5
 Ghana               14           11            7           32          44           34            22           100      RR            2
 India               15            8            0           23          65           35            0            100   RRAAAA           6
 Indonesia           10           12            1           23          43           52            4            100    RRAA            4
 Malaysia            13            4            6           23          57           17            26           100     RRR            3
 Mauritius           17            6            0           23          74           26            0            100      RR            2
 Morocco             10            7            6           23          43           30            26           100     RRA            3
 Philippines         11            7            4           22          50           32            18           100      RR            2
 Russia              13            9            1           23          57           39            4            100   R AS A R         4
 Saudi                7           12            0           19          37           63            0            100    RRAA            4
 Thailand             8           19            5           32          25           59            16           100    ARRA            4
 Ukraine              9           12            1           22          41           55            5            100   R AS R L A       5
 Vietnam             22           10            0           32          69           31            0            100   R A AS AS        5
 Totals             202          158           60          420          48           38            14           100                    61
Source: See Part 4.2 Appendix Table 1. IEG analysis.
Note: R: ROSC; A: WB AAA, AS: IFC Advisory services and L: WB loan. Totals refer to total comparable ratings.

20.     On the whole, client countries’ corporate governance broadly improved over time.
Across the 17 countries and 37 CG ROSCs analyzed, there were 418 individually rated sub
Principles. Of these, 204, or close to half, improved over time, across all countries and 155 (37
percent) remained largely unchanged. Only 59 (14 percent) showed some deterioration. Ten out
of 17 countries had improvements in most indicators (half or more), with Vietnam and
Azerbaijan showing the most improvement; 5 countries mostly remained unchanged (although
in Brazil improvements had taken place following early ROSCs of 2000 and 2002, predating the
two CG ROSCs in or after 2004). One country (Egypt) showed mostly deterioration in its
indicators. These scores suggest that on average, there was improvement in at least half the CG
ROSC principles, and in around two thirds of the countries (Table 2).




                                                                                                                                                 67
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


Appendix 6.2 Table 2 Improvements Over Time in CG ROSC Ratings – Analysis by Country (2004-2014)

                   Item                       Number                           Country name
                                                 of
                                              countries
 Countries for which most of the indicator       10          Azerbaijan, Colombia, Croatia, Ghana, India,
 ratings improved.                                           Malaysia, Mauritius, Philippines, Russia, Vietnam
 Countries for which most of the indicator         5         Brazil, Indonesia, Thailand, Ukraine, Saudi Arabia
 ratings remained the same
 Countries for which most of the                   1         Egypt
 indicators ratings deteriorated

Source: IEG
Note: For one country, Morocco, changes were ambiguous in direction, with less than half of its indicators (43%) improving, but
around a quarter declining (26%), and around 30% remaining unchangedLooking at individual areas among the Core Principles,
improvements appear to predominate in areas that are easier to tackle. These are areas such as accounting and auditing (12 out
of 17 countries) and independent external audit (10 out of 17). They are not related to the rights of shareholders. Although there
are also gains in ‘basic shareholder rights’, gains are noticeably fewer in specific areas such as ‘disproportionate control
disclosure’ or ‘shareholders’ rights to participate in fundamental decisions’ (Appendix 6.2 Annex Table A6.2.4). 35

21.     In a majority of countries, World Bank Group CG interventions were timed to take
advantage of the diagnostic guidance provided by ROSCs, though in a third to two fifths of
countries the WB and IFC had CG work programs unrelated to ROSCs. IEG first examined the
extent to which the World Bank Group was able to use the CG ROSC findings as guideposts to
contribute toward the design of its interventions by examining the timing of the ROSCs in each
country, compared to the timing of additional World Bank Group activities –lending, AS or
AAA. Looking at the larger set of 35 countries which had at least 2 CG activities of any form, as
well as the smaller set of 17 countries which had at least two CG ROSCs, the results are similar.
In almost half the countries, initial diagnostics were followed by an advisory intervention by
either the WB or IFC, and in 3 out of 35 countries, or 2 out of the 17 countries, there was a follow
up WB loan, which had CG related components. Thus in slightly less than two thirds (of the 35
countries) to three fifths (of the 17 countries), World Bank Group interventions were at least
timed so that they could benefit from the detailed CG diagnostics of the ROSC, and there was
opportunity to structure them into the interventions undertaken. Nevertheless, there were also
outliers – six countries where multiple ROSCs were undertaken with no further World Bank
Group follow up, and also, 4 where there were repeated advisory interventions though no
ROSC diagnostics.




35 IEG recognizes that the Core Principles themselves may not provide the full picture of and their design
is not perfect. In September 2015 the G20 agreed a revised set of CG Principles that take some current
issues into account.


68
                                                                               APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


Appendix 6.2 Table 3 Sequencing of World Bank Group Corporate Governance Activities Relative to ROSC
Diagnostics

 Total Countries                                                      35      17

 Countries where Rosc was followed by AS or AAA alone                 17       7
   o/w IFC AS                                                          7       5
 ROSCs follwed by loans alone (Egypt, Mexico, Colombia, Ukraine)       3       2
  o/w ROSCs follwed by loans and AS or AAA (Bosnia and Ukraine)        2       1
 Only ROSCS (Brazil Croatia Ghana Malaysia Mauritius Philippines)      6       6
 AS or AAA before ROSC (Kyrgyz, Nigeria, Thailand)                  2+(1)     (1)
 AS / AAA only, no ROSC (China, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Serbia)           4       0
Source: IEG.

22.      Average outcomes in terms of improvements in corporate governance however show
little difference between countries with subsequent World Bank Group CG interventions and
those with no such interventions. IEG compared the results, in terms of improvements in
governance, between those countries where the World Bank Group had made subsequent
interventions, whether through WB loans, AAA or IFC AS, and those countries where the
World Bank Group did not offer any additional support apart from the ROSCs (Table 3). This
analysis is necessarily based upon those 17 countries for which pairwise comparisons of
corporate governance ratings are possible, through at least two CG ROSCs. In the 6 countries
where there were no World Bank Group interventions apart from the ROSCs, results appear
somewhat better compared to those countries where there was additional WB intervention (51
percent of indicators improved compared to 47 percent for the entire group, or 49 percent for
the countries that did have WB interventions). However these countries also had somewhat
higher proportions of indicators that deteriorated: 18 percent compared to 14 percent for all 17
countries, or just 12 percent for the countries that did have World Bank Group follow up.

23.     These findings suggest an ambiguous outcome for the additional World Bank Group
interventions. However, the 6 countries with no additional follow up are also among the more
sophisticated World Bank Group clients: all except Ghana are middle income countries. For
such countries, the diagnostic value of the ROSC itself could be useful, without the need for
World Bank Group support for implementation. And among the countries where the World
Bank Group did intervene, results are heavily weighed down by the inclusion of Egypt, where
arguably external forces at this time were of primary significance. These results are largely
substantiated by a closer look at relevant country and project documentation, which suggests
that indeed specific ROSC-identified recommendations were acted upon, even in the absence of
further WB interventions (Box 2). Overall, this numeric analysis of corporate indicators over
time suggests that most client countries made progress in their corporate governance
environments; some on their own with no need for further support from the World Bank Group




                                                                                                       69
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


after an initial diagnostic, others may have benefitted from support (Azerbaijan, India,
Vietnam), and in some cases deterioration was likely due to known external factors (Egypt).

Appendix 6.2 Table 4 Comparison of Corporate Governance in Countries with / without World Bank Group
follow up.

                                                         Numbers of Ratings               Percent of Total Ratings
                                                                                                   (Avg)
                                                Impro        Un-     Ratings    Total     Impro       Un-     Ratings
                                                 ved      changed    deterio     com       ved     changed    deterio
                                               ratings     ratings    rated    parable   ratings    ratings    rated
                                                (Nos)       (Nos)     (Nos)    ratings     (%)        (%)       (%)
                                                                                (Nos)

 All 17 countries with at least 2 ROSCs
 Total / Avg                                    202         158        60       420       48%       38%        14%
 ROSCs, No other interventions (6)
 Total / Avg                                     74         45         27       146       51%       31%        18%
 ROSC, WB Loan or AAA; IFC AS (9)
 Total / Avg                                    128         113        33       274       47%       41%        12%
Source: IEG.




 Appendix 6.2 Box 2 Country Use of WB CG ROSC Diagnostics – Progress and Areas of Difficulty
  Brazil is one example where progress in corporate governance was realized, following its CG ROSCs (2000, 2002, 2005 and
 2012), largely on its own, although it did benefit from earlier WB development policy loans (DPLs). Reforms were noted in the
 strengthening of shareholder rights, exercise of control, board director and manager disclosure and ethical standards.
 Stakeholder disclosure and disproportionate control disclosure however showed deterioration. Brazil’s Novo Mercado, an
 alternative listing tier on the Bovespa stock exchange, for good governance companies, demonstrates the success of an
 informed voluntary approach. Brazil’s market capitalization and number of listings grew materially.
 In Croatia the World Bank undertook CG ROSCs in 2001 and in 2008. The 2001 CG ROSC recommended tighter disclosure
 of ownership and control structures, introducing a CG Code of best practice, strengthening the requirement for auditor
 independence, requiring boards to have audit committees and harmonizing existing disclosure laws. The 2008 CG ROSC
 found several framework enhancement, a single regulator, and as recommended, a CG Code. Other reforms were also
 introduced many of which addressed earlier issues identified - partly propelled by Croatia’s aspiration of joining the European
 Union.
 Ghana – The first CG ROSC undertaken for Ghana in 2005 found that Ghana needed to address raising awareness of
 transparency and accountability, including director training; continuing the process of legislative review and modernization;
 insider trading, ownership disclosure, management conflicts of interest, and shareholder redress. The 2010 CG ROSC found
 that basic shareholder rights were in place, transparency and disclosure with respect to accounting and auditing had improved
 and board practices had been strengthened with explicitly defined board member roles and duties and partly-independent
 audit committees. However, it also found that weaknesses remained with respect to shareholder redress, regulation of related
 party transactions and conflicts of interest, and some remaining weaknesses regarding board member powers and training.
 Philippines – The World Bank CG ROSCs took place in 2001 and 2006. Disclosure was a major issue in the first, including
 beneficial ownership, regulation of related party transactions and conflicts of interest, strengthening the role and influence of
 minority shareholders, and several areas related to board structure, roles and responsibilities. The 2006 CG ROSC found that
 in the interval, the regulators had undertaken significant reforms, including issuance of a Code of Corporate Governance, the
 adoption of IFRS and a new requirement for the training of directors. During the interval between the two CG ROSCs,




70
                                                                                                 APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


 significant reforms were introduced but the main challenges have been and continues to be in the areas of monitoring and
 enforcement.
 Source: IEG.

A REALITY-CHECK: PORTFOLIO REVIEW

World Bank Lending and AAA to Support Corporate Governance

24.     Actions flagged in WB DPLs sometimes reflected ROSC diagnostics though corporate
governance issues were only included as a small element. IEG further examined the nature and
impact of CG-related interventions in terms of WB lending and advisory work, and IFC
advisory interventions. In the case of Colombia for example, two CG ROSCs were conducted, in
2003 in 2011. The first clearly identified the principal issues in Colombia to include the power
and influence wielded by a few large economic groups, together with accounting and auditing
which lag international standards and disclosure. Despite the incorporation of corporate
governance as a theme in the Colombia DPL of 2006, the 2011 CG ROSC found that the
problems with groups remained unresolved, and only limited progress was achieved toward
adopting IFRS; a conclusion supported by the IEG mission to Colombia. While a CG Code had
been introduced, progress is limited by its voluntary nature. In Mexico, and Egypt, issues noted
in corporate governance ROSCs were followed by World Bank DPLs and also by an IDF grant
in Egypt. Such support had partial success; much depended on countries’ own initiatives or
prevailing government support.

25.    As regards WB AAA, other than the ROSCs themselves, many documents appear
miscoded or tangential to relevant issues. In India, only one of two AAA interventions labeled
as CG-related in fact dealt with the subject. In the Czech Republic, an in-depth assessment of the
domestic insurance industry alluded briefly to corporate governance but without in-depth
treatment. In China (where no CG ROSCs were undertaken), one AAA intervention advanced a
reform agenda for state-owned banks, including recommendations on corporate governance,
without in-depth treatment. Thus the World Bank’s most valuable contributions toward
corporate governance remain primarily its CG ROSCs.

IFC Advisory Services to Support Corporate Governance

26.     IEG also reviewed 25 IFC advisory service CG interventions in 18 countries and found
around half mentioned ROSCs, and all provided support in a spectrum of areas including,
especially, to regulators. In a number of cases (Bosnia, Kyrgyz Republic, Macedonia, FYR,
Nigeria, Russia, Ukraine and Vietnam), WB support was also provided in addition to IFC AS
support, which dilutes the possibility of attribution specifically to IFC. Almost half these IFC AS
activities, and two thirds of the countries, were in the ECA region – reflecting the initial focus of
IFC’s corporate governance work on former Soviet Union countries. Eleven interventions in
nine countries (out of 18) included a reference to the diagnosis of an FSAP/ROSC. In four



                                                                                                                            71
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


countries (China, Georgia, Nigeria & Serbia) there was a pre-existing ROSC report at the time of
IFC’s AS intervention. Examples of AS interventions that drew on the ROSC findings included
Malawi where a stakeholder’s workshop was organized to discuss the findings of the ROSC and
to develop an action plan. In Azerbaijan, IFC’s policy advice addressed the concerns raised in
the ROSC diagnostic report. However In the case of Vietnam and Macedonia, FYR each of
which had 2 AS interventions, only one mentioned the ROSC’s findings. A review of the these
reports in the areas of support to regulators as well as capacity building, public awareness
building and direct institutional support finds that support was highest for work with
regulators compared to direct assistance to enterprises and banks. (Table 5 and Box 3). The
assessment framework is based on IFC’s Corporate Governance goals. 36 Virtually all
interventions focused on at least three out of five of these areas.

Appendix 6.2 Table.5 Areas of Support for Corporate Governance in IFC AS activities.

        Dimension                 Work with regulators and         Direct          Direct        Raising public   Developing local
                                  government agencies on         assistance    assistance to     awareness of     expertise related
                                   the legal framework for           to       banks/financial      corporate        to corporate
                                              CG.               enterprises   institutions for    governance        governance
                                                                 related to   assessment of         issues
                                                                 corporate       client CG
                                                                governance.      practices
      Average score
     across 25 IFC AS                         2.76                  1.84                0.72              2.12             2.24
         projects
Source: IEG.
Note: Rated on a scale of 0 (no support) to 3 (high support).




  Appendix 6.2 Box 3 IFC Support for Corporate Governance
  IFC activities to support improving the legal framework for CG involved providing comments on new laws and regulations
  (China, Vietnam), helping amend existing codes and regulations (Kyrgyz, Ukraine), and providing comparative
  studies/international best practice of legislation in other countries (Vietnam). In some countries, IFC’s projects helped
  establish a CG code or related legislation, where none previously existed and in others, it helped strengthen the existing legal
  framework (Senegal, Lebanon). In three countries (Vietnam, Macedonia, FYR, and Serbia) IFC’s AS interventions helped
  develop CG scorecards assess the quality of CG practices among listed companies.
  Direct assistance to enterprises featured moderately among the activities undertaken in IFC’s CG advisory services, in 17
  out of 25 interventions reviewed.There was variability in the forms of assistance rendered, from full Corporate Governance
  Assessments (CGA), to training workshops, and one-on-one CG consultancy services to companies and banks, often with
  observable positive outcomes. As a result of IFC’s CG intervention in Pakistan, companies implemented positive changes in
  their board structures and compositions, as well as improvements in internal controls and accounting practices.
  Building public awareness of corporate governance issues was a crucial component in all the interventions reviewed.
  Twenty three of the 25 interventions reviewed had components aimed at raising public awareness of corporate governance
  issues, included the preparation of CG publications and training of media representatives. In Malawi, a survey conducted after
  the intervention indicated an increase in the awareness and knowledge of key CG issues, compared to the baseline.



 IFC’s CG assessment methodology is also based on OECD Principles and thus broadly in conformity
36

with the World Bank methodology, but with a focus on the functioning of companies and their boards.


72
                                                                                                      APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


 Finally, support for CG capacity building was an important aspect. Twenty one interventions (84 percent) had components
 aimed at building local capacity. Activities under this component typically involved working with universities or through training
 of trainers programs. In Bosnia for example, the AS intervention helped establish the first post-graduate program in CG at
 Sarajevo University. The Pakistan Capacity Building project helped launch the first internationally accredited directors’ training
 program in the country. In Malawi, the intervention helped to train and establish a core faculty for the Institute of Directors
 Malawi, which now provides CG training to directors and senior managers.
 Additionally, in some rare cases (6 interventions), IFC AS interventions provided indirect support for CG at the company level,
 by helping commercial bank clients to assess their clients’ CG practices. In Ukraine, IFC helped design a CG
 assessment tool for bank credit to help the banks evaluate the governance practices of their corporate clients thereby
 improving their credit assessment process and reducing risk. In Azerbaijan, ten organizations introduced CG screening of
 their clients in the investment decision process as a result of the intervention.

 Source: IEG.



World Bank – IFC Collaboration

27.      Both WB and IFC have a mandate in this area and some fundamental differences in
approach are inevitable, arising from the distinct mandates of the two institutions, though
mutual recognition has improved. Because of its public-sector focus, the World Bank
emphasizes interventions that fortify legal and institutional frameworks. IFC’s operations aim
in the first place at its private-sector company client base. IEG finds that over the years, better
mutual recognition of the complementarity of their work is emerging. IFC’s early corporate
governance assistance, of necessity, involved a range of regulatory and advisory activities
which significantly overlapped similar WB work – and still predominate in aggregate. Early
coordination (during the Eastern European transition) was fragile but the paucity of Bank
resources and compelling country needs prompted IFC to step in. After the first round of WB
CG ROSCs, post 2004, staff from the two institutions began to increasingly – if not invariably -
appreciate the natural complementarity of roles. In LAC, a joint program of World Bank and
IFC corporate governance assistance allows the World Bank Group to speak with one voice as
well as to dovetails each other’s programs. Yet such collaboration has not necessarily been the
consequence of institutional mandates so much as commitment at the staff level among
colleagues in both the Bank and IFC with a shared resolve and compatible work styles.
Evidence of WB-IFC collaboration has been evident in Colombia, Kenya, and Vietnam; three of
the five case study countries underpinning this report.

CORPORATE GOVERNANCE - A SUMMARY

28.     IEG’s review finds, first, that most client countries made progress in their corporate
governance environments. Some did so on their own with limited support from the World Bank
Group after an initial diagnostic, while over half may have benefitted from World Bank Group
support. Deterioration in some prominent World Bank Group clients was likely due to known
external factors. Second, in a majority of countries, the World Bank’s ROSC assessments were
able to provide information for World Bank Group corporate governance interventions, though



                                                                                                                                 73
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


in over a third of countries both the WB and IFC had work programs for corporate governance
likely unrelated to the assessment. Third, supplementary support in countries where corporate
governance assessments were combined with other forms of WB interventions – lending or
advisory - had partial success. Some areas of success were arguably easier to attain, for example,
improvements in accounting and auditing, or independence of external auditors. Gains are
noticeably fewer in difficult areas such as ‘disproportionate control disclosure’ or ‘shareholders’
rights to participate in fundamental decisions,’ as well as with respect to enforcement. Fourth,
IFC interventions largely achieved target outputs and there is still emphasis on regulatory
support, albeit also with direct assistance. Finally, over the years, improved mutual awareness
of WB and IFC corporate governance interventions is emerging although there may be scope for
more formal and systematic cooperation.

Appendix 6.2 Annex Table A6.2.1 World Bank Group Sequences of Corporate Governance Activities: Type of
Activity and Time Period

   World Bank Group Support:              Number of CG activities                    % Total
     By Type of Intervention
 CG ROSC                                           52                                  42
 WB AAA Project                                    41                                  33
 IFC AS project                                    25                                  20
 WB Loan                                            6                                   5
 Total                                            124                                  100
 By Time Period                           Number of CG activities                 Annual average
 2000-2002                                         13                                   4
 2003-2005                                         28                                   9
 2006-2008                                         36                                  12
 2009-2011                                         26                                   9
 2012-2014                                         21                                   7
 Total                                            124                                   8
Source: IEG.
Appendix 6.2 Annex Table A6.2.2 World Bank Group Corporate Governance Activities by Country and Type
of World Bank Group Support




74
                                                                                     APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


                 ROSC + WB    ROSC +IFC
 ROSC Only                                 ROSC + IFC + WB           Advisory Only            Total
                     only         only
 Brazil        Bangladesh     Azerbaijan   Bosnia and Herz.   China (WB +IFC)
 Croatia       Bulgaria       Georgia      Kyrgyz Republic    Kazakhstan (WB+IFC)
 Ghana         Colombia       Malawi       Macedonia, FYR     Lebanon (WB +IFC)
 Malaysia      Czech Rep.     Mongolia     Nigeria            Serbia (IFC)
 Mauritius     Egypt          Pakistan     Russia             East Asia and Pacific (WB)
 Philippines   India          Senegal      Ukraine            Mid.East& N. Afr (WB+IFC)
               Indonesia                   Vietnam            World (WB)
               Mexico
               Moldova
               Morocco
               Saudi Arabia
               Thailand
      6               12          6                7                        7                  38
Source: IEG.




                                                                                                         75
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


Appendix 6.2 Annex Table A6.2.3 World Bank Group Corporate Governance Interventions 2000-2014: Countries with at least two Interventions
   Country     2000   2001   2002   2003   2004     2005       2006      2007     2008   2009     2010    2011   2012   2013   2014   Total   Sequence
 Azerbaijan                                       ROSC; IFC                              ROSC                                          3       R AS R
                                                     AS
 Bangladesh                                                                       ROSC                           AAA    AAA            3        RAA
 Bosnia and                                                    ROSC;     Loan     AAA    IFC AS                                        5      R AS L A AS
 Herzegovina                                                   IFC AS
 Brazil               ROSC   ROSC                  ROSC                                                          ROSC                  4        RRRR
 Bulgaria                    ROSC                                                 AAA                                                  2         RA
 China                                            AAA; AAA                               IFC AS                         AAA            4       A A AS A
 Colombia                           ROSC                       Loan                               ROSC                                 3         RLR
 Croatia              ROSC                                               ROSC                                                          2         RR
 Czech                       ROSC                   AAA                                                                                2         RA
 Republic
 East Asia                                 AAA      AAA        AAA       AAA                                                           4        AAAA
 and Pacific
 Egypt, Arab          ROSC                 ROSC                          Loan            ROSC     Loan                                 5       RRLRL
 Rep.
 Georgia              ROSC                         IFC AS                                                                              2         R AS
 Ghana                                             ROSC                                                   ROSC                         2         RR
 India                ROSC                 ROSC     AAA                  AAA      AAA    AAA                                           6      RRAAAA
 Indonesia                                 ROSC                                                   ROSC;                        AAA     4        RRAA
                                                                                                   AAA
 Kazakhstan                                        IFC AS                         AAA                                                  2         AS A
 Kyrgyz                                                                  IFC AS   AAA             ROSC                                 3        AS A R
 Republic
 Lebanon                                                                  AAA;                                                         2         A AS
                                                                         IFC AS
 Macedonia,                                       ROSC;AAA    AAA; IFC                   IFC AS                                        5      R A A AS AS
 FYR                                                            AS
 Malawi                                                                  ROSC            IFC AS                                        2         R AS
 Malaysia      ROSC                                ROSC                                                          ROSC                  3         RRR
 Mauritius                   ROSC                                                                         ROSC                         2         RR


 Mexico                             ROSC                       Loan                                                                    2            RL




                                                                                                                                               76
                                                                                                                                             APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


 Country       2000   2001   2002   2003   2004      2005       2006      2007    2008     2009     2010   2011    2012     2013       2014          Total        Sequence
Middle East                                                    IFC AS                     IFC AS:                            AAA                      4           AS AS AS A
North Africa                                                                               IFC AS
Moldova                                    ROSC                 AAA                                                                                   2               RA
Mongolia                                                                                  ROSC      IFC                                               2              R AS
                                                                                                    AS
Morocco                      ROSC                                                                   ROSC                               AAA            3              RRA
Nigeria                                                                           AAA;    ROSC                                                        3             A AS R
                                                                                   IFC
                                                                                   AS
Pakistan                                             ROSC                IFC AS                     IFC                                               3             R AS AS
                                                                                                    AS
Philippines           ROSC                                      ROSC                                                                                  2               RR
Russian                             ROSC            IFC AS                                                 AAA              ROSC                      4            R AS A R
Federation
Saudi                                                                     ROSC    ROSC                             AAA       AAA                      4             RRAA
Arabia
Senegal                                                         ROSC               IFC                                                                2              R AS
                                                                                   AS
Serbia                                                         IFC AS                     IFC AS                                                      2             AS AS
Thailand                                    AAA      ROSC                                                         ROSC;                               4             ARRA
                                                                                                                   AAA
Ukraine                      ROSC                   IFC AS      ROSC                       Loan                                        AAA            5           R AS R L A
Vietnam                                                         ROSC              AAA     IFC AS    IFC                                ROSC           5           R A AS AS R
                                                                                                    AS
World                                       AAA                                                                    AAA;   AAA;AAA    AAA;AAA          7          AAAAAAA
                                                                                                                   AAA
   Total        1      6      6      3       7        18         14        11      11       14       9       3      8         7          6            124
               2000   2001   2002   2003   2004      2005       2006      2007    2008     2009     2010   2011    2012     2013       2014          Total
ROSC            1      6      6      3       4        7          5         3        2       4        4      2       3         1         1             52
WB Len                                                           2         2                1        1                                                6
WB AAA                                       3        6          3         3        7       1        1      1       5         6         5             41
IFC AS                                                5          4         3        2       8        3                                                25
Total          1       6       6       3     7         18          14       11         11      14     9       3      8         7         6           124
Notes:Excluding Bulgaria's reported 2008 CG ROSC which was in fact an Accounting and Auditing ROSC. Also one each of the reported ROSCs for the Czech Republic, Poland and
Romania were not in a comparable format. Saudi Arabia is included based upon a first unpublished CG ROSC in 2007.




                                                                                                                                                                   77
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


     Appendix 6.2 Annex Table A6.2.4 – Progress Over Time in Corporate Governance- CG ROSC Scores of 17 Countries
Progress over time in Corporate Governance: Analysis Based on Countries with Two or More Corporate Governance ROSCs
      Legend: O = Observed; LO = Largely Observed
      PO = Partially Observed; MO = Mostly non-Observed
      NO = Not Observed                                         Country 6                   Country 7                  Country 8                      Country 9                       Country 10
                                                                6. Ghana 2005 2010          7. India 2001 2004         8. Indonesia 2004 2010         9. Malaysia 2001 2005           10. Mauritius 2002 2011
      ROSC Principle:                                            NO MO PO LO O              NO MO PO LO O              NO MO PO LO O                  NO MO PO LO O                    NO MO PO LO              O
    1 Ensuring the Basis for an Effective Corporate Governance Framework
1A       Overall Corporate Governance Framework                            L   E          1                          0            L              0                  L         0                     L               0
1B       Legal Framework Enforceable/Transparent                          EL              2                        0              L              0                  L         0                           L         0
1C       Clear Division of Regulatory Responsibilities                    EL              2                        0                   L         0                  L         0                     L               0
1D       Regulatory Authority, Integrity, Resources                   E L                 3                        0              L              0                  L         0                           L         0
    2 The Rights of Shareholders and Key Ownership Functions                                                       0
2A       Basic Shareholder Rights                                     E        L          3             E      L   3              E         L    3                  L    E    1                     E     L         3
2B       Right to Participate in Fundamental Decisions                         EL         2                    EL 2                   EL         2              L        E    1                     E     L         3
2C       Shareholder AGM Rights                                            L   E          1             E      L   3              L    E         1              E   L         3                     EL              2
2D       Disproportionate Control Disclosure                              EL              2             E L        3         EL                  2         E        L         3                     EL              2
2E       Control Arrangements Allowed to Function                     E             L   3                      EL 2          E         L         3                  EL            2                 E     L         3
2F       Exercise of Ownership Rights Facilitated                     E L                 3       EL               2         E L                 3             EL             2        EL                           2
2G       Shareholders Allowed to Consult One Another                               EL 2                                                     L    0                  L         0                           L         0
    3 Equitable Treatment of Shareholders
3A       All Shareholders Should Be Treated Equally                       EL              2            EL          2              E L            3              L   E         1                     E     L         3
3B       Prohibit Insider Trading                                         EL              2            EL          2             EL              2                  L    E    1                     E     L         3
3C       Board/Managers Disclose Interests                            E L                 3        E L             3             EL              2                  L    E    1                     E     L         3
    4 Role of Stakeholders in Corporate Governance
4A       Legal Rights of Stakeholders Respected                                E L      3          E           L  3               E L            3              E   L         3                     E     L         3
4B       Stakeholder Redress                                               E L            3        E         L    3              EL              2              E   L         3                     EL              2
4C       Performance-enhancing Mechanisms                                      L    E   1          E           L  3               E L            3              E   L         3               E           L         3
4D       Stakeholder Disclosure                                           EL              2        E           L  3               E L            3              E   L         3                           EL        2
4E       Whistleblower Protection                                              EL         2                                       L              0                  L         0         L                           0
4F       Creditor Rights Law and Enforcement                               E        L   3                                         L              0                  L         0                           L         0
    5 Disclosure and Transparency
5A       Disclosure Standards                                              E L            3             E L       3              EL              2              E   L         3                     E     L         3
5B       Standards of Accounting and Audit                                 E        L   3          E         L    3               E L            3              E        L    3                           E     L   3
5C       Independent Audit Annually                                   E L                 3        E L            3              EL              2              E   L         3                     E     L         3
5D       External Auditors Should Be Accountable                           E L            3                                       L              0                  L         0                           L         0
5E       Fair and Timely Dissemination                                     L   E          1                    EL 2               E L            3                  L    E    1                           EL        3
5F       Research Conflicts of Interest                               E L                 3                                       L              0                  L         0                     L               0
    6 Responsibilities of the Board
6A       Act with Due Diligence and Care                                  EL              2                 EL     2             EL               2            EL              2                    E     L          3
6B       Treat All Shareholders Fairly                           E         L              3                 EL     2             EL               2            E    L          3                    E     L          3
6C       Apply High Ethical Standards                                      L   E          1        E           L   3             EL               2            EL              2                    EL               2
6D       Fulfil Certain Key Functions                                 L        E          1        E         L     3             EL               2            E    L          3                    E     L         3
6E       Exercise Objective Judgment                                 EL                   2        E L             3              E L             3            E    L          3              E           L          3
6F       Provide Access to Information                                     L   E          1        E           L   3             EL               2            E    L          3                    E     L         3
      Total pairs of sub-Principles reviewed                                           32                         32                            32                            32                                    32
      Totals Improved                                                                   14                         15                            10                             13                                    17
      Totals Unchanged                                                                  11                           8                           12                              4                                     6
      Totals Deteriorated                                                                 7                          0                            1                              6                                     0
      Total Scored                                                                      32                         23                            23                             23                                    23
      Not scored                                                                          0                          5                            9                              9                                     9




78
                                                                                                                                                                                                  APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


      Note: Total Number of ROSCs examined:


Progress over time in Corporate Governance: Analysis Based on Countries with Two or More Corporate Governance ROSCs
      Legend: O = Observed; LO = Largely Observed
      PO = Partially Observed; MO = Mostly non-Observed
      NO = Not Observed                                         Country 11                     Country 12                          Country 13                        Country 14                            Country 15
                                                                11. Morocco 2003 2010          12. Philippines 2001 2006           13. Russia 2004 2013              14. Saudi Arabia 2007 2009            15. Thailand 2005 2013
      ROSC Principle:                                            NO MO PO LO O                  NO MO PO LO O                       NO MO PO LO           O           NO MO PO LO O                         NO MO PO LO O
    1 Ensuring the Basis for an Effective Corporate Governance Framework
1A       Overall Corporate Governance Framework                                  L         0                 L             0                   L              0                 EL                2                       EL        2
1B       Legal Framework Enforceable/Transparent                            L              0                 L             0                   L              0                  E    L           3                       EL        2
1C       Clear Division of Regulatory Responsibilities                      L              0                 L             0                        L         0                  E    L           3                       EL        2
1D       Regulatory Authority, Integrity, Resources                         L              0                 L             0                   L              0                  E    L           3                       EL        2
    2 The Rights of Shareholders and Key Ownership Functions
2A       Basic Shareholder Rights                                               EL         2                     EL        2              E          L        3                  E    L                3                   E   L    3
2B       Right to Participate in Fundamental Decisions                          EL         2                     EL        2                        EL        2                 EL                2                   E    L        3
2C       Shareholder AGM Rights                                             L    E         1                EL             2                        EL        2                 EL                2                   L    E        1
2D       Disproportionate Control Disclosure                           E    L                3              EL                 2          E    L              3                 EL                2                   L    E        1
2E       Control Arrangements Allowed to Function                      E    L              3                 L             0        E          L              3                       EL          2                       EL        2
2F       Exercise of Ownership Rights Facilitated                 E         L                3              EL             2              L    E              1                  L                0                   L    E        1
2G       Shareholders Allowed to Consult One Another                             L         0                      L        0                        L         0                       L           0                       EL        2
    3 Equitable Treatment of Shareholders
3A       All Shareholders Should Be Treated Equally                        EL                2               L    E        1              E         L         3                             L     0                  EL             2
3B       Prohibit Insider Trading                                      E    L              3                 L    E        1              E    L              3                  L                0                       EL        2
3C       Board/Managers Disclose Interests                             E    L              3           E     L             3                  EL              2                       L           0                       EL        2
    4 Role of Stakeholders in Corporate Governance
4A       Legal Rights of Stakeholders Respected                        E         L         3                     EL        2              E    L              3                       L            0                      EL        2
4B       Stakeholder Redress                                           E         L         3           E     L             3              E    L              3                  L                 0                      EL        2
4C       Performance-enhancing Mechanisms                              E    L              3           E     L             3                  EL              2                  L                0                       EL        2
4D       Stakeholder Disclosure                                             L    E         1           E     L             3              E    L              3                                   ??                      EL        2
4E       Whistleblower Protection                                 L                        0           L                   0                   L              0             L                     0                   E    L        3
4F       Creditor Rights Law and Enforcement                                                           L                   0                   L              0                       L           0                       EL        2
    5 Disclosure and Transparency
5A       Disclosure Standards                                          E    L              3                EL             2                  EL              2                 EL                2                       EL        2
5B       Standards of Accounting and Audit                             E         L         3           E          L        3                        EL        2             E    L                3                   E        L    3
5C       Independent Audit Annually                                         L         E    1           E     L             3                  EL              2             E    L                3                       EL        2
5D       External Auditors Should Be Accountable                            L              0                 L             0                   L              0                  L                0                       EL        2
5E       Fair and Timely Dissemination                                          EL         2           E     L             3                   E          L   3                 EL                2                       EL        2
5F       Research Conflicts of Interest                                          L         0                 L             0        L                         0             L                     0                   L    E        1
    6 Responsibilities of the Board
6A       Act with Due Diligence and Care                                    L    E         1           E     L             3              E    L              3                 EL                2                   E    L        3
6B       Treat All Shareholders Fairly                                           L    E    1                 L    E        1              E    L              3                 EL                2                       EL        2
6C       Apply High Ethical Standards                                           EL         2                 L    E        1              E    L              3                 EL                2                   E    L        3
6D       Fulfil Certain Key Functions                                      EL              2           E     L             3                  EL              2                 EL                2                   E    L        3
6E       Exercise Objective Judgment                                       EL              2           E     L             3                  EL              2                 EL                2                   E    L        3
6F       Provide Access to Information                                      L    E         1           E          L        3              E    L              3                       E     L     3                   L    E        1
      Total pairs of sub-Principles reviewed                                              32                               32                                 32                                  32                                32
      Totals Improved                                                                       10                              11                                 13                                   7                                 8
      Totals Unchanged                                                                       7                                7                                  9                                 12                                19
      Totals Deteriorated                                                                    6                                4                                  1                                  0                                 5
      Total Scored                                                                          23                              22                                 23                                  19                                32
      Not scored                                                                             8                              10                                   9                                 12                                 0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    79
                                                                            APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


Appendix 6.3: The Western Hemisphere Initiative and Other Regional Payments
Initiatives

1.      The Western Hemisphere Payments and Securities Settlement Initiative (WHI), began in
1999 under the partnership of the World Bank and CEMLA (Center for Latin American
Monetary Studies) and COSRA, the Latin American association of securities regulators, in
collaboration with other international organizations (CPSS of BIS, IMF, IADB), as well as central
banks (including the Federal Reserve Board, the Central Bank of Italy, Central Bank of Spain,
etc.). As a result of its diagnostic assessments the World Bank was subsequently involved with
reform implementation, through technical assistance loans (e.g., in Brazil, Honduras,
Dominican Republic, Guatemala and Paraguay) and through advisory services (e.g., Bahamas,
Barbados, El Salvador, Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela and Jamaica) in several countries over
the following decade. The WB role evolved from coordination to support of the Forum, that was
firmly established in the region, housed in CEMLA. CEMLA and the Working Group on
Payment System Issues of Latin America and the Caribbean (WGPS-LAC) continue to
coordinate with the WB on the biannual “Global Payments Week”; one of the key events in the
payment systems area at the international level. Examples of WHI assessment follow up
interventions include a 2002 diagnostic of the Dominican Republic that was followed by a WB
Technical Assistance Loan in 2004, leading to the adoption of a Real Time Gross Settlement
System (RTGS) that went live in 2008. The assessments in Jamaica and Venezuela led to requests
for fee based advisory services for payments and securities settlement systems reform.

2.      Following a request from the central banks of the countries of the Middle East and North
Africa (MENA) Region, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, in cooperation
with the Arab Monetary Fund, led the Arab Payments and Securities Settlement Initiative (API),
based on the SADCC central bank group (2005). Its objective was to assess the payment systems
of MENA countries, identifying possible improvements in their safety, efficiency and integrity.
An expert International Advisory Council (IAC) comprising IFIs, central banks and securities
commissions from other regions supports the API. And as with the Western Hemisphere
Payments and Securities Settlement Initiative (WHI), there have been several regional follow
ups that still continue, many as Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS), including, e.g., Oman,
Saudi Arabia and Quatar.

Following a request from the central banks of the countries of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS), the World Bank led the CIS Payments and Securities Settlement
Initiative (2004), following, once again, the pattern of country level diagnostics under the aegis
of an expert International Advisory Council. As with the Western Hemisphere Initiative, follow
up began in several countries with World Bank involvement. In this region too, the CIS
Payments Initiative evolved into a permanent forum with the creation of the CIS Working
Group on Payment Systems in 2008.




                                                                                                80
                                                                                                   APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


Appendix 6.4: Payments Projects Analyzed
1.      IEG’s portfolio identification of relevant payments and securities clearance and
settlement projects for the Approach paper, beyond system codes, was based largely on word
searches and additionally supplemented by the advice of Bank payments experts. It yielded 25
projects. For the present full evaluation, IEG supplemented its initial portfolio identification
with a more detailed review, examining all available documentation for projects with a
payments flag, and using a more granular classification according to whether they had high,
medium or low content in the securities settlements area. Overall results were similar to those
of the Approach Paper, with 10 core projects focused on securities settlement systems, and
another 20 with medium securities settlement content. IEG also noted relevant current projects
in 2014-2015.

Appendix 6.4 Table 1: World Bank Payments and Securities Settlement Systems Portfolio (2004-2015)

                                All country level payments     At least significant reference to   Core Reference to Securities
                                       interventions              securities settlement (30)             Settlement (10)
                                             75
 By Region
   AFR                                            17                                   11                            3
   MNA                                            19                                    6                            2
   ECA                                            18                                    6                            2
   SAR                                            1                                     1                            0
   EAP                                            3                                     2                            1
   LCR                                            17                                    4                            2
 By Funding
   BB- Lending                                    21                                    12                           2
   BB- Advisory                                   20                                    5                            2
   FIRST                                          22                                    10                           4
   RAS                                            12                                    3                            2
 By Time period
   2002-2008                                      26                                    11                           5
   2009-2015                                      49                                    19                           5

Source: IEG.
Note: Of the 75 country level interventions reviewed by IEG, 30 had significant content in the securities settlement area, and in
10 of these 30, there was major focus on securities settlement systems, whether in specific components or in the entire project.


2.      As shown in Appendix 6.4 Table 1 the payments portfolio is limited to the World Bank
alone and consists mostly of analytical and advisory work (a third to a fifth or projects in all
three categories represented lending). There is some regional clustering of interventions over
time, following regional payments systems workshop roll-outs. In the first half of the period
reviewed, there was a significant focus on Latin America, as well as Africa, which together
accounted for 15 out of 26 projects in the period 2002-2008. In the latter period, demonstrating
the effectiveness of new regional initiatives, waves of new projects began in the Middle East and
North Africa (13), and Europe and Central Asia (12), comprising over half the total. Trust


                                                                                                                                81
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


funding and reimbursable services have provided substantial support for 34 out of the total of
75 projects reviewed and a higher proportion (6 out of 10) of projects with core content in the
securities settlement space. And many of the 75 interventions (over four fifths of lending
projects and half the non-lending projects), especially in Africa and Middle East, were
coordinated with other donors and IFIs. 37




37 Kenya's Financial and Legal Sector Technical Assistance Project (FLSTAP) approved in 2004 was co-

financed by DFID. Loans in Mozambique were built on the the coordination of multiple organizations; in
2009 a memorundam of understanding was signed by 19 institutions including the World Bank. And
there was coordination with the IMF in the payment systems area in Ethiopia, Mozambique, Namibia,
Rwanda, Azerbaijan, Moldova, and Morocco.


82
                                                                              APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 6


Appendix 6.5: Risk Reduction with Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) and Link to
Securities Clearance 38

1.      If a country has an RTGS payments system, a bank can make a payment only if it has
adequate balances in its settlement account at the central bank. Payments are thus made on a
‘gross’ basis. As a result, any liquidity problem is detected immediately. RTGS is the most
certain way of eliminating interbank settlement risk. A RTGS system does not remove the
possibility that a bank may fail and be unable to make timely payments, but it limits the
problem to the failed institution.

2.      In contrast, prior to the introduction to RTGS, banks used the Deferred Net Settlement
(DNS) system, in which they continued to make payments throughout the day that were then
netted against each other at the end of the day. Thus liquidity pressures were concentrated in
the end-of-day settlement session. If a problem arose at that point, it involved dealing with the
whole of the day’s inward and outward payments, across all banks, and the need to ‘unwind’
payments – leading to the ‘contagion’ of bank failures. Loss-sharing rules meant other banks
carried a share of the burden and depended for their efficacy on the robustness of netting law.
By requiring prefunding of each payment, an RTGS system prevents settlement risk. It provides
recipients with the assurance that payments are irrevocable and final; and it removes the
possibility that the broader financial community will be caught up in the liquidity pressures
that could follow a settlement failure.

3.      While a small number of countries have had RTGS systems for certain high-value
payments for some time, such as ‘Fedwire’ in the US, the SIC system in Switzerland and BOJ-
NET in Japan since the late 1980s, developing countries began to move in this direction
beginning with Thailand, South Korea and China, from around 1997. Others began to follow,
several with the assistance of the World Bank. Securities clearance and settlement systems are
now recognized as having the same inherent risks as those associated with systemically
important payment mechanisms. Since securities trading requires transfer of ownership in
tandem with the transfer of payment, well-functioning payments systems are a prerequisite for
sound securities clearance and settlement systems. Government securities settlement has
traditionally come under the oversight of the payments departments of central banks. Vendor
provided RTGS hardware increasingly integrate elements such as automated clearing house
(ACH) facilities for securities settlement. central banks as well as securities regulators today
complement private services in the spectrum of public and private securities.



38 Sources: Keppler, (1999), Transforming Payment Systems: The Building Blocks and the World Bank’s

Role, World Bank/Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY); Guadamillas and Keppler (2001)
Securities Clearance and Settlement Systems; Allsopp, Summers and Veale (2009) ‘ The Evolution of Real-
Time Gross Settlement: Access, Liquidity and Credit, and Pricing. FPD, World Bank; CPSS, BIS (2008)
“The Interdependencies of Payment and Settlement Systems.”


                                                                                                     83
Appendixes to Chapter 7
Appendix 7.1: – World Bank Group Strategy Towards Infrastructure Finance

1.      As witnessed by a series of strategy documents, financing infrastructure finance has
received increasing emphasis as a priory for the World Bank Group throughout the review
period of this evaluation.39 At the outset of IEG’s review period World Bank lending for
infrastructure had dropped from US$10.6 billion in 1993 to US$5.4 billion in 2003. This led to the
formulation of an Infrastructure Action Plan (IAP), FY04-07, to revitalize the institution’s
engagement in infrastructure, followed by subsequent Action Plans for FY 09-11 (which
identified a $1 trillion gap in financing needs), and the most recently updated World Bank
Group Infrastructure Strategy FY12-15, which lays out the framework for transforming the
Group’s engagement in infrastructure. 40
2.      Mention of capital markets financing for infrastructure has received varying degrees of
emphasis. Thus the Action Plan for FY09-11 inter alia discussed both global and local capital
markets as a possible source of infrastructure financing, to be supported by IFC’s Global
Financial Markets group. It also mentioned exploring use of World Bank Group risk mitigation
products and asset backed securities, and it emphasized the need to support PPP for
infrastructure finance. The more holistic recent strategy for FY12-15 takes a broad view of what
is required—in terms of partnership, knowledge, advice, and projects—for infrastructure to
accelerate growth. It emphasizes the need for transformational engagement and recognizes the
need to mobilize private capital and the importance of building public private partnerships. It
mentions the need for support to capital market development as one element along the
spectrum of PPP activities.
3.     The present broad based approach of the World Bank Group has been reaffirmed in the
international sphere, where huge if nebulous financing deficits are discussed - e.g., the World
Bank Group umbrella report to the G20 on Long-Term Investment Financing for Growth and
Development (2013); statements of the G20 Investing in Infrastructure working group (2014) on
the need for long term infrastructure investments, to the tune of $2 trillion; and the 2015 Addis
Ababa Action Agenda, which points to a “1 trillion to $1.5 trillion annual gap”. 41 Most recently,


39 See http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTSDNET/Resources/5944695-
1241627159876/SIAPfinal.pdf
40 Infrastructure Strategy Update FY12-15: Transformation Through Infrastructure.

http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTINFRA/Resources/Transformationthroughinfrastructure.pdf
41 Addis Ababa Action Agenda – Third International Conference on Financing for Development July 13-

16, 2015. It states that “…Investing in sustainable and resilient infrastructure, including transport, energy,
water and sanitation for all, is a pre-requisite for achieving many of our goals.”
http://www.un.org/esa/ffd/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/AAAA_Outcome.pdf ; G20 –Policy Note
“Increasing Investment in Infrastructure” –August 2014 (Australia).


                                                                                                            84
                                                                                APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


during the 2015 IMF World Bank Annual Meetings in Lima, Peru, the WB’s MD drew attention
to the need to mobilize capital market resources through institutional investors, such as pension
funds, and to fill the funding gap for infrastructure in the developing countries. 42 Moreover the
2015 Global Financial Development Report focuses on the provision of long term finance,
significantly in the context of capital market development. 43
4.      Moreover, even prior to the period under review, and continuing to the present, the WB
has long offered advisory services on project bonds (for example, Gray et. al., (1997), Dailami
[2003]). Interest in this area waned after the financial crisis, but is making a comeback (Bond,
Daniel (2014); Bravo, Fernando, (2014) and Garcia-Kilroy [2014]). The G-20 High Level Panel on
Infrastructure pointed to the critical need to find new mechanisms for leveraging resources for
infrastructure projects (G20 High Level Panel on Infrastructure [2011]). The World Bank Group
envisages a scale up of its infrastructure financing activities, as described in its umbrella report
on Long-Term Investment Financing for Growth and Development (2013), in the latest
infrastructure strategy update FY13-15 (World Bank, 2013), and in its recent establishment of a
Global Infrastructure Fund (World Bank, 2014).
5.      Project bonds allow borrowers to access a capital markets investor base, attract another
pool of liquidity that could complement – and for some projects fully replace – bank funding
and, for projects with a long economic life, obtain longer tenors than available in the bank
market. Project finance and infrastructure assets, with their long-dated tenors, flexible
structures, contractual framework and cash flows, lend themselves well to fixed income
investors and in particular ‘real money’ investors, such as pension funds and insurances with
long-term liabilities structures. Fixed income investors are keen to increase their allocations to
long-dated assets as they search for returns in the current low interest rate environment. For
borrowers, project bonds could help diversify away from the historical reliance on banks as a
sole source of funding. The capital markets’ deep investor base and wide geographical spread
also reduces reliance on investors from one single country. Whereas historically the US dollar
Qualified Institutional Investor (the so called section 144a) base was the only market for long
dated bonds, Southern European and Asian investors have become much more important in
recent years and have shown an increased appetite for longer tenors.

6.     Some diminution of interest in project bonds after the financial crisis partly reflected the
disappearance of credit enhancements for such bonds, hitherto available from ‘monoline’
insurers, who provided ‘wrapped’ finance for project bonds. 44 However, the availability of
long-term investment financing from all sources has diminished following the crisis and has not


42 http://live.worldbank.org/infrastructure-investing-for-growth-and-people. These Annual meetings
(October 2015) also showcased the recently established $100 million WB Global Infrastructure Facility, set
up in April 2015, and pointed toward $1 trillion of unmet demand for infrastructure demand in emerging
and developing economies (EMDEs).
43 Long Term Finance. (2015), World Bank.
44 See e.g., Yescombe (2011): Public-Private Partnerships: Principles of Policy and Finance.




                                                                                                        85
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


fully recovered due to persistent weakness in the global economy. Meanwhile, commercial
banks’ appetite for lending to project finance transactions is also being adversely impacted by
the new regulatory requirements (Basel II&III). As a consequence of these multiple factors, deal
volumes in 2012 were at an historic low, despite the closing of large transactions with
government support. The number of projects to reach financial close fell 8 percent in 2012, the
first annual decline since 2002. Global project finance in 2012 was down 6 percent from 2011. 45
7.       At the present juncture, there is a timely revival of interest in the case for developing
bond markets, especially project bonds, for infrastructure finance in emerging markets as new
estimates of infrastructure needs are estimated variously at around US$57 trillion to US$70
trillion from 2013 through 2030. Attention is turning to institutional investors (such as pension
funds) who may have the potential to step in and finance longer-term infrastructure projects as
they hold over US$85 trillion in assets in OECD countries.
8.      Mobilizing long term capital market resources becomes an important element of the
strategy for funding infrastructure. This mobilization can take place at sovereign, corporate or
project levels. While sovereign and corporate debt borrowings from capital markets reflect
sovereign or corporate ratings, borrowing at the project level depends upon the stand alone
credit quality of the project and the regulatory requirements e.g. investment grade or higher
rating, governing potential institutional investors, hence making mobilization substantially
more challenging. As equity is generally not constrained by requirements such as ratings but
driven by risk/reward considerations it is generally less challenging to mobilize.




45G20/McKinsey/World Bank (2013) Long Term Financing for Growth and Development: Umbrella
Paper, February.


86
                                                                          APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


Appendix 7.2: Infrastructure Portfolio Identification
1.      As discussed in the Approach Paper, relevant World Bank infrastructure and capital
market interventions were initially identified as all activities with both capital market related
sector codes and infrastructure related sector or theme codes, over the period 2004 through
2015. For IFC activities, capital market relevance was determined based on sector classification
while infrastructure focus was indicated by an infrastructure flag for advisory services and by
infrastructure department codes for investments. These included 6 IFC investment projects that
utilized securities instruments (4 bonds and 2 guarantees of bonds to support infrastructure
development These interventions were determined to be primarily focused on financing
infrastructure. One additional loan and one additional WB AAA were added to the list of the
Approach Paper, as they are recent, and were not included in the FY04-14 project list.
2.      IEG has not included projects which had a different market segment as their primary
focus, even if they included infrastructure finance content, as these are reviewed elsewhere in
the report. E.g., IFC also has 26 private equity (PE) funds with some focus on infrastructure;
these are combined with the review on PE in chapter 3. Separately, IEG also reviewed projects
supported by WB guarantees to identify possible indirect support for the use of capital markets
instruments.




                                                                                               87
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


Appendix 7.3: – IFC Guarantees and Performance Bonds for Infrastructure: Extracts
from Board documents

1.       Guatemala City Project (Closed, AppFY2006): This project entailed a risk sharing
facility with Banco G&T Continental, where both IFC and B&T pool their risk capital to finance
the city project. The total financing package for the MTS project and related civil works is Q351
million (US$46.2 equivalent). It comprises two segments: (i) a 10 year syndicated local currency
loan in the amount of Q279 million (US$ 36.7 million equivalent), and (ii) a local currency loan
from Banco G&T Continental in the amount of Q72 million (US$ 9.5 million). IFC will provide a
local currency partial credit enhancement to G&T through a risk sharing facility for 70% of
G&T's exposure (US$ 6.7 million equivalent). If the term of a loan exceeds the term of
administration in the local municipalities in Guatemala, a positive recommendation has to be
obtained from a technical feasibility study prior to incurring the loan. Such recommendation
was obtained with respect to the full scope of this project being financed by both the syndicated
loan and the G&T loan. Banco G&T Continental is also contributing to the total financing
package.
2.      Arabesque Corp Finance (Active, AppFY2007): IFC’s proposed financing in this case
consisted of an A Loan of up to EUR 28 million; a B Loan of up to EUR 28 million and an IFC
guarantee of up to US$ 10.5 million, guaranteeing the underlying payment obligations related
to the purchase of shares in Budmax. With EU accession in January 2007, the Romanian
financial market is experiencing increased liquidity. However, the Company’s access to
alternative financing would only be available at shorter tenors than IFC and without the benefit
of grace periods. IFC's presence in this transaction will help increase investor's confidence in
these countries business environments where Arabesque has been unable to satisfactorily obtain
the needed funds from the local or foreign commercial banks. Additionally, IFC long tenors
tailored to meet the cash flow needs of the Project will help further strengthen Arabesque's long
term financial position.
3.      Irapuato-Piedad (Active, AppFY2007): The proposed IFC investment consists of a
partial credit guarantee of up to 25% of a local currency loan of up to MX$580 million to be
provided by Banco Santander Serfin and a syndicate of banks ("the senior lenders") to finance
the Project. IFC's guarantee is equivalent to up to MX$145 million (approximately US$13
million).The project will also be funded through equity in the amount of MX$160.8 million
(equivalent to US$14.6 million) contributed by the Sponsor. Since the project is active and the
1st guarantee occurred 2/2007, as such, it is too early to measure an impact on the sector.
4.     Hernic BEE (Active, AppFY2006) [Guarantee(s) facilitating equity investment/reduce
financing cost]: This was IFC’s follow on investment “Hernic BEE”. The investment was
approximately US$4.5 million and consisted of a shareholder loan of US$0.8 million and up to
the South African Rand (“ZAR”) equivalent of US$3.7 million in loan guarantees. The
investment was made to secure the future of IFC’s earlier investment in the Company. IFC



88
                                                                          APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


would provide a guarantee of up to ZAR23 million to support the financing of the BEE
structure. Rand Merchant Bank (RMB) will finance the BEE purchase price of ZAR180 million
for 15% of Hernic's shares. The guarantees provided by all shareholders with the exception of
the BEE Partners are designed to facilitate and lower the cost of financing to the BEE Partners,
thereby enabling them to vest more quickly in their shares.

5.       El Jadida RADEEJ (Active, AppFY2008): The proposed investment was a risk sharing
facility with a consortium of local financial institutions in Morocco for a 15-year dirham-
denominated loan to RADEEJ in the amount of MAD 300 million. Under the risk sharing
agreement, IFC would cover 50% of the credit risk associated with the loan, up to a maximum
exposure of MAD 150 million (equivalent to approximately USD 19 million). Through its
participation in the pioneering RADEEJ deal, IFC met its expected additionality in helping to
jumpstart the market for financing sub-national water utilities in Morocco. The facility would
also allow the local banks to lengthen the maturity of their loans to RADEEJ from a 10-year
tenor to a 15-year tenor. No funds were disbursed against the original Risk Sharing Facility
amount of US$20 million. Although IFC's contributions to the project are not apparent due to
the early cancellation of the facility, one could argue that the groundwork laid by IFC in
convening the right participants/stakeholders in the project and facilitating the risk sharing
facility improved the understanding of subnational credit risk and interest levels of the local
banks in lending to municipalities.
6.     BBVA Lima and BBVA Arequipa (Closed, AppFY2010; and Active, AppFY2011): IFC
guarantee will cover up to PEN 90 Million, and will not cover the portion of the loan that will be
used for the Bus Scrapping Fund. (No more info) On BBF Arequipa: : IFC guarantee will cover
up to PEN 15 Million. Mining transfers flowing to an independently-managed trust with a 3x
DSCR. IFC shares security pari passu with BBVA in case the guarantee is called. (No more info
7.       Zain Malawi District (Closed, FY2010): IFC provided a partial credit guarantee as part
of a risk sharing facility of approximately MK2 billion with Standard Bank Malawi Limited
which will provide local lending to small and medium enterprises (SMEs) that distributed
mobile telephone air time for Zain Malawi Limited (“Zain”). The proposed risk-sharing facility
was intended to enable Zain’s distributors to access financing from Standard Bank on favorable
terms than currently available. The Project aimed to allow Standard Bank to expand its lending
to this sector with lower risk of loss. To an extent IFC introduced a "new structured product
(RSF) to SBM, the Project was innovative. However, the RSF was defective in the context of the
business environment and implementation challenges.
8.     Tegucigalpa (Closed, FY2011)): The proposed investment is a risk-sharing with a loan to
be provided by a syndicate of local banks to the Alcaldía Municipal del Distrito Central (AMDC
or the Municipality) of Tegucigalpa for investments in urban transport infrastructure and
refinancing of a short term bridge loan. The loan size will be up to Lempiras (HNL) 1 billion
(approximately US$53 million), and the risk share would cover up to 50% of the loan, with a
maximum exposure of US$15 million.


                                                                                                   89
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


Appendix 7.4: – Infrastructure Project Bonds- Other IFIs and Country Models
The EIB – A Multilateral Initiative

1.       There are ongoing efforts by most of the development institutions to find ways to
mobilize resources for development from the capital markets in general and for infrastructure
development in particular. Some of these initiatives are discussed below. The Project Bond
Initiative of the European Investment Bank is one of the more comprehensive, targeted and
advanced efforts to mobilize resources for infrastructure using project bonds and provides a
replicable model.
2.      The European Project Bond Credit Enhancement (PBCE) facility has been sponsored by
the European Union to catalyze increased investment in the European Infrastructure sector. The
PBCE is a response to the sharp contraction of available capital to fund infrastructure globally
after the financial crisis. Europe has been particularly impacted due to the previous reliance on
the commercial bank market as the provider of senior debt to projects and sharply reduced
equity funding. The pilot phase for up to 2020 was initiated in 2012. The European Investment
Bank (EIB) is the manager of the PBCE.
3.      A pilot phase was undertaken to test the project bond concept during the multi-annual
financial framework 2007-2013, to feed into design modifications for the next multi-annual
financial framework 2014-2020. The test phase was funded by EUR 230 million of EU budgetary
resources from unused budget lines for existing programs. This should enable the EIB to
provide financing to infrastructure projects worth more than EUR 4 billion across the three
sectors. The EIB selects and appraises projects according to its own standards, structures and
prices the credit enhancement instrument for the selected project, and carries out the
monitoring, although it will not act as a credit controller. Subsequent decision-making for
projects will be formulated on a case by case basis by the parties involved. As of end 2014, the
EIB Board of Directors had approved nine projects in six different Member States.
4.      The first transaction under the Project Bond Credit Enhancement initiative successfully
took place in July 2013 in Spain for the Castor underground gas storage project, to provide
storage for 30% of Spain’s daily gas consumption. Based on a positive interim evaluation in
2013 and subject to the final evaluation of the pilot phase in 2015, the Project Bond Initiative is
expected to be fully rolled-out within the Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) forming part of the
2014-2020 Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF).The program is managed by the EIB, builds
on its core strength of providing senior debt funding to trans-European infrastructure projects.
All three leading corporate rating agencies – Fitch, Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s supported
the proposal.
5.     For large projects, where bank loans and bonds are part of the financing package,
bondholders can benefit from the role of third-party banks as controlling creditor. They will
also benefit from the EIB expertise in due diligence, valuation and pricing methodologies.



90
                                                                             APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7

Other IFI Initiatives

6.       In addition to the EIB program discussed above there have been ongoing efforts by
almost all development institutions and governments to substantially increase the use of capital
markets particularly for project bonds. In some case these efforts complement the initiatives to
develop regional and domestic capital market such as the efforts being undertaken by Asian
Development Bank under ABMI to develop the bond markets in Asia. A subset of these
initiatives which is particularly relevant for the infrastructure sector is the local currency project
bond markets. African Development Bank and Asia Development Bank have carried out an
exhaustive review of the potential of bond financing and expect to provide credit enhancements
to enable the bonds to reach acceptable credit ratings. And in August 2015 IADB approved a
US$200 million partial credit guarantee for a bond issuance for “Constructora Norberto
Odebrecht S.A. (CNO) Surety Bond Project”. There are also few example of the private sector
arms of multilaterals enhancing and/or participating in municipal and project bonds in foreign
and local currency but there have been relatively few such transactions.
Latin American Bond Markets – Chile, Brazil, Peru and Mexico

7.      Latin America has an active project bond market albeit with divergent results across the
continent. Chile is a Latin American leader in terms of having well-developed financial
institutions and markets (along with Brazil, Peru, and Mexico). One of the keys to Chilean
financial market development, and consequently to the development of the project bond
market, was the 1981 reform that established the basis for private pension plans. Private
pension funds in Chile have assets equivalent to about 70 percent of GDP, the largest in the
region. Infrastructure bonds in Chile account for about one-fifth of all outstanding corporate
bonds, with about 90 percent held by pension funds and insurance companies. Chilean
infrastructure bonds generally have a credit enhancement in the form of a guarantee by a
monoline insurance company or a multilateral agency. The decline of the monoline guarantee
business in the wake of the global financial crisis has led to a sharp reduction in the issuance of
Chilean infrastructure bonds. PPP concessionaires in Chile also typically benefit from a
government minimum revenue guarantee, mitigating the risk that revenues will fall short of
projections.
8.     In contrast with Chile, the Brazilian project bond market is much smaller. This seems
somewhat surprising, given the size and sophistication of its banking and corporate sectors.
One contributing factor may be that, unlike other countries in the region, Brazil did not
undertake pension reform in the 1980s or 1990s. As a result, Brazilian institutional investors are
smaller than their counterparts in other countries in the region.
9.      As in Chile, pension funds in Peru have been among the major investors in
infrastructure bonds. Additionally, substantial infrastructure investments have been made
through private equity funds. A potentially useful model is the Infrastructure Debt Trust Fund,
a type of private equity fund established by Peruvian pension fund managers to pool expertise.


                                                                                                    91
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


Four of these funds undertake due diligence and make the actual investment in the project,
while the pension funds and other institutional investors invest in the Debt Trust Fund rather
than individual debt or equity securities.
10.    Mexican structured products known as certificates of capital development (CCDs)
provide a vehicle for investors to indirectly fund infrastructure projects. CCDs are listed on the
Mexican stock exchange to provide liquidity and invest directly in one or more projects, or in
the securities issued by companies engaged in infrastructure activities. Virtually, all of the
outstanding CCDs are held by Mexican pension funds. Conceptually, Mexican CCDs and
Peruvian infrastructure debt trust funds offer models that could be replicated in other region.




92
                                                                                 APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


Appendix 7.5: – Supporting the Environment and Other Priority Sectors: Green
Bonds and Theme Bonds

1.      In 2008, the World Bank Group adopted a Strategic Framework for Development and
Climate Change to increase support to sustainable investments and as a part of this strategy,
the IBRD and IFC Treasury Departments began to issue thematic bonds supporting World Bank
Group operational work on climate change that came to be known as ‘green bonds’. 46
Subsequently IFC began to support other areas of the real sector deemed to be strategic using
similar structures; ‘Banking on women’ bonds and ‘Inclusive business’ bonds, while the IBRD
Treasury assisted the support of bond issues in other areas: ‘vaccine’ bonds and catastrophic
risk (CAT) bonds are examples. 47 As of June 30, 2015, total World Bank Group issuance of
thematic bonds amounted to US$12.7 billion, and over 96 percent of these consisted of green
bonds. IBRD accounted for 69 percent of total green bond issuance of the World Bank Group.
IFC issued the two largest green bonds, of US$1.0 billion each compared to the largest issue of
US$600 million by IBRD.

2.       The present evaluation does not question the relevance of these issues, given that they
support World Bank Group strategic priorities; rather it provides a perspective of their
effectiveness in terms of supporting the increase of sustainable investments, whether for climate
change or other priority areas, their additionally, and their sustainability in global debt
markets. 48

3.     Demand for green bonds and environmentally friendly investment opportunities
increased after 2000, following the Montreal Protocol, and the adoption of the UN Principles for
Responsible Investing (PRI). 49 Investors who signed on – mostly buy-and-hold asset managers,
pension funds, insurance companies and others - did not have in-house capacity to select
environmentally friendly projects and carry out the required due diligence.

29.    In response, the European Investment Bank (EIB) was the first multilateral development
bank (MDB) to issue a Climate Awareness Bond (CAB), in 2007, introducing a core underlying
concept - ring-fencing of proceeds of such bonds to match disbursements of underlying World
Bank Group portfolios that contributed to green bond goals: a reduction in carbon emissions.
Shortly after, IBRD in in collaboration with a Swedish pension fund investment house,
Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken (SEB), issued its first green bond of SK3.25 billion (US$403


46 World Bank, Development and Climate Change: A Strategic Framework for the World Bank Group, DC

2008-0009, September 30, 2008.
47 Thematic bonds other than green bonds are discussed in Appendix A6.5.
48 For an introduction, see http://treasury.worldbank.org/cmd/htm/WorldBankGreenBonds.html.
49 UN (2006). See e.g., “Principles for Responsible Investment”. An investor initiative in partnership with

UNEP Finance Initiative and the UN Global Compact. http://www.unpri.org/viewer/?file=wp-
content/uploads/PRI_Brochure_2015.pdf


                                                                                                         93
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


million) in November 2008, targeting European investors. 50 This was followed by an issue of
US$300 million in green bonds to the State of California, also a first time responsible investor in
WB paper. In accordance with the principle of ring fencing, the World Bank agreed to credit the
proceeds of the issue to a special account for funding loan disbursements to qualifying green
projects in client countries (Appendix 7.5 Box 1). IFC started issuing green bonds in 2010.

30.     Green bonds issuance by the World Bank Group has grown rapidly but although the
amounts issued by the World Bank Group were relatively large, by 2014 aggregate World Bank
Group annual issues were only about 10 percent of total green bond issuance in the global
market place, then estimated at around US$40 billion. 51 By early June 2015, IBRD had issued 100
green bonds totaling US$8.4 billion. The combined issuance of the World Bank Group was
US$12.2 billion. Other issuers followed suit, worldwide, The EIB remains the largest issuer in
this space.

31.     World Bank Group green bonds were thus its plain vanilla debt instruments with the
green bond label, with disbursements tied to a ringed-in portfolio, sold to socially responsible
investors (SRI) who were looking to meet their compliance requirements without taking on
screening or additional risks. AAA bonds issued by the World Bank Group with a green bond
label facilitated their investment decisions. IBRD green bonds have the same characteristics and
risk profile as its standard debt instruments. This is also true for IFC and EIB. There is no cost
savings to the World Bank or IFC in issuing these bonds.

32.      As of June 2015, IBRD had launched 100 green bonds/ structured notes totaling US$8.4
billion in 18 currencies, and sold to diverse investors. They ranged from large benchmark issues
(US$600 million, the largest green bond issued by IBRD to date), to a US$5 million issue.
However, the proceeds were always swapped back to US$ as IBRD is a spread borrower and
does not take exchange risks in its lending or borrowing operations (Appendix 7.5 Figure 1).


 Appendix 7.5 Box 1. World Bank Group Green Bonds and Eligible Project Selection Criteria
 How do World Bank Group green bonds work?
 As part of their annual funding program, and based upon prevailing market conditions, IBRD and IFC issue a part of their
 annual bonds under a green bond label. The proceeds raised from such issues are credited to a special account, and
 matched against loan disbursements of eligible projects. Proceeds are not tied and can be disbursed for existing projects that
 meet the eligibility criteria as well as new environment-friendly projects. Investors are given prospectuses that identify the
 underlying eligible projects, and there is a periodic reconciliation of project disbursements against funds raised. Criteria for
 eligible projects include:



50Initially planned for SK 2.35 billion, it was increased to SK 3.25 billion, in response to the demand.
51For example, the State of Massachusetts, Ile de France, Export Development Canada have all issued
green bonds, and the largest issue was in May 2014, by the French utility GDF Suez, for 2.5 billion euro.
See Reichelt and Davies (2015): http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2014/03/04/growing-
green-bonds-market-climate-resilience.


94
                                                                                                  APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


 Mitigation
      • Solar and wind installations;
      • Funding for new Technologies that permit significant reductions in greenhouse gas emissions;
      • Rehabilitation of power plants and transmission facilities to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
      • Greater efficiency in transportation, including fuel switching and mass transport;
      • Waste management (methane emissions) and construction of energy efficient buildings;
      • Carbon reduction through reforestation and avoided deforestation.
 Adaptation
     • Protection against flooding (including reforestation and watershed management)
     • Food security improvement and stress-resilient agricultural systems (which slow down deforestation)
     • Sustainable forest management and avoided deforestation.
 IBRD and IFC green bonds are thus linked to the ongoing and proposed pipeline of projects that provide support against climate
 change. Their pricing and characteristics do not materially differ from the regular bond issues of these institutions. While
 issuance of green bonds is thus not linked to an expansion of this part of the World Bank Group portfolio, the bonds attract new
 investor classes toward the support of World Bank Group bonds, and help to highlight the important work that the World Bank
 Group undertakes in this area.
 Innovation
 In 2013, IFC issued two large green bonds (benchmark bonds) of US$1.0 billion distributed globally. These IFC benchmark
 bond issues attracted a large proportion of US pension fund investors. In July 2014 IBRD issued an €50 million 10-year equity
 index-linked green bond linked to the performance of the Ethical Europe Equity Index, that tracks eligible sustainable
 companies. This transaction helped expand the investor base to include those in search of a sustainable equity index. And in
 February 2015 IBRD issued its largest and longest dated global US$ green bond for US$600 million, at a 10-year fixed rate.

 Sources: IEG, IBRD and IFC Treasuries.


33.    IFC started issuing green bonds in 2010, shortly after IBRD, mostly in non-US$
currencies that carry higher interest, that were attractive especially to Japanese retail investors
(Uridashi). Most were plain vanilla with pricing similar to the World Bank. There is limited
market differentiation between the two AAA rated organizations.


 Appendix 7.5 Figure 1 World Bank Group Real Sector Interventions for the Environment : Green
 Bond Issues (FY04-14)




                                                                                                                               95
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7



                IBRD: Green Bonds Investors By Type                         IFC: Green Bond Investors By Type
                   (Largest Single Issue US$600m)                            (Total of US$2.0 billion of issues)
                                                                 30%
      50%
      45%                                                        25%
                                                                            26%
      40%                                                        20%                      24%
                43%                                                                              22%
      35%
                                                                 15%
      30%
      25%                    31%                                 10%                                    12%
      20%                                                                         10%
                                                                  5%
      15%                                                                                                          7%
      10%                                              15%        0%
       5%                                   11%
       0%
               Asset        Bank and       Pension   Insurance
              Managers     Corporates


             IFC and IBRD Green Bond Investors by                  10,000
                                                                             IFC and IBRD Green Bond Issuance
                            Region                                                      (2009-2015)
                                                                    8,000
      80%

      60%                                                           6,000
                                                                 US$m



      40%                                                           4,000

      20%
                                                                    2,000
        0%
                Americas            Asia        Emerging Mkts           0
                                                                             2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Total
                              IFC       IBRD                                               IFC   IBRD

     Source: IBRD and IFC Treasury Departments, IEG analysis.
     Note: EMEA: Emerging Market Economies and Areas.


34.    Although there seems to be some duplications between the World Bank and IFC in
green bond markets, this is not a real issue given the strong global demand for environmental
and social investments. Annual green bond issuance by the World Bank Group is relatively
modest compared to the growing size of the market including large issues by the private sector.

 World Bank Group Contributions to Green Bond Market Governance Structures - the Green Bond Principles
(GBP)

35.     Aside from bond issuance, the World Bank Group played a key role in bringing together
stakeholders to agree to a general framework for such issues, which has now come to be known
as the Green Bond Principles (GBP). The rapid growth in green bond markets necessitated a
sound framework that would enable key market participants (issuers, investors, and financial
market intermediaries) to operate efficiently and on a transparent basis. At the outset of green
bond issuance in 2008 there were no clear rules beyond the generally stated strategic UN
objectives. The authors of the principles included major issuers (such as EIB, IBRD, IFC, EDF


96
                                                                           APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


and Unilever), investment banks (e.g., Citi, JPM, Credit Agricole, HSBC), and investors (e.g.,
Black Rock, TIAA-CREF, Zurich Insurance). Together they also appointed the International
Capital Market Association (ICMA) based in London to be the secretariat. 52

36.     The Green Bond Principles, published in 2015, represent voluntary process guidelines
intended for use by market participants. 53 They define green bonds as any type of bond
instruments where the proceeds will be exclusively applied to finance or re-finance in part or in
full new and/or existing eligible green projects and which follow four principles: promoting
progress on environmentally sustainable activities as defined by the issuer (Principle 1); in line
with the issuer’s project process for evaluation and selection (Principle 2). The management of
green bond proceeds should be traceable within the issuing organization (Principle 3) and
issuers should report at least annually on use of proceeds (Principle 4). The GBP identified four
different types of green bonds, to date: (i) green use of proceeds bond; (ii) green use of proceeds
revenue bond; (iii) green project bond; and (iv) green securitized bond. The World Bank Group
green bonds fall into first category. As of March 2015, 82 institutions representing all
participants have joined the GBP as members and 41 organizations have received observer
status. In addition to playing a lead role in adoption of the GBP, the World Bank Group’s
activities also contributed to development of green bond markets in several emerging market
countries. A recent example is the issuance of a US$500 million green bond by the Export-
Import Bank of India in early 2015. 54

Other Thematic Bonds

37.     Although smaller in volume, the Treasury departments of both IBRD and IFC began to
undertake bond issues to support other World Bank Group priority areas (detailed in Appendix
A6.5). Some were similar to Green bonds, notably, IFC’s Banking on Women and Inclusive
Business bonds. The former reflects effort followed the G-20 meeting in Seoul (2011), which
recommended that concerted efforts should be made to increase access to finance by women-
owned SMEs in developing countries. Accordingly IFC set up a series of lines of credit for
women, typically those in positions of management and control in SMEs, and IFC’s Treasury
Department issued two ‘Banking on Women’ bonds (US$162.5 million in November 2013 and
US$105 million in August 2014) targeting retail Japanese investors. Proceeds were set aside in a
designated account for investing exclusively in IFC’s already established Banking on Women
program. IFC’s Inclusive Business bond program, launched in October 2014, was similarly
structured, with a focus on including people at the bottom of the economic pyramid into a
company's value chain. Its two early bond issues, each of approximately US$100 million, are
also plain vanilla debt instruments sold to Japanese retail investors and proceeds are similarly

52 www.icmagroup.org.
53 http://www.icmagroup.org/Regulatory-Policy-and-Market-Practice/green-bonds/green-bond-
principles/
54 Emerging Markets: Asia Awakes to Green Bonds, February 2015.




                                                                                                 97
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


segregated in a special account to be disbursed solely to Inclusive Business projects in IFC’s
portfolio. 55

Vaccine Bonds: IBRD’s role as Treasury Manager

38.     Meanwhile the IBRD Treasury had a hands-on advisory and managerial role in assisting
the issuance of ‘vaccine’ bonds by IFFIm, the International Finance Facility for Immunization
(IFFIm) as its Treasury manager. IFFIm was established as a charity intended to mobilize
resources to support and enhance the immunization and/or vaccine procurement program
carried out by the GAVI Alliance (GAVI). 56 The World Bank advises IFFIm on all aspects of the
issuance of GAVI’s debt instruments as part of the support it extends for Bank-supported trust
funds. The pooled assets are maintained separately from the funds of the World Bank Group.
The World Bank offers these services for direct cost recovery and without seeking any
management fee. IFFIm’s issuances are based on its own credit.

39.     The World Bank, as Treasury Manager for IFFIm, has played a key role in helping IFFIm
to accessing capital markets, at a cost competitive with GAVI’s donors' funding costs. IFFIm has
issued some 25 bonds in a range of currencies and maturities and in late 2014, IFFIm issued a
US$500 million inaugural sukuk. The World Bank played a key role in structuring this landmark
issue, now used as a template for other issuers although the World Bank was not the obligor of
the bond. In all, IFFIm has enabled GAVI to nearly double its spending on immunization
programs, saving an estimated US$21 billion in health costs, vaccinating more than 325 million
children and help saving more than 5.5 million lives since its creation in 2000.

40.     Sukuks are financial certificates that comply with Islamic law and are also known as
Islamic bonds. Sukuks are structured in such a way as to generate returns to investors without
infringing Islamic law. Sukuk represents an undivided shares in the ownership of tangible
assets relating to particular projects or special investment activity. A sukuk investor has a
common share in the ownership of the assets linked to the investment although this does not
represent a debt owed to the issuer of the bond.

41.     This sukuk has a maturity of 3 years and carries a quarterly coupon of 15 basis points
over 3-month USD LIBOR. This rate was higher than the IBRD’s borrowing cost because IFFIm
is the obligor. The issue was lead-managed by a group of five banks representing many of the
major jurisdictions for Islamic finance – Barwa Bank of Qatar, CIMB of Malaysia, the National
Bank of Abu Dhabi, NCB Capital of Saudi Arabia and Standard Chartered Bank. IFFIm was able
to diversify its investor base, with 85 percent of the order book coming from new and primarily



55 The second transaction was in Mexican Peso (MXN 1.5 billion) with a maturity of 5 years. IFC swapped
the proceeds back into US$. IFC had also undertaken two additional small transactions, as of June 2015.
56 http://www.gavi.org/




98
                                                                             APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


Islamic investors in the Middle East and Asia. In the past, IFFIm’s investor base had been
largely concentrated in Japan, the United States, Europe and Australia.

Catastrophe Bonds (CAT Bonds)

42.      An interesting financial instrument available through the World Bank is catastrophe
bond (CAT). Catastrophe bonds allow entities that are exposed to natural-disaster risk, such as
insurance companies, to transfer a portion of that risk to bond investors. Although several
member countries are interested in diversifying risks from climate change through the
catastrophe-bond market, their ability to access this market has been limited. This due to several
factors including: a lack of familiarity among many government officials with re-insurance in
general and the catastrophe bond market in particular; limited or non-existent modelling of the
natural-disaster risk exposure of many countries; potential political risks of purchasing
insurance protection when the pay-out is uncertain; and discomfort of many government
officials with the complex legal documentation and relatively high transaction costs associated
with these kinds of transactions. 57

43.      In a typical catastrophe-bond structure, the entity exposed to the risk (the sponsor of the
bond) enters into an insurance contract with a special purpose vehicle (SPV) that issues the
bonds to investors. The SPV invests the proceeds of the bond issuance in highly rated securities
that are held in a collateral trust, and it transfers the return on this collateral, together with the
insurance premiums received from the sponsor, to the investors as periodic coupons on the
bonds. If a specified natural disaster occurs during the term of the bond, some or all of the
assets held as collateral are liquidated and that money is paid to the sponsor as a pay-out under
its insurance contract with the SPV. If no specified event occurs, the collateral assets are
liquidated on the maturity date of the bonds and the money is paid to the investors. In other
words, investors risk losing some, or all, of their principal if a natural disaster occurs and in
exchange receive a coupon that reflects the insurance premium for such risk Catastrophe bonds
benefit sponsors by allowing them to access a bigger pool of capital and in general longer
coverage periods than conventional re-insurance. The attraction of these bonds to the investors
is the relatively high returns and the low level of correlation with other asset classes, such as
equities and conventional bonds (IBRD, 2015).

44.      In 2009, IBRD created a MultiCat Program which the Bank acted as arranger, allowing
clients to sponsor catastrophe bonds using a common documentation platform that makes
issuance more efficient, in terms of both time and cost, than doing a stand-alone transaction.
Under the program, the client sponsoring the transaction established an SPV to act as issuer of
the bonds and then enters into an insurance contract or other risk-transfer arrangement with the
SPV. The Government of Mexico chose to use this program to sponsor catastrophe bonds


57   Michael Bennett, Greening the Global Economy, IBRD, 2015


                                                                                                    99
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


covering both earthquake and hurricane risk in 2009 and then again in 2012. The Bank has no
credit exposure under this program.

45.     To facilitate the use of CAT bonds by its member countries, IBRD in 2014 created the
Capital-at-Risk-Note Program which eliminates the need for an SPV or for the collateral
arrangements that are required in a conventional catastrophe-bond structure. Instead, IBRD
issues the bond supported by the strength of its own balance sheet and hedges itself through a
swap or similar contract with a client. This simplify structures enables IBRD to transfer risks
from its clients to the capital markets in an efficient way with minimal transaction costs.

46.     Up to August 2015, there has been only one transaction under the new program. In June
2014, IBRD issued its first CAT bond under the Capital-at-risk Notes Program. The transaction
was a three-year issue linked to hurricane and earthquake risk in 16 Caribbean countries. 58 To
hedge its obligations under the bond, the World Bank entered into a catastrophe swap with the
Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF) 59 that mirrors the economic terms of the
bonds. If the bond is triggered by a referenced natural disaster of sufficient intensity, the
principal amount of the bond will be reduced and an equivalent amount will be paid to CCRIF
under the swap agreement. A summary of the transaction is given in Appendix 7.5 Table 1. The
return to investors in this bond is 6 month LIBOR plus 6.3% with a floor of 6.5% which is
substantially higher than regular IBRD bonds. However, the cost is borne by CCRIF through the
swap agreement.

Appendix 7.5 Table 1 IBRD Catastrophic Risk Bond – Transaction Summary

                        Issuer                                             World Bank (IBRD)

                   Nominal Amount                                             USD 30,000,000
                  Redemption Amount                    The nominal amount reduced by all principal reductions as a
                                                       result of applicable Caribbean tropical cyclone or earthquake
                                                                events (as defined in the terms of the notes)
                   Settlement Date                                             June 30, 2014
                       Coupon                                      6 month Libor + 6.30%, floored at 6.5%
                Coupon Payment Dates                                              Quarterly
                    Maturity Date                                               June 7, 2017




58IBRD press release dated June 30, 2014
59CCRIF is a risk-pooling facility that is designed to limit the financial impact on its sixteen Caribbean
member governments resulting from catastrophic earthquakes and hurricanes by quickly providing
financial liquidity when a policy is triggered. CCRIF was set up under the technical leadership of IBRD
and with a grant from the Government of Japan. It was capitalized through contributions from a multi-
donor Trust Fund by the Government of Canada, the European Union, IBRD, the governments of the UK
and France, the Caribbean Development Bank and the governments of Ireland and Bermuda, as well as
through membership fees paid by participating governments.


100
                                                                          APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


Green Bonds and Theme Bonds: A Summary

47.     World Bank Group thematic bonds, mostly green bonds, mobilized nearly ($12.7 billion)
over 2010-2015, reflecting its portfolio of projects for climate change mitigation. These programs
attracted new investors and diversified the World Bank Group funding base. Now new green
bond issuers have entered this market and the share of the World Bank Group has declined to
less than ten percent. However, it has played an important catalytic role for the development of
the Green Bond principles. Other IFC theme bonds had identical structures, serving to showcase
the role of IFC in these areas, but not increasing funding, or helping to monitor performance.
IBRD also played an important role through its catastrophic risk bond; a very creative structure
for insurance against natural disaster, as well as through its Treasury management services for
GAVI's 'vaccine bonds' including the innovative sukuk. Thematic bonds, if undertaken on a
large scale, could lead to a perception of fragmentation of World Bank Group debt on issue.

48.     While World Bank Group's theme bonds did not actually increase the volume of its
loans and investments for the specified areas, they ring-fenced suitable on-going and new
investments and helped to showcase the substantial portfolio of World Bank Group work in this
area., Bonds were issued as a part of overall borrowing needs, with negligible differences in
terms of pricing or structure. Since the annual borrowing requirements of the IBRD and IFC are
determined on an aggregate basis, and green bond issues are within this envelope, there is no
obvious additionality in funding obtained. The World Bank Group was not the first IFI to issue
green bonds, and has not been the largest. In fact, it now accounts for only a tenth or so of the
global green bond market. Nevertheless it is an important issuer and it has been a steady
presence in this market, and has also produced some innovative structures, such as the IBRD
equity index- linked issue.

49.     Additionally, these structures have certainly helped create a stable pool of investors,
including new institutional, retail, and buy-and-hold investors, who benefit from World Bank
Group's experience in project selection criteria and rigorous evaluation, especially as they
frequently are not equipped with this capacity. From the perspective of the World Bank Group
as issuer, this helps to broaden the investor base and reduce funding risk.

50.    World Bank Group's greatest contribution with regard to Green Bonds lay in fostering
development of this new segment of debt capital markets. Its role in the formulation and
eventual adoption of the Green Bond Principles has been widely acknowledged and
appreciated. Once again this represents the leverage of the World Bank Group convening power
to shape global markets, even with a relatively limited volume of project level interventions.

51.     Finally, World Bank Group has played an important role through Treasury Management
services and design support, for bond issuance, as has been demonstrated by the role of IBRD in
its support for 'vaccine bonds' including the innovative sukuk. Its catastrophic risk bond also



                                                                                              101
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


demonstrated a very creative structure for insurance against natural disaster. World Bank
Group contributions through such structures and support have been at least as important for
certain real sector activities as its own thematic bond issuance.




102
                                                                                                APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


Chapter 7 Appendix Tables A7.1 to A7.5
Appendix Table A7.1 IEG Identified WB Infrastructure Lending Projects with Capital Market Content
                                   Project Name                                  Status         IEG Rating        PAD Date
  1     Kenya Infrastructure Finance/PPP Project                                 Active            NA             10/02/2012
  2     Multi Country -3A-WAEMU Capital Markets Dev FIL (FY04)                   Closed          Moderate         01/28/2004

  3     India - IIFCL - India Infrastructure Finance Co Ltd                      Active             NA            08/27/2009
  4     India - IIFCL – Capacity Building                                        Closed             N/A           03/16/2010
  5     Romania - Programmatic DPL 1                                             Active             NA            04/29/2014
  6     Thailand - Strategy and Implementation for Compt. Finance                Closed             NA            09/23/2003
  7     Peru - Lima Metro Line 2 Project                                         Active             NA            07/20/2015
Source: IEG.
Note: These represent loans identified in the Approach Paper, and add one additional recent project – Peru Lima Metro Line.


Appendix Table A7.2: IEG Identified WB AAA on Infrastructure Finance: Thematic Content

 Theme                                                        Project No.       Region /Country
 Policy and Regulation (5)                                    P147471           Nepal
                                                              P132968           Turkey
                                                              P146626           Turkey
                                                              P149083           Global (2015 report on Long-term Finance)
                                                              P132213           Costa Rica
 Market development (9)                                       P148214           Southern Caucasus
                                                              P149561           Colombia
                                                              P151408           Colombia
                                                              P144841           EAP
                                                              P130754           Indonesia
                                                              P115016           Kenya
                                                              P117387           Uruguay
                                                              P144584           Global
                                                              P149155           Global

 Infrastructure Funds /Financing vehicles country             P112540           COMESA - Africa
 specific & sub-regional (3)                                  P116898           Mano River Union-Africa
                                                              P070074           Vietnam (for municipal finance)
 Public Private Partnerships (11)                             P144218           West Africa
                                                              P144416           Africa
                                                              P126385           East Africa
                                                              P133509           India
                                                              P150610           India
                                                              P150913           India
                                                              P148371           Kenya
                                                              P114097           Mexico
                                                              P128686           Uruguay
                                                              P109142           Vietnam
                                                              P114160           Vietnam




                                                                                                                              103
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


 Urban and Housing finance (10)   P102862   China
                                  P114599   China
                                  P119977   China
                                  P145700   Indonesia
                                  P072288   Philippines
                                  P131251   Philippines
                                  P148205   Turkey
                                  P126733   Global
                                  P126824   Global
                                  P144507   Kenya

 Other/Miscellaneous (3)          P130848   Mexico(DRM)
                                  P125907   Peru (utility rating)
                                  P150056   Zambia ( water utility finance)
Source: IEG




104
                                                                             APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7

Appendix Table A7.3: WB Guarantees for Infrastructure Projects 60FY04-FY14




60Under the Guarantee Policy approved in 2014, the nomenclature Partial Risk Guarantees and Partial
Credit Guarantees has been discontinued . Guarantees henceforth will be categorized as –Loan
Guarantees and Payment Guarantees. This is expected to provide greater flexibility in developing
appropriate guarantee structure to support infrastructure projects.


                                                                                                      105
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7

Appendix Table A7.4: Portfolio of WB Guarantees for Infrastructure Financing

                                        Characteristics of WB Guarantee Projects: FY94 to FY2015

                                                        All Projects: Approval FYs             Infrastructure Projects: Approval FYs
                                                                                               (Energy and Transport)
                                                FY94      FY04        FY09 to        FY04 to    FY94 to     FY04       FY09      FY04
                                                 to         to         FY15           FY15       FY03         to         to       to
                                                FY03      FY08                                              FY08       FY15      FY15
                                                        Guarantee Type
 Enclave Partial Risk                             1          0            1             1         0          1          1         2
 IDA credit                                       1          0            0             0         0          0          0         0
 Partial Credit                                   8          0            2             2         0          0          1         1
 Partial Risk                                     9         10           17            27        13          9         17        26
 Policy Based                                     2          0            4             4         0          0          0         0
 TOTAL                                           21         10           24            34        13         10         19        29
                                                            Instrument Type
 Bond issue                                       7          0            0             0         4          0          0         0
 Commercial Loan                                 13          5            8            13         9          5          3         8
 Commercial Loan -LC structure                    1          3           14            17         0          3         14        17
 No Information                                   0          2            2             4         0          2          2         4
 TOTAL                                           21         10           24            34        13         10         19        29
                                                           Guarantee Status
 Cancelled                                        3          3            0             3         1          2         0          2
 Effective                                        3          5           11            16         2          6         7         13
 Expired                                         13          1            0             1         9          1                    1
 Prepaid                                          2          0            0             0         1                               0
 To be cancelled                                  0          1            0             1                    1         12        13
 To be effective                                  0          0           13            13                                         0
 TOTAL                                           21         10           24            34        13         10         19        29
                                                              Project Status
 Active                                           4          7           24            31         3          8         19        27
 Cancelled                                        1          1            0             1                                         0
 Closed                                          14          0            0             0         9          1                    1
 No Information                                   2          2            0             2         1          1                    1
 TOTAL                                           21         10           24            34        13         10         19        29
                                                             Area of Activity
 Infrastr: Energy/Mining nes                     14          7           19            26        13          8         19        27
 Infrastr: Transportation                         0          2            0             2         0          2          0         2
 Agriculture, Fishing & Forestry                  1          0            0             0
 Finance                                          2          1            3             4
 Health and other social services                 0          0            1             1
 Industry & Trade                                 1          0            0             0
 Information and Communications                   1          0            0             0
 Public Administration, Law & Justice             2          0            1             1

 TOTAL                                           21        10           24             34        13         10         19        29
 IBRD/ IDA commitment amt                      2518.2     698.9       3612.7         6829.7    1503.9      658.9     2450.7    3109.6
Source: IEG analysis




106
                                                                                            APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7

Appendix Table A7.5 IFC Bond Guarantees – Project Level Summary Table

                                                                            Evidence of Additionality
 Type of          Projects (name, country, year)       New project bond         New lenders,          Additional equity
 instrument                                            issues, extended         syndicated loans      investment
                                                       bond maturities,
                                                       reduced coupons
 Bond purchases   4                                    Yes, debut Eurobond No                         Equity investment
                  (Peru LNG, Peru, 2008)               issue for BR Further                           in Peru LNG and
                  (BR Further Inv, Russian             Inv.                                           Quasi-equity in
                  Federation, 2013)                    Mandatory                                      Renaissance MCB
                  (Renaissance MCB, MENA,              convertible bonds in
                  2013)                                Renaissance MCB.
                  (Mersin Port, Turkey, 2014)          Eurobond in Turkey.
 Bond             2                                    Yes, PCG enabled         No                    No
 guarantees       (CoJ Financing. South Africa,        longer term 2006
                  2004)                                Bond in CoJ (12
                  (Chuvash Republic, Russian           years). Also
                  Federation, 2006)                    extended maturity
                                                       debt in Chuvash.
 Performance      3                                    Yes, extended            Yes, syndicated
 bonds            (GCP, Guatemala, 2006)               maturity in Romania.     loan being prepared
                  (Arabsq Corp Fin, Romania,                                    by local bank for
                  2007)                                                         Guatemala.
                  (Odebrecht Surety, Brazil, 2012)

 Loan             9                                    Yes, extended loan     New lenders in         Equity investment
 Guarantees       (Veolia MENA, MENA, 2006)            maturity in Mexico     Morocco, Malawi,       by already existing
                  (Irapuato-Piedad, Mexico, 2007)      (14 years), Morocco,   Mexico, and            investors in Mexico
                  (Buffalo City, South Africa, 2006)   Honduras, and          Honduras               and South Africa
                  (Hernic BEE, South Africa, 2006)     reduced spread in      (expected              (Hernic BEE).
                  (El Jadida RADEEJ, Morocco,          Hernic BEE, South      syndicated loan of
                  2008)                                Africa.                around US$ 53
                  (BBVA Lima, Peru, 2010)                                     million in
                  (BBVA Arequipa, Peru, 2011)                                 Honduras).
                  (Zain Malawi Dist, Malawi, 2010)
                       (Tegucigalpa, Honduras,
                  2011)
 Source: IEG




                                                                                                                      107
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 7


Appendix Table A7.6 WB, IFC and MIGA: Guarantees by Sector and Instrument (Numbers of projects)
                                    World Bank                                                     IFC                                                   MIGA
                        FY04-FY08       FY09-FY14                 FY04-FY08                 FY09-FY14                         FY04-FY08                  FY09-
                                                                                                                                                         FY14
Sector 1                Nos     Bon    Nos     Bon     Total    Nos      Bond      AB     Nos of    Bond     AB     Total    Nos     Bond     AB       N    Bon     ABS/    Total
                         of      d      of      d                of      Gts.       S      Gts.     Gts.      S               of     Gts.      S       os d Gt      other
                        Gts.    Gts.   Gts.    Gts.             Gts.               Gts                       Gt              Gts.             Gts.                  Gts.
                                                                                    .                        s.
Energy and Mining        8              19              27                                   1                       1         28                      26                    54
Transportation           2                              2         1                          4                       5          3         1            12                    16
Water                                                             3        2                                         5          8                       6                    14
Telecommunications                                                                          1                        1         10                       5                    15
Total Infrastructure     10             19              29       4         2                6                        12        49         1            52               1    103
Other Real Sectors                      2               2        14        3                4          2             23        53                      81                    134
Financial Sectors        1              3               4        12        3        3       25         1      1      45        54                  4   64       1            123
Grand Total              11             24              35       30        8        3       35         3      1      80       156         1        4   19       1       1    360
                                                                                                                                                        7
        WB: No guarantees of securities during the evaluation period. Of the 7 guarantees of bonds from FY94 to FY03, 5 were for infrastructure.
        IFC: bond guarantees in the earlier period included two in Russia, one regional project in Africa, Colombia, Kenya, Mexico, South Africa, and Tanzania while ABS were in
        Brazil, Colombia, and Mexico. In the later period, the bond guarantees were in Algeria, Indonesia, and Mexico while the ABS was in Brazil.
        MIGA's bond guarantee in the earlier period was in Dominican Republic while ABS included two in Kazakhstan and once each in Brazil and Latvia. In the later period, the
        bond guarantee was in Hungary while the derivative was a currency swap in Senegal rather than ABS.




                                                                                                                                                                            108
Appendixes to Chapter 8
Chapter 8 Appendix Tables A8.1 to A8.3
Appendix Table A8.1: The Efficient Securities Markets Institutional Development Program and World Bank Group Capital Markets Development Work
(FY07-FY15)
Part A: Contributions to ESMID from SECO and SIDA (US$)
              FY:                                    2005        2006               2007        2008       2009        2010      2011        2012        2013        2014        2015    Total
             SIDA                                                              2,727,955   2,986,412                                                            1,356,867     745,628     7,816,862
             SECO                                                                                                             754,973     445,000                                         1,199,973
Part B: ESMID Distributions by Project and Funding Sources (US$)
                                                                                                                                 EXPENSES INCEPTION TO DATE
                                                                                                                   TF092403 TF058142
                                                                                                                     (IFC     (IFC    TF057239   TF016468 TF097245          TF098321
Proj ID    Proj Name                                    Country   Executor   Approval FY   BB (WB)     BB (IFC)    FMTAAS) FMTAAS)    (SIDA TF)  (SIDA TF) (SECO TF)         (SECO)      Total
P121995    GCMSM Support to ESMID                       Africa    WB AAA        2010          26,689        -           -         -           -           -          -             -         26,689
P124057    GCMSM: Support to ESMID in Africa            Africa    WB AAA        2011          41,756        -           -         -           -           -          -             -         41,756
P129763    FCMSM Support to ESMID in Africa II          Africa    WB AAA        2012          31,584        -           -         -           -           -          -             -         31,584
P143456    ESMID support in Africa FY13                 Africa    WB AAA        2013          19,942        -           -         -           -           -          -             -         19,942
           FY14 Non-Govt Bond Markets in AFR
P149828    Reg.                                         Africa    WB AAA        2014         150,902        -           -         -           -           -          -             -        150,902
           Efficient Securities Markets Institutional   Eastern
545164     Development (ESMID) - East Africa            Africa    IFC AS        2006             -       82,558         -         -     5,450,884         -          -             -      5,533,443
           ESMID East Africa II - Bond Market           Eastern
600053     Development                                  Africa    IFC AS        2014             -       (8,982)        -         -           -      677,523         -             -        668,541
           ESMID Efficient Securities Markets
           Institutional Development (ESMID) -
562707     Nigeria                                      Nigeria   IFC AS        2009             -       65,699         -         -       961,392         -          -             -      1,027,091

           (ESMID) Peru and Colombia Non-
           Government Bond Market Development Latin
578507     Program (ESMID) Peru and Colombia America              IFC AS        2011             -        2,052      12,418       -           -           -      309,996      849,501     1,173,967
           GCMSM Support to ESMID in Latin              Latin
P125844    America                                      America   WB AAA        2011          34,127        -           -         -           -           -          -             -         34,127
           FCMSM Spport to ESMID in Latin               Latin
P129766    America2                                     America   WB AAA        2012          81,355        -           -         -           -           -          -             -         81,355
                                                        Latin
P143049    FY13 ESMID support in MILA                   America   WB AAA        2013           6,705        -           -         -           -           -          -             -             6,705
           FY14 Non-Govt Bond Markets in LAC            Latin
P149833    Reg.                                         America   WB AAA        2014          65,872       -            -         -           -           -          -             -         65,872
599872     Non-government bond markets                  World     IFC AS        2013             -         -            -     221,641         -           -          -             -        221,641
           Total                                                                             458,932   141,327       12,418   221,641   6,412,277     677,523    309,996       849,501    9,083,614
           Total SECO and SIDA- distribution                                                                                                        7,089,800                1,159,497    8,249,297
           Total SECO and SIDA- contribution                                                                                                        7,816,862                1,199,973    9,016,835
           Residue                                                                                                                                    727,062                   40,476      767,538
Source: World Bank Group.




                                                                                                                                                                                                         109
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 8


Appendix Table A8.2 Trust Funds and the Capital Markets Work Program –References to FIRST in Five
Country Case Studies (IEG FY15)
 Country         FIRST Reference
   Colombia      The availability of funding from bilateral and multilateral donors through facilities like FIRST, and bilateral
                 donors like the Swiss Government through SECO became critical partnerships to ensure delivery of a
                 significant portion of the advisory work that the World Bank Group and in particular IBRD did. Had that
                 targeted funding not been available there are questions as to whether the Government would have relied so
                 heavily on the Bank to carry out several of the recommendations of the FSAP work.

                 For FIRST, several proposals were approved, e.g. on Self-Regulatory Capital market institutions, Pensions,
                 and Corporate Governance. Implementation of those programs followed suit.
     India       None found
    Kenya        According to the FIRST website, IMF has operated a project (#10212) entitled “Strengthening the
                 Supervisory and Enforcement Capacity of the Capital Markets Authority of Kenya” funded by FIRST. It was
                 approved on 1/9/1/2011 …

                 FIRST and IOSCO provided assistance to the regional support program: helping the five countries sign the
                 MOU and assisting the regional IOSCO principles assessment
   Morocco       FIRST programs responded to issues raised by FSAPs, particularly the 2008 FSAP. GEMLOC also followed
                 the FSAP of 2008. FIRST and GEMLOC fed into the DPL of 2014. FIRST formulated the changes, which
                 were then integrated into the subsequent DPLs… The advisory work provided through FIRST led to the
                 design and implementation of the DPLs. These two sets of activities were well coordinated and built on each
                 other…

                 One part of the 2011 FIRST project is the design of a money market reference rate (Moroccan LIBOR).

                 Our interview with the pension regulator confirmed …..the work being done to transform the system, as
                 included in the 2014 DPL, which itself follows related work in the FIRST advisory work.

                 Two FIRST projects and the following DPL are focused on the primary markets for government bonds, with
                 effort placed on inducing the government to adopt an issuance program aimed at promoting their securities
                 as benchmarks. This included issuance plans and reducing the number/types of instruments; design of a
                 secondary market architecture; review of primary dealer scheme; design of a money market reference rate
                 (Moroccan LIBOR). The DPL has…a set of conditions related to the ideas put forth in the FIRST projects, as
                 well as a condition to establish an electronic auction system for government bonds…

                 While there are no direct references in the DPL to the FIRST projects, it is clear from the design and from
                 discussions with staff that the two are directly linked. FIRST was first and set the stage and then the
                 conditions on the DPL followed what FIRST proposed

                 The implementation of an electronic quotation system (Bloomberg, a component of the 2014 DPL that follows
                 work done through the FIRST program) is in process. Prices are now quoted on that system, but its impact
                 remains limited.
    Vietnam      Of the 18 projects contained in the (Vietnam capital markets) inventory …(some) are listed as funded by
                 FIRST …including the VN-Accelerating Capital Markets project (TF053399). FIRST also supported the third
                 project, still underway today, the Vietnam Bond Markets Development project (150688). It can be fairly
                 viewed as the follow on to 561026. Budget is $488,879 funded entirely by FIRST. Approval was December
                 2014; the project is scheduled to last one year. The main counterpart role has shifted to the MoF, as the
                 focus is now more on the government bond market.

                 Despite the fact that the CAS/CPSs omitted insurance and pension reform, the program did include one
                 intervention related to insurance. This was Project # 106408 entitled “International Standards for Supervising
                 Insurance Sector” (WB AAA). The commencement date was June 2007 and completion in December 2008.
                 Its total budget was $248,917 funded entirely by FIRST.
Source: IEG Country Case Studies.



                                                                                                                               110
                                                                                                APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 8


Appendix Table A8.3 Bond Markets Relevant Advisory Services - Summary of Information Available
 Source of                WB       BB (24)     GEMLOC      FIRST (6)    SECO/SID     Others      IFC AS    SECO/SID   Others
 Funding                 AAA                     (32)                    A (12)        (5)         (9        A (5)      (4)
                          (79                                                                    Overall
                         Overa                                                                      )
                           ll)
 Total Interventions         79       24          32            6           12          5           9         5         4

 Desired Core Documents

 Concept note /           52          12          16            4            9          2           9         5         4
 pkg
                       (18 Pkgs)    (3Pkgs)     (6 Pkgs)     (3 Pkgs)     (4 Pkgs)   (2 Pkgs)

 Concept note             33           7          12            3            5          3           3         2         1
 review/minutes
 BTORs                    28           9           7            2            4          4           2         2         0

                     (12 Aide       (2 Aide     (5 Aide      (2 Aide      (2 Aide     (1 Aide
                    Memoires)      Memoires)   Memoires)    Memoires)    Memoires)   Memoire)
 Consultant/Gen         11             5           3            0            0           3          0         0         0
 eral TORs
 Reports / Core           44          12          16            3            4          4           5         2         3
 Output
 Presentations /          28           6          10            0            6          1           5         2         3
 suppl. outputs
 Minutes / peer           22           8          10            1            2          0           1         1         0
 review of
 outputs
 Proj.                    30           5          10            2            4          3           6         3         3
 Completion
 Summary
                       (10 Pkgs)                (3 Pkgs)     (1 Pkg)      (4 Pkg)    (2 Pkgs)

 Dissemination            0            0           0            0            0          0           0         0         0
 Docs
                                                  Other documents (Nos of proj)

 Mission                  3            0           0            2            0          1           0         0         0
 Documents
 Internal                 47           9          19            5            6          3           5         1         4
 memoranda,
 Correspondenc            18           4           2            3            3          1           5         4         1
 e
 client/stakehold
 ers
 Procurement              21           6           3            3            3          3           3         2         1
 docs
 Disbursement             5            0           0            2            2          1           0         0         0
 and payment
 docs
 Reqd core docs          711          216         288           54          108         45          81        45        36

 Total core docs         248          64          84            15          34          20          31        17        14

 Available               34.9         29.6       29.2          27.8        31.5        44.4        38.3      37.8      38.9
 docs % total
 desired



                                                                                                                      111
APPENDIXES TO CHAPTER 8


Appendix Table A8.4 Other Areas of Capital Markets Relevant Advisory - Information Available

 Capital Markets Area                            Insurance (30)                Pensions                       Housing (56)
                                                                               (32)
 Total Numbers of Interventions     WB AAA (24)         FIRST        IFC AS    WB AAA            WB AAA (32)        FIRST       IFC AS
 (Nos)                                                  (4)          (6)                                            (3)         (24)
 Desired Core Documents
 Concept note / pkg / PDS                          24         4           6                32                 32            3        24
 Approval
                                                   17          2          5                18              24             2          24
                                    (4 Pkgs)            (1 Pkg)                (5 Pkgs)          (8 Pkgs)           (1 Pkg)
                                    (3 Project          (1 Project                               (1 Exec
                                    Proposals)          Proposal)                                Summary)
                                                                                                 (1 Agreement)
 Concept note review/minutes                                                                     (1 PAD)
 BTORs                                          11            1           4                16              19             2          16
                                                  5           3           2                17              23             2           5
 Consultant/General TORs            (4 Aide Memoires)                          (1 Aide           (5 Aide            (1 Aide Memoire)
                                                                               Memoire)          Memoires)
 Reports / Core Output                             11         0           5                 9              18               1        21
 Presentations / supplementary                     11         0           4                21              17               2        22
 outputs
 Minutes / peer review of outputs                  11         0           4                 9                 15            2        20
 Proj. Completion Summary                          10         0           4                16                 16            2        14
                                                   10         0           4                12                 13            2        22
 Dissemination Docs                 (8 Pkgs)                                   (8 Pkgs)          (12 Pkgs)          (2
                                                                                                                    Pkgs)
 Other Available documents
 (No of proj)
 Other Reports                                      6         0           4                 7                  7            0        18
 Mission Documents                                 15         0           4                19                 18            1        19
 Internal memoranda, corres                        13         3           2                13                 20            2         3
 pondence
 Corresp w/client                                  20         4           4                21                 23            3        19
 Procurement docs                                  16         3           4                12                 20            1        19
 Disbursement and payment                          19         3           5                17                 18            2        22
 docs
 Total desired core documents                       6         1            1                 8                  7         1          11
 Total core documents available                   216        36           54               288                288        27         216
 Available documents                               92         6           36               125                152        15         162
 % Total desired                                 42.6      16.7         66.7              43.4               52.8      55.6        75.0
Source: IEG analysis.




112
