OVERVIEW                  AF R I C A D EV EL O P M EN T F O RU M




                     END POVERTY DAY EDITION


           Reaping Richer Returns
               Public Spending Priorities for African
                    Agriculture Productivity Growth

                               Aparajita Goyal and John Nash




                                                   OCTOBER 2016
The full report will be available in January 2017.
Foreword
A vibrant, sustainable and resilient agriculture sector is vital for sub-Saharan Africa‚Äôs economic future.
While productivity of African agriculture has grown, it still lags behind Asia and Latin America,
and has not delivered the development dividends needed to significantly reduce poverty in rural
areas across Sub-Saharan Africa. Consider this: nearly two-thirds of Africa‚Äôs population still rely on
agriculture to make a living, and for Africa‚Äôs poorest households, food makes up almost three-quarters
of consumption expenditures. As a result of poor agricultural productivity, Africa‚Äôs growing urban
populations are also confronted with higher food prices. In order to make a significant dent on poverty,
enhancing the productivity and competitiveness of African agriculture must become a priority.

Clearly, the status quo must change. One key element that can accelerate change and unleash growth
is to catalyze a shift toward more effective, efficient and climate resilient public spending in agriculture.
This book comes at an opportune time and the research effort was motivated by the confluence of
several factors related to public spending on agriculture in Africa.

First is the elevated prominence of this topic in policymaking circles, underscored by the Maputo
Declaration of 2003, and, more recently, the Malabo Declaration of 2014, which calls for enhancing
investment finance in agriculture as a means to ending hunger and halving poverty by 2025 through
inclusive agricultural growth and transformation. Furthermore, assisting countries to develop
National Agricultural Investment Programs and to improve the efficiency and quality of expenditures
has become a cornerstone of the New Partnership for Africa‚Äôs Development (NEPAD) and its
Comprehensive African Agricultural Development Program (CAADP).

Second, Africa‚Äôs development partners have been actively supporting this effort and in doing so have
accumulated a large and growing body of experience and knowledge that can provide useful lessons.
The World Bank, in particular, through a program with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, has
been assisting countries to carry out public agricultural spending reviews (AgPERs), and more recently
has been developing tools to help mainstream AgPERs as standard instruments for budgeting and
policymaking.

Third, as this book well demonstrates, agricultural spending in Sub-Saharan Africa not only
significantly lags behind other developing regions, its impact is also vitiated by subsidy programs
and transfers that tend to benefit elites to the detriment of poor people and the agricultural sector
itself. ¬†Shortcomings of the budgeting processes also reduce spending effectiveness.¬†In light of this
scenario, addressing the quality of public spending and the efficiency of resource use becomes
an even more important issue than simply addressing the level of spending. The rigorous analysis
presented in this book provides options for reform with a view to enhancing investment in the sector
and eventually development impact.

The evidence show that the efficient use of public funds has been instrumental in laying the
foundations for agricultural productivity growth around the world, providing important lessons for

                                                                                REAPING RICHER RETURNS          1
    African policymakers and development partners. ¬†Investments in rural public goods, combined with
    better policies and institutions drive agricultural productivity growth. ¬†The dividends from investments
    to strengthen markets, develop and disseminate improved technologies and expand irrigation can
    be enormous. Similarly, improvement of the policy environment through trade and regulatory policy
    complements spending by enhancing incentives for producers and innovators to take advantage of
    public goods, thereby crowding in private investment. Reforming the design and implementation of
    these subsidy programs while prioritizing government spending in favor of high-return core public
    goods and policies could produce significant gains. For this reason, this book argues for a rebalancing
    of the composition of public agricultural spending in order to reap robust development dividends.

    We hope that the findings presented here will resonate with policymakers concerned with agricultural
    policies, and more specifically with public spending programs that aim to improve the productivity
    of African agriculture. ¬†The target audiences include ministries of agriculture, as well as ministries of
    finance, planning and rural development, which are concerned with maximizing development impact
    of public expenditures across different sectors. In addition, the study seeks to reinforce the work of
    regional initiatives such as CAADP that are working with individual country governments to enhance
    the efficiency of agricultural budgets and increase investments in agriculture. Ultimately, we hope that
    the findings will help catalyze growth in Sub-Saharan Africa‚Äôs agricultural sector for the benefit of all
    Africans.

        Makhtar Diop
        Vice President, Africa Region
        The World Bank




2   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
Acknowledgments
This study is part of the African Regional Studies Program, an initiative of the Africa Region Vice-
Presidency at the World Bank. These studies aim to combine high levels of analytical rigor and
policy relevance, and to apply them to various topics important for the social and economic
development of Sub-Saharan Africa. Quality control and oversight are provided by the Office of
the Chief Economist for the Africa Region. This study, in particular, is an outcome of collaborative
effort of team members from Poverty Global Practice, Agriculture Global Practice, DEC, IFPRI, Gates
Foundation and academic experts.

The core team was led by Aparajita Goyal and John Nash, comprising Erick Fernandes; Habtamu Fuje;
Madhur Gautam; Ruth Hill; Hanan Jacoby; Yurie Tanimichi; and Stephen Mink; along with external
collaborators Samuel Benin, Tewodaj Mogues, and Alvina Erman from IFPRI; Thom Jayne and Nicole
Mason from Michigan State University; Bill Burke from Stanford University, and Joshua Ariga from
IFDC. Background papers for chapters were authored by Samuel Benin (chapter 2); Thom Jayne, Nicole
Mason, Joshua Ariga, and Bill Burke (chapter 3); Stephen Mink (chapter 4); Tewodaj Mogues and Alvina
Erman (chapter 5). These are available as working papers, as indicated in individual chapters. Additional
inputs were also received from Luc Christaenson, Chris Delgado, Massimo Mastruzzi, and David Nielson.
Excellent research assistance was provided by Sinafikeh Gemessa, Abdul Nabourema, and Sehoon Park.

The team would like to acknowledge the generous support of the Africa Chief Economists Office, the
Gates Foundation, and the CGIAR Research Program on Policies, Institutions, and Markets. Invaluable
advice was provided by Karen Brooks, Mark Cackler, Shanta Devarajan, Dina Umali-Deininger, Pablo
Fajnzylber, Francisco Ferreira, Mark Lundell, Bill Maloney, Mamta Murthi, Martien van Nieuwkoop,
Punam Chuhan Pole, Ana Revenga, Ethel Sennhauser, Juergen Voegele, Jan Walliser,¬†and Albert
Zeufack.

Thanks to Andrew Dabalen, Nabil Chaherli, Keith Fuglie, Don Larson, Robert Townsend, Holger Kray
and anonymous reviewers selected by the Africa Chief Economists Office for insightful peer review
comments. Kathleen Beegle, Markus Goldstein, Hans Hoogeveen, Elliot Mghenyi, and Pierella Paci
also¬†provided useful suggestions. Several World Bank staff, as well as policy makers, academics,
and other stakeholders provided comments at various stages of the development of this study.
Thanks also to Srilatha Shankar, Salam Hailou, Volana Andriamasinoro, Mapi Buitano, Marina Galvani,
Alexandre Hery, Sarwat Hussain, Beatrice Berman, Stephen McGroarty, Abdia Mohamed, Kofi Tsikata
for administrative, communication, design, and outreach efforts. Bruce Ross-Larson was the principal
editor. All errors and omissions are the responsibility of the team.

¬†




                                                                             REAPING RICHER RETURNS         3
4   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
Overview
The lack of robust agricultural productivity growth underlies pervasive rural poverty in Sub-Saharan
Africa. While many developing countries in other regions have successfully raised their agricultural
productivity, Sub-Saharan Africa lags behind. Yet, boosting agricultural productivity in Sub-Saharan
Africa would not only raise the incomes of farm households, which make up more than half the
region‚Äôs population, it would also lower food costs for the nonfarm population and promote the
development of agro-industry. That in turn would promote broader economic growth by stimulating
demand for nonfarm goods and services. Higher productivity would also free up resources such as
labor for the growth of other economic sectors. For these reasons, improving agricultural productivity
in Sub-Saharan Africa remains an important strategy for reducing poverty, enhancing inclusive growth,
and promoting structural transformation in the region.

Investments in rural public goods combined with better policies and institutions have driven agricultural
productivity growth around the world. The dividends from investments to strengthen markets, expand
irrigation, and develop and adopt improved technologies can be enormous. And improving the policy
environment through trade and regulatory policy reforms complements such spending by enhancing
the incentives for producers and innovators to take advantage of public goods, thus crowding in private
investment. Despite high returns to such investments, Sub-Saharan countries tends to underinvest in
them. Rebalancing the composition of public agricultural spending could reap massive payoffs.

Agricultural spending in Sub-Saharan Africa not only lags behind other developing regions on several
metrics of volume, it is also vitiated by subsidy programs and transfers that tend to benefit the better
off with insignificant gains for agriculture or for the poor. Shortcomings of the budgeting process also
reduce spending effectiveness. Therefore, addressing the quality of public spending and the efficiency
of resource use is perhaps even more important than addressing the level of spending.

Improving the efficiency of public spending requires managing the political pressures that determine
budget allocations. Groups of producers that control a large proportion of national wealth often have
the means to influence public policies to their benefit. And political pressures sometimes influence
spending towards short gestation projects and programs rather than those that are longer in term
but higher in impact. How then to marshal political support for reform and more effective spending?
By increasing transparency about the distributional effects of policies, by improving targeting
and gradually phasing out subsidies, by using mechanisms to enhance credibility of government
commitment to investments with long time horizons, and by packaging and sequencing reforms in
ways that reduce opposition.

The lack of robust evaluations, combined with limited access to public information on expenditures
and its beneficiaries, reduces the effectiveness of formal accountability mechanisms that might be
provided by political checks and balances, a free press, and well-intentioned civil society organizations.
Rigorous, evidence-based evaluations and their wide dissemination could reduce this information gap
and increase transparency.

                                                                              REAPING RICHER RETURNS         5
    Efficient public spending is only one ingredient of a strategy for agricultural transformation, and
    must be complemented by a host of additional policies. Indeed, in a poor policy environment,
    even spending in areas that would otherwise deliver high returns will be unproductive or
    counterproductive. Although these complementary policies and investments are essential, this book
    is not about them‚Äîit is about public spending in and for agriculture. But as we will demonstrate, the
    efficient use of public funds has laid the foundation for transformation in other parts of the world, and
    a key objective here is to explore how public agricultural spending can play that role in Sub-Saharan
    Africa as well.


    Enhance agricultural productivity to reduce poverty
    Extreme poverty is broad and deep
    Extreme poverty is becoming increasingly concentrated in Sub-Saharan Africa, which accounted for
    43 percent of global poverty in 2012,1 and its breadth and depth remain a dominant challenge.2 While
    the region‚Äôs GDP growth has picked up in recent years, it has mostly been driven by higher production
    of mineral and hydrocarbon resources. This growth model has not turned out to be an effective
    engine to drive the twin goals of rapid poverty reduction or boost shared prosperity.3 Even after nearly
    two decades of economic growth, most Africans continue to earn their livelihoods in the traditional
    economy. Much more than in any other region, agriculture dominates African economies, accounting
    for a third of the GDP region wide and employing two-thirds of the labor force, with the poorest
    countries most heavily reliant on it.


    Growth must be revitalized where the poor work
    Clearly one element to progress toward the twin goals is to revitalize growth where a large majority
    of the continent‚Äôs poor live and work. Evidence indicates that agricultural growth reduces poverty in
    developing countries by around three times more than growth in other sectors.4 Improving agricultural
    productivity is also critical for fostering structural transformation and managing the urban transition by
    increasing incomes and enabling people to move out of agriculture.5 Investments and policies to foster
    growth in the rural economy thus emerge as critical for accelerating poverty reduction and fostering
    inclusive growth in the region.


    African agriculture has been growing, but not sustainably
    Growth in agricultural production in Africa has undeniably picked up in recent years, and was close to
    that of other developing regions in 1985‚Äì2012 (figure 1). In those other regions, production increases
    were mainly associated with yield growth due to intensive use of inputs and improved production
    technologies. In Africa, however, production increases were largely a result of expanding the area
    under cultivation (figure 2).6 Such expansion cannot be sustained indefinitely, even with Africa‚Äôs relative
    land abundance.

6   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
  FIGURE 1. Total factor productivity growth in Africa lags behind other regions‚Äîand the gap is widening

                                                      3.5

                                                      3.0
      TFP growth (% per year)




                                                      2.5

                                                      2.0

                                                      1.5       3.27
                                                                         2.94
                                                      1.0                              2.02      2.00                       2.04
                                                      0.5                                                          1.03                 1.11
                                                                                                                                                0.60
                                                      0.0
                                                            East Asia and Paci c   Latin America and                South Asia       Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                       Caribbean

                                                                                          1991‚Äì2000              2001‚Äì2012
  Source: USDA Economic Research Service data.



  FIGURE 2. Production increases in Africa came largely from expanding the area under cultivation rather than input
  intensification or total factor productivity growth

                                                      4.0
            Agricultural output growth (% per year)




                                                      3.5
                                                      3.0
                                                                                          0.97
                                                      2.5                                                                               1.76
                                                                                          0.28                      0.73
                                                      2.0              0.01
                                                      1.5              0.52
                                                                                                                    1.34                1.12
                                                      1.0                                 2.10
                                                      0.5              1.38
                                                                                                                    0.57                0.59
                                                      0.0
                                                                 1961‚Äì1984            1985‚Äì2012                1961‚Äì1984             1985‚Äì2012
                                                              Sub-Saharan Africa   Sub-Saharan Africa        Other developing      Other developing
                                                                                                                 regions               regions

                                                                                         Land           Inputs            TFP
  Source: USDA Economic Research Service data.




The Green Revolution that boosted yields in other countries largely bypassed Africa. A comparison
with Asia and South America over two decades shows Africa in the 1990s with lower total factor
productivity growth than its comparators (TFP is a comprehensive measure of overall efficiency in the
use of all inputs see Box 1).7 And while other regions enjoyed faster growth in the 2000s than in the
1990s, Africa‚Äôs rate fell even lower, further magnifying the TFP gap.

                                                                                                                                   REAPING RICHER RETURNS   7
       Box 1. Measuring Agriculture‚Äôs Productivity Performance

       Total factor productivity (TFP) measures the total conventional resource cost of producing economic
       outputs. Unlike partial productivity measures (such as labor productivity, as output per worker,
       and land productivity, as crop yield per hectare), TFP takes into account the contributions of all
       conventional inputs to production‚Äîland, labor, capital, and materials. While growth in labor or
       land productivity may be attributed to increasing the use of other inputs, growth in TFP reflects
       improvements in the efficiency of this aggregate bundle of inputs. It is a more complete measure of
       productivity and more closely associated with technological change. Measuring TFP trends requires
       detailed information on all the output and input quantities involved in agricultural production,
       plus information on prices and unit costs. This measurement is an onerous task even for countries
       with detailed agricultural data, like the United States; for countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, data are
       incomplete and often of poor quality, and indirect methods are required to derive approximate
       measures of TFP.



    The time is right for boosting the productivity of African agriculture
    Although total factor productivity needs to be the primary driver of sustainable agricultural
    growth, Africa‚Äôs potential for agricultural prosperity is enhanced by an abundance of vital inputs.
    Of the world‚Äôs surface area suitable for the sustainable expansion of production‚Äîthat is,
    unprotected, unforested land with low population density‚ÄîAfrica has the largest share by far,
    accounting for almost 45 percent of the global total. Although some large areas of the continent
    are arid or semi-arid, the water resources in Africa are also, on average, substantially underused.
    Only 2.5 percent of renewable water resources in Africa are being used, half the 5 percent rate
    worldwide.

    On the supply side, the prospects are promising to increase both capital and the labor devoted
    to agricultural production. If the investment climate can be improved, the potential is good for
    attracting a higher share of global resources. Africa‚Äôs inward FDI stock in agriculture accounts
    for a mere 7 percent of the total stock in developing countries, compared with 78 percent for
    Asia and 15 percent for Latin America and the Caribbean. There is also the prospect of a growing
    labor force for agriculture. With the creation of jobs in upstream or downstream agribusinesses,
    this ‚Äúyouth dividend‚Äù could drive growth in the sector. But failing to create these jobs would mean
    rising unemployment or accelerated migration to already-crowded cities.8


    African markets are growing rapidly
    On the demand side, African regional markets are growing rapidly‚Äîdriven by population, urban, and
    income growth‚Äîand are forecast to reach a trillion dollars by 2030 (figure 3).9 The rising demand for
    food to nourish rapidly growing urban populations has so far been filled mostly with imports. From the
    1990s to the 2000s, the balance of trade in food staples was moving from deficit to surplus in Europe

8   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
and Central Asia,
                              FIGURE 3. The retail value of food and beverages in Sub-Saharan Africa is set to hit $1 trillion
South Asia, and East
Asia and the Pacific.                    1,000
But in Sub-Saharan
                                           900
Africa, the deficits
                                           800
widened.10 Food



                                   Billions of US dollars
                                           700                                                Urban
trade deficits are
                                           600
understandable
                                           500
in a region such
                                           400
as the Middle East
                                           300
and North Africa,                                              Urban
                                           200                                                 Rural
which has limited
advantage in food                          100                 Rural
production. But in                            0
Sub-Saharan Africa,                                            2010                            2030
                              Source: World Bank 2013.
where all the natural
ingredients for
efficient production
are in place, the deficits signal that something fundamental is amiss. If not reversed, the consequences
of missed opportunities to capture regional markets will only increase over time. But if African
agriculture becomes more competitive and regional producers capture these markets, the benefits
could be enormous. Taking advantage of these opportunities will need smart policy choices to reduce
trade barriers, which currently greatly impede regional trade, as well as smart spending in the public
and private sectors to make Africa‚Äôs production more competitive with imports.


Improving the effectiveness of public investments can boost productivity
A crucial element in enhancing agricultural productivity growth is improving the provision of
productive investments through more and better public spending in agriculture. This opportunity
has been recognized by African policymakers, and over the past few years, ministries of
agriculture and finance have intensified efforts to improve both the quantity (volume) and quality
(effectiveness) of public spending. In 2003, African nations launched the Comprehensive Africa
Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP), including a commitment to invest 10 percent of
national public spending in agriculture, a commitment popularly known as the Maputo Declaration.
This target was recently reiterated in the 2014 Malabo Declaration, and CAADP has led the charge
to support national teams working on agriculture sector expenditure to conduct basic agriculture
public expenditure reviews and related specialized analyses. A cornerstone of CAADP‚Äôs work
and that of its development partners, including the World Bank, has been to assist countries in
developing National Agricultural Investment Plans, make progress toward the quantitative goal, and
improve the quality of spending.

                                                                                             REAPING RICHER RETURNS              9
     Spending choices make a difference
     Increasing the volume of public spending in agriculture will be important but not sufficient to kindle
     agriculture growth and poverty reduction. Actions will also be needed to improve the efficiency and
     effectiveness of public spending. The expectation that high-quality public spending should bolster
     growth has strong empirical validation. This book shows significant differences in the rates of return to
     different categories of agricultural spending. Indeed, many studies find quite low returns to aggregate
     spending on agriculture. But almost all find high returns to specific types of spending, such as
     investments in core public goods related to technology generation and diffusion, market linkages, and
     irrigation infrastructure. The implication is that a large part of the spending in some countries goes to
     low-return activities, dragging down the overall returns relative to what they could have been if more
     spending were allocated to the higher return activities. The inevitable conclusion is that choices about
     how to allocate public agricultural spending matter a lot.

     Other complementary policies and investments are necessary as well
     Enhanced public spending in agriculture is only one ingredient of a strategy for agricultural
     transformation. Investments in rural infrastructure, health, and education matter too, and wise
     investments must be complemented by a host of other policies. Indeed, in a poor policy environment,
     even spending in areas generally considered high return will be unproductive or counterproductive.
     But smart use of public funds‚Äînot only by agriculture ministries, but by other ministries dealing with
     hard and soft infrastructure in rural areas‚Äîhas laid the foundation for transformation in other parts of
     the world. A key for policymakers and development practitioners is knowing what kinds of spending
     decisions can yield the biggest bang for the buck in achieving public policy objectives. What are the
     options to rebalance agricultural public spending and improve the budgeting process to increase the
     efficiency of limited resources for inclusive growth? Answering this question is the main objective of
     this book, so that public spending can do for Africa what it has done elsewhere.


     Why governments should invest in agriculture
     Before discussing ‚Äúwhat‚Äù African governments should be spending public funds on, it may be useful to
     briefly understand the ‚Äúwhy.‚Äù Why should governments be spending on agriculture at all? The rationale
     for public investments derives from two fundamental sources: economic inefficiencies caused by
     market failures and from inequalities in the distribution of goods and services (box 2).

     Considering pathways to benefits
     To guide decisions on areas appropriate for government spending, it helps to consider what kinds of
     goods and services are necessary to catalyze agricultural growth, and to what extent each is a ‚Äúpublic
     good.‚Äù To do this, we conceptualize the beneficial effects of public spending in agriculture along
     four pathways: generating technology, disseminating knowledge (building human capital), reducing
     transaction costs, and attracting private capital.11 Each can be identified with particular classes of

10   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
  BOX 2. Correcting market failures and inequalities

  Agricultural production is quintessentially a private enterprise. But production requires public goods
  and services that the private sector, on both theoretical and practical grounds, cannot provide
  efficiently. One characteristic of such goods and services is that they are nonexcludable‚Äîif provided
  to one consumer, other potential beneficiaries cannot be kept from enjoying them. A second is
  that they are nonrivalrous‚Äîconsumption by one does not reduce the consumption of another.
  Nonexcludability implies that potential beneficiaries cannot be charged for the good, so the producer
  cannot capture its full social value. Nonrivalry implies that it is inefficient to charge anything for the
  good, since the cost of supplying an additional unit (letting another consumer enjoy the benefits) is
  zero. These characteristics cause social and private returns to diverge, leading to private investments
  below the social optimum. That is why the public sector needs to play a role in their provision.


spending to provide goods or services that have public good characteristics and that are crucial for
fostering robust agriculture productivity growth and poverty reduction in rural contexts.

n	 To generate knowledge. Technology-advancing effects are associated with public spending
   on agricultural research and development (R&D) to create basic knowledge, which is both
   nonexcludable and nonrivalrous. Sometimes the knowledge can be embodied in a commercial
   product (as with hybrid seeds and chemicals), with benefits that are excludable and rivalrous, but
   the basic knowledge itself is not. Investments in R&D are among the most important public goods
   and a critical component of public agricultural spending.

n	 To disseminate knowledge and build human capital. Human-capital-enhancing effects can be
   associated with public spending on extension, training, and information services that transfer
   knowledge and skills to those engaged in agricultural production. These investments create
   significant positive externalities through demonstration effects and peer-to-peer learning of
   benefits from adopting new productivity enhancing technology. As agricultural production
   processes become increasingly knowledge intensive, with higher demand for precise and timely
   information, such investments become more important.

n	 To reduce transaction costs. Similarly, transaction-cost-reducing effects can derive from public
   spending on soft and hard infrastructure that might improve access to input and output markets.
   Transaction costs are an important determinant of market integration, and investments that lower
   the costs of searching for and exchanging information‚Äîand of bargaining, decision-making, and
   enforcing contracts‚Äîtend to enhance market participation.12 Investments in rural roads, market
   information dissemination, and land market development, for example, are important in reducing
   transaction costs.

n	 To attract private capital. The crowding-in effects of public agricultural spending on private capital comes
   about when public and private investments are complements in production. An example is public
   investment in large infrastructure such as dams and canals, which then make it profitable for farmers to
   make small on-farm investments in water management and a wider range of production technologies.

                                                                                  REAPING RICHER RETURNS          11
     Reducing inequality and poverty
     Public spending in agriculture is also often justified on equity grounds, especially salient given the
     concentration of the poor in rural areas, most of whom rely primarily on agriculture (directly or
     indirectly) for their livelihoods. One argument for fertilizer subsidies is that they could potentially
     help poor farmers break out of a low-productivity poverty trap. The equity justification for spending,
     of course, is stronger for programs that can actually be targeted at the poor and for programs that
     demonstrate a high income multiplier. For instance, impacts of spending on extension are just
     as progressive as those from several kinds of social spending, and are far superior to spending on
     subsidies. Also to be recognized is that many programs aimed at rural poverty reduction‚Äîeither
     directly (as with rural safety nets) or indirectly (as with programs to support structural transformation
     by helping the rural poor find jobs in urban areas)‚Äîfall outside the scope of this study.


     Ensuring productive spending
     Not all public spending is productive. This is a clear implication of the low estimated net benefits
     from total agricultural spending compared with the high benefits of some categories of agricultural
     spending.13 Apparently, where aggregate spending has no measurable impact, the negative effects
     of ineffective spending overwhelm the positive effects of more effective spending.14 Public spending
     may be unproductive or even reduce the productivity of other spending for two basic reasons. First,
     governments sometimes spend on things that are not public goods. They tend to be inefficient
     suppliers of private goods, and when they enter these markets, there is a serious risk of displacing the
     private sector. Second, even when there are clear failures in particular markets, government spending
     will not necessarily improve the situation. Inherent characteristics of government interventions can
     sometimes lead to ‚Äúgovernment failures,‚Äù which may exacerbate the original problems caused by the
     market failures and produce unintended adverse ancillary effects. Empirically though, public spending
     on public goods has typically been much more productive than public spending on private goods.15


     How much public spending‚Äîand for what?
     10 percent on agriculture?
     In the 2003 Maputo Declaration, African heads of state and government agreed that spending was
     far too low in agriculture and set a goal of investing 10 percent of their total national spending in
     agriculture. This goal was reaffirmed in the Malabo Declaration in 2014, and assisting countries to
     increase the quantity and quality of public agricultural spending has been a major objective of the
     Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme. There is also an aspirational goal of
     increasing agricultural annual growth to 6 percent for Sub-Saharan countries, though growth is not a
     policy variable under the direct control of governments the way public spending is.

     Of course, the optimal distribution among sectors will depend on many country-specific factors (box
     3). In particular, the extent that ministries of agriculture (and related ministries) can demonstrate that

12   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
their programs are an efficient and high-impact use of public funds, they can make a stronger case to
ministries of finance and planning for increasing their budgets. In this sense, enhancing the quality of
spending is the first order of business, and this book sees this objective as the priority. Nonetheless,
the quantity of spending is a meaningful indicator of government commitment to agriculture, so it is
worth considering how Africa stacks up to other regions, and to the Maputo and Malabo targets.


    BOX 3. How much of the government budget should be devoted to agriculture?

    How much of the government budget should be devoted to agriculture, and how much to other
    sectors? What is ‚Äútoo little‚Äù and what is ‚Äúenough‚Äù? The answers are conceptually straightforward but
    difficult to put into practice. In principle, to maximize welfare on a given budget, spending should be
    distributed such that the marginal dollar in each activity yields the same increase in national welfare
    (however ‚Äúwelfare‚Äù is defined). If this were not true‚Äîif, for example, an additional dollar devoted to
    agriculture increased welfare more than the incremental dollar to health spending‚Äîoverall welfare
    could be increased by taking a dollar from health and spending it on agriculture.

    In a two-sector world (agriculture and nonagriculture), this condition for distributing spending so as
    to maximize welfare can be expressed as:
          !!         !"
(1) (1) ! ! = !" ,
 (1)      ! !! = ! !!" ,
           ! !!      ! !!"
where   Ì†µÌ±äÌ†µÌ±ä is welfare   and   Ì†µÌ±ÜÌ†µÌ±Ü!    and  Ì†µÌ±ÜÌ†µÌ±ÜS " are
                                                       are spending        agricultureand
                                                                        on agriculture  and  nonagriculture.
    where
 where    Ì†µÌ±äÌ†µÌ±äW
              is is welfare
                  welfare    and
                           and       SA
                                      ! and Ì†µÌ±ÜÌ†µÌ±Ü!
                                   Ì†µÌ±ÜÌ†µÌ±Ü    and    !NA       spending on                    nonagriculture.
                                                     " are spending on agriculture and nonagriculture.
Of course,      how     muchwelfare
                      much                          increased
                                              isincreased     byby   an incremental       dollardollar
                                                                                        public          spent   in agriculture
 Of Of  course,
     course,      how
                 how   much     welfare
                                welfareisis          increased    an
                                                                  byincremental    public
                                                                       an incremental    public  dollarinspent
                                                                                                spent      agriculture
                                                                                                                 in agriculture
depends
    depends on how
                 on   much
                    how   much that  that dollar
                                            dollar  will
                                                      will increase
                                                           increase   agricultural
                                                                     agricultural   production,
                                                                                  production, as as well
                                                                                                 well as howas how
                                                                                                               much  much
                                                                                                                      the the
 depends on how much that dollar will increase agricultural production, as well as how much                                  the
additional
    additionalproduction
                  production will
                                will      increasewelfare.
                                        increase      welfare.   This
                                                                This   optimal
                                                                     optimal     allocation
                                                                              allocation    condition
                                                                                         condition can can
                                                                                                         be   be expressed
                                                                                                             expressed  in a in
 additional     production    will       increase     welfare.    This  optimal   allocation condition    can  be expressed   in
a ratio of
    ratio  ofspending
              spending   in
                          in each
                             each       sector,
                                         sector,    suchthat:
                                                   such    that:
 a ratio of spending in each sector, such that:
           !!            !!"              ! ! ,! !
(2) (2)  !!      =          !!" √ó          ! ! ,! ! ,
 (2)    !!"
            !!"
                 =     !!,!" √ó !!",!!"
                         !!,!"           !!",!!"
                                                       ,
    Where EWA is the elasticity of welfare to agricultural production (and likewise for nonagricultural
Where   Ì†µÌª¶Ì†µÌª¶!" is the elasticity of welfare to agricultural production (and likewise for nonagricultural
 Where              the elasticity
          Ì†µÌª¶Ì†µÌª¶!" is and
    production),           E A is the    welfare of
                                      ofelasticity    agricultural
                                                   to agricultural            to (and
                                                                     production
                                                                   production         likewise
                                                                                 public        for
                                                                                        spending innonagricultural
                                                                                                   agriculture
production), and Ì†µÌª¶Ì†µÌª¶!,!A,S    is the elasticity of agricultural production to public spending in agriculture
 production),
    (and likewise and      !,!! is the elasticity
                       Ì†µÌª¶Ì†µÌª¶nonagricultural
                     for     !                     of agricultural production to public spending in agriculture
                                           production).
(and likewise for nonagricultural production).
 (and likewise for nonagricultural production).
    The optimality condition in equation (2) provides a useful framework for thinking about spending
	 allocations whereby the optimal ratio of public spending in agriculture versus nonagriculture is
 	
    equal to the ratio of the welfare elasticity of each sector‚Äôs production times the ratio of each sector‚Äôs
    elasticity of production with respect to public spending in the sector. The problem in operationalizing
    this to provide practical guidance to policymakers is that it would require empirical estimation of all
    these elasticities (in every sector) for a given country. There have been some attempts in cross-country
    samples to estimate the elasticity of welfare (measured by either national GDP or poverty reduction)
    with respect to agricultural production, and the elasticity of production with respect to public
    spending.16 But there is no strong reason to assume that for any given country, the elasticities would
    be equal to the global or regional average.



                                                                                                REAPING RICHER RETURNS             13
        BOX 3. How much of the government budget should be devoted to agriculture?

        In the absence of a practical way to rigorously answer the question of how much public spending
        should be allocated to agriculture, there have been some efforts to provide ‚Äúrules of thumb,‚Äù which
        may seem intuitive and reasonable. For example, De Ferranti et al. (2005) show that with some special
        (and quite restrictive) simplifying assumptions, the optimal allocation is such that each sector‚Äôs share
        of spending is its share of national GDP.17 This index‚Äîthe share of spending on agriculture relative to
        agriculture‚Äôs share in the economy‚Äîis calculated for a number of Latin American countries over time
        to analyze whether there has been a systematic underallocation or ‚Äúanti-agricultural bias‚Äù in public
        spending, with the general conclusion of no such bias in that region.

        An alternative approach is to examine the experiences of countries that have undergone successful
        agricultural transformations. Analysis of 12 East and South Asian countries during their periods of high
        agricultural growth‚Äîthe ‚ÄúGreen Revolution‚Äù‚Äîshows that, on average, these countries devoted around
        10 percent of total public spending to agriculture.18 Many other factors certainly contributed to success,
        but public support was an important ingredient. Thus, the Maputo target is similar to what the Asian
        countries were spending on agriculture in this period. Likewise, the NEPAD target of spending 1 percent
        of agricultural GDP on research is quite similar to the level that Brazil devoted to its successful research
        agency, Embrapa, as well as the level of spending on research in some high-income countries.

        In applying such ‚Äúrules of thumb,‚Äù it is also sensible to make adjustments based on economic
        reasoning using equation (2). For example, countries differ greatly in the contribution of agriculture
        to national GDP, and a 1 percent increase in agricultural production will generally result in a smaller
        percentage increase in overall GDP in a country where agriculture is 10 percent of the economy than
        in a country where it is 30 percent. That is, the value of will be smaller in the latter than in the former,
        and so‚Äîall other things equal‚Äîthe share of spending going to agriculture should be smaller as
        well. And the elasticity of production with respect to spending () will be higher in countries with high
        agricultural potential (both because of favorable natural endowments and because the overall policy
        environment is conducive to a positive supply response)‚Äîand where the spending is ‚Äúsmarter.‚Äù In
        such countries with a higher value of EA,SA , agriculture‚Äôs share of spending should be higher.
        Source: Correa and Schmidt 2014; De Ferranti et al. 2005; Hazell 2009.




     Lagging behind other regions
     Public agricultural spending in Africa has lagged behind that in other developing regions on several
     metrics. Agricultural spending as a share of overall public spending‚Äîthe metric used in the Maputo
     Declaration‚Äîis substantially lower than that in other regions, particularly East Asia and the Pacific and
     South Asia (figure 4). In 2014, Burkina Faso, Malawi, Mozambique, and Zimbabwe‚Äîhad barely met or
     surpassed the 10 percent target (Malawi and Mozambique consistently surpassed it). Three countries‚Äî
     Niger, Rwanda, and Zambia‚Äîwere close behind at 9 percent. On another metric‚Äîpublic spending on
     agriculture as a share of agricultural GDP‚Äîspending is also substantially lower in Africa than in other
     regions. This is also the case on the metric of spending per capita; in Africa, spending per capita was on
     average $19, almost a third lower than the next lowest region, South Asia.

14   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
  FIGURE 4. Public agricultural spending lags behind other regions
  (public agricultural spending across regions, 2000‚Äì12)


      100                               96
       90
       80
       70
       60
       50                                                                       47
       40
       30
                                                                                                          28
                                                                                                                                19
       20                      13
                       5                                                8                   5      5
       10                                                      2                                                    3     4
        0
                   East Asia and Paci c                          Caribbean                   South Asia            Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                             Latin America and

                                                                Share of total spending (percent)
                                                                Share of agricultural GDP (percent)
                                                                Agricultural spending per capita (PPP dollars)
  Source: IFPRI Statistics on Public Expenditures for Economic Development database.




Conditions and contexts differ widely‚Äîbut trends indicate a widespread problem
While almost all countries are spending below the 10 percent target, country conditions and thus
spending contexts differ widely across Sub-Saharan Africa (figure 5). For instance, the spending
target is arguably less meaningful for such countries as South Africa and Botswana, with relatively
small agricultural GDP shares in the overall economy (box 3). An alternative indicator of the public
budgetary commitment to agriculture accounts for sector size‚Äîthe Agriculture Orientation Index
(AOI) is agriculture‚Äôs share of public spending relative to its share in the economy.19 An AOI value of 1
would indicate that the government spends a share of its budget on agriculture exactly proportional
to agriculture‚Äôs contribution to GDP. As with other indicators, this is a blunt tool to measure policy, and
only under special assumptions would spending be allocated exactly in proportion to each sector‚Äôs
contribution to the economy. Still, intuitively, large deviations would at least suggest a deeper enquiry
by policymakers.

As it turns out, no country in Africa has an AOI of 1, although some come close (figure 6). There is a
strong tendency for the countries with small agricultural sectors to devote proportionately more of the
budget to supporting it (higher AOIs). Overall, however, most African countries spend much smaller
proportions of the public budget on agriculture than the sector‚Äôs share in the economy. Of the 47
countries for which the AOI can be computed, it is less than 0.3 in 31 countries.

                                                                                                                 REAPING RICHER RETURNS   15
       FIGURE 5. Almost all African countries fall short of the 10 percent target of government spending
       (public agricultural spending in Sub-Saharan countries, 2014)

       Agriculture spending share of          25
                                              20
                                              15
              total spoending


                                              10
                                               5
                                               0
                                                          Guinea-Bissau
                                                                  Angola
                                                           South Sudan
                                                              Seychelles
                                                        Congo, Republic
                                                            South Africa
                                                                 Lesotho
                                                               Botswana
                                                                   Sudan
                                                               Mauritius
                                                             Cape Verde
                                                                   Kenya
                                                                  Nigeria
                                                            The Gambia
                                                              Swaziland
                                                                   Ghana
                                                                 Burundi
                                                                Tanzania
                                                                 Uganda
                                                             Mauritania
                                                                   Eritrea
                                                                Namibia
                                                         Central African
                                                           C√¥te d'Ivoire
                                                                      Mali
                                                                     Togo
                                                            Madagascar
                                                                  Guinea
                                                                     Chad
                                                              Cameroon
                                                           Sierra Leone
                                                                 Senegal
                                                                    Benin
                                                                 Ethiopia
                                                            S√£o Tom√© &
                                                                 Rwanda
                                                                    Niger
                                                                  Zambia
                                                              Zimbabwe
                                                           Burkina Faso
                                                           Mozambique
                                                                  Malawi
                                                      Congo, Dem. Rep.
       Source: IFPRI Regional Strategic Analysis and Knowledge Support System data.




     While the numerical goal of 10 percent is somewhat arbitrary and the failure to meet this target is
     arguably not so worrisome, the AOI also appears to demonstrate underspending in most countries.
     Even more problematic is the persistent negative trend across three decades in agricultural spending
     as a share of both agricultural GDP and total public spending in Sub-Saharan Africa. Perhaps even
     more important than the level of spending is the inefficiency of resource use within the existing
     budget envelope.


       FIGURE 6. No country in Africa spends as much on agriculture as agriculture contributes to the economy

                                             60                     Central African Rep.
                                                                        Sierra Leone
       Agriculture GDP (share of GDP) 2014




                                                                         Chad
                                             50
                                                                   ‚Äê
                                                        Guinea Bissau      Togo
                                                                                     Ethiopia
                                             40          Burundi           Mali
                                                                                                Niger
                                                      Comoros                                       Burkina Faso
                                                                         Tanzania                                                                                          Malawi
                                                          Kenya                                 Rwanda
                                             30                                Uganda
                                                         Sudan                             Madagascar
                                                                                                          Benin                                  Mozambique
                                                                      Ghana                C√¥te d'Ivoire         S√£o Tom√© & Pr√≠ncipe
                                             20                     Nigeria Mauritania                         Congo, Dem. Rep.
                                                                              Cameroon               Guinea
                                                                                                                                       Senegal
                                                                                                                                                                     Zimbabwe
                                             10
                                                                                           Lesotho              Cape Verde                                                 Namibia
                                                                                                                                                     Swaziland
                                                      Gabon                                                Congo, Republic                                                                      Botswana
                                                                                                                                         South Africa         Seychelles            Mauritius
                                              0
                                                  0                0.1            0.2                0.3              0.4          0.5               0.6             0.7               0.8             0.9
                                                                                                                        2014 AOI
       Source: IFPRI Regional Strategic Analysis and Knowledge Support System data.




16   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
Within any given overall budget envelope for agricultural public spending, the allocation across
different activities needs to be balanced for the highest returns. There is no one-size-fits-all formula for
deciding what that optimal allocation should be, and it will differ greatly across countries, depending
on country circumstances and political preferences. Even so, it is useful to consider what kinds of
expenditures have generally been most productive, and to examine how current composition of
spending appears to reflect these lessons‚Äîor not. The evidence on returns to different spending
categories is a bit lopsided, in the sense that much more research integrating benefits and costs have
been done on certain categories of spending such as R&D than on other types of spending. Why?
Efforts at data collection in this area have been more systematic, and the specific kind of spending
under this rubric is perhaps more homogeneous than other categories as well.

Research has high returns but is severely underfunded
Spending on agricultural R&D is worth an especially close look, given the strong evidence that returns
to investments in this area are consistently high around the world. A large sample of studies estimated
rates of return averaging 43 percent in developing countries and 34 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Yet agricultural R&D capacity in Sub-Saharan Africa has remained low by international norms. Over
the last decade, spending on agricultural research constituted about 0.4 percent of agricultural GDP
in Sub-Saharan Africa, compared with 1.3 percent in Latin America and the Caribbean, 0.6 percent in
East Asia and the Pacific, and 0.9 percent in South Asia (figure 7). In addition, Africa was the only region
where agricultural research spending fell on average over this period. These are troubling signs that
agricultural research is severely underfunded in Africa.



  FIGURE 7. Public agricultural research spending varies across regions 2000‚Äì11


                                                    5
      Agricultural research expenditure (percent)




                                                    4

                                                    3
                                                                         5
                                                    2
                                                                                                                                3.5

                                                    1                                              1.9
                                                                                        1.3
                                                           0.6                                                      0.9
                                                                                                                                              0.4
                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                        -0.6
                                                    -1
                                                         East Asia and PaciÔ¨Åc Latin America and Caribbean            South Asia            Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                 Average annual share in agricultural value added
  Source: IFPRI Agricultural Science and Technology Indicators data.                                                      Average annual growth rate


                                                                                                                                         REAPING RICHER RETURNS   17
     Most countries fall short of NEPAD‚Äôs 1 percent target
     It is not surprising that in 2006, in its commitment to implementing an agriculture-led
     development agenda, the African Union‚Äôs New Partnership for Africa‚Äôs Development (NEPAD)
     set an additional target to increase public spending on agricultural R&D to at least 1 percent
     of agricultural GDP, a target that few countries have met (figure 8). As noted earlier, most high-
     income countries spend around 1 percent of their agricultural GDP on research, as does Brazil,
     a country widely regarded to have an effective research agency, Embrapa. A closer look at the
     relative shift in the patterns of spending in agricultural R&D in Sub-Saharan countries over
     time reveals important cross-country differences and challenges. Over 2000‚Äì11, half the Sub-
     Saharan countries experienced near-zero or negative growth in agricultural R&D spending
     (figure 9). Despite the well-documented considerable payoffs to agricultural research and the
     demonstrated political commitment to agricultural R&D in Africa, many Sub-Saharan countries
     have continued to underinvest in this activity.



       FIGURE 8. Only six countries are above 1 percent
       (agricultural research spending as a share of agricultural GDP, 2011)

         5

         4

         3

         2

         1

         0
             Guinea-Bissau
                       Gabon
                         Chad
                Madagascar
             Central African
                       Sudan
                     Ethiopia
               Congo, Dem.
                      Guinea
               Sierra Leone
                      Nigeria
                       Eritrea
                    Tanzania
              Mozambique
                      Zambia
               Cote d'Ivoire
                         Togo
                 Mauritania
                     Burundi
                       Liberia
                          Mali
                        Benin
                     Rwanda
                       Ghana
               Burkina Faso
                     Senegal
                  Zimbabwe
               Gambia, The
                     Uganda
                        Kenya
                Congo, Rep.
                     Lesotho
                      Malawi
                  Swaziland
                 Cabo Verde
                South Africa
                   Botswana
                    Namibia
                   Mauritius

       Source: IFPRI Agricultural Science and Technology Indicators data.




18   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
  FIGURE 9. Half the countries have zero or negative spending growth
  (annual growth in agricultural R&D spending, 2000‚Äì11)

                                                           10
      Agricultural research expenditure growth (percent)




                                                            5


                                                            0


                                                            -5


                                                           -10


                                                           -15
                                                                        Eritrea
                                                                       Guinea
                                                                        Gabon
                                                                          Togo
                                                                       Zambia
                                                                 Gambia, The
                                                                 South Africa
                                                                 Cote d'Ivoire
                                                                    Mauritius
                                                                  Madagascar
                                                                 Burkina Faso
                                                                           Mali
                                                                      Ethiopia
                                                                      Senegal
                                                                        Kenya
                                                                   Zimbabwe
                                                                    Botswana
                                                                      Lesotho
                                                                       Malawi
                                                                       Nigeria
                                                                        Sudan
                                                                        Ghana
                                                                      Burundi
                                                                         Benin
                                                                     Tanzania
                                                                  Congo, Rep.
                                                                      Uganda
                                                                   Average annual growth rate of agricultural research spending, 2000‚Äì2011
  Source: IFPRI Agricultural Science and Technology Indicators data.
  Note: The figure excludes Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Democratic Republic of Congo, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mauritania, Mozambique, Namibia, Rwanda,
  Sierra Leone, and Swaziland because time-series data did not date back to 2000.




This, despite the enormous rewards
Spending on research and development (R&D) has driven agriculture‚Äôs transformation around the
world. During periods of rapid growth, Brazil, China, and India invested heavily in agricultural research,
with their collective share in developing country public spending on agricultural R&D rising from
a third in 1981 to almost half in 2000.20 And investments in national and international agricultural
research have been demonstrated to be among the most important determinants of long-term
productivity growth in Sub-Saharan Africa as well. For example, the CGIAR Consortium has played an
important role in raising agricultural productivity growth in Sub-Saharan Africa. Spending by CGIAR in
the region has generated $6 in benefits for every dollar spent on research in Africa. Returns to national
agricultural R&D spending have been lower, but still significant, averaging about $3 in benefits for
every $1 spent on R&D.




                                                                                                                                     REAPING RICHER RETURNS              19
     Large countries have earned higher returns to R&D than small countries, but even in small countries,
     returns were still high enough to justify the investment, particularly around adaptive research
     (table 1). Moreover, national and international agricultural research efforts in Sub-Saharan Africa are
     complementary: Countries that have made a greater national investment in agricultural research are
     better able to adapt and deliver new technologies to farmers emanating from international centers.21

     African research institutions can learn from Brazil‚Äôs Embrapa, whose success is attributable to
     institutional characteristics and policy choices in addition to adequate funding, such as high investment
     in human capital, effective collaboration with private sector and international research centers, as well
     as an open innovation system and intellectual property rights to facilitate technology development and
     diffusion. Other lessons emerging from Africa‚Äôs own experience in investing in technology generation
     and dissemination will be useful in shaping future spending decisions in this area.

     TABLE 1. Returns to agricultural research in Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                     Returns to agricultural research
         Countries
                                                                                              Benefit‚Äìcost    Internal rate    IRR (%) without
                                                                                                 ratio        of return (%)         CGIAR
         Large countries
                                                                                                   4.4              43                  36
         Nigeria, Sudan, Ethiopia, Kenya, C√¥te d‚ÄôIvoire, Ghana
         Mid-size countries
                                                                                                   2.6              29                  23
         Uganda, Senegal, Mali, Mozambique, Madagascar
         Small countries
                                                                                                   1.6              17                  13
         Gabon, Burundi, Gambia, Botswana, Swaziland
     Source: Fuglie and Rada 2013.
     Note: The benefit‚Äìcost ratio discounts future benefits at a yearly rate of 10 percent.




     Rebalance spending to reap richer returns
     Reduce the barriers to disseminating foreign technology
     and developing domestic technology
     An important principle for expenditure policy is that governments cannot afford to be the only, or
     even the main, developers of new technology. In Africa, governments currently fund more than 90
     percent of the ongoing R&D. But with scarce budget resources, countries need to adopt policies
     to reduce barriers to spill-ins of technology from abroad and to encourage private investment in
     technology generation. Current requirements for lengthy and expensive tests to register new seed
     varieties (imported or domestic) in many African countries practically guarantee that African farmers
     will not benefit from advances in other parts of the world or from private domestic R&D.

     These barriers could be reduced by following the practices in such countries as India and South
     Africa, which allow the introduction of new varieties with no performance testing but which require
     truth in labeling to protect farmers from false claims.22 This has been particularly effective in South
     Africa, where farmers benefit from a much higher rate of introducing new varieties than other African


20   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
countries, even accounting for the size of the market.23 Barriers can at least be lowered by mutual
recognition of new varieties already registered in neighboring countries, the approach of the EU, and is
being pursued in several regional regulatory frameworks in Africa, but progress has been slow. The two
approaches are not mutually exclusive and countries could potentially consider unilateral action to
reduce barriers while waiting for regional agreements to take shape.24

Invest in land governance
One key public good that is greatly undersupplied across Africa is the legal and institutional
framework for land governance. The poor institutional framework is reflected in the low demand for
land administration professionals: Ghana, Kenya, and Uganda, for example, all have fewer than 10
land surveyors per million population, compared with 197 in Malaysia and 150 in Sri Lanka.25 These
conditions undermine land market development and secure tenure, weakening incentives to make on-
farm investments and impeding rural credit market development.

Significant investments will be needed to reverse soil degradation and depletion, so improving land
security will be hugely important to create conditions for sustainably boosting productivity. Many
Sub-Saharan countries have either legislation in place or initiatives under way to address communal
land rights and gender equality, the basis for sound land administration. In addition, they have made a
commitment to implement more land policy reforms, primarily second-generation reforms, through a
declaration adopted by the African heads of state and government in their July 2009 Summit in Libya,
to develop and implement comprehensive land policies, guided by the African Union‚Äôs Framework and
Guidelines on Land Policy in Africa.26 Implementing the main elements of a strategy to raise standards of
land governance across Africa is estimated to require increased spending of some $4.3 billion.

Bolster extension
Another crucial element in crafting spending decisions to encourage greater adoption of modern
technologies is to improve the effectiveness of extension services. Particularly where information
constraints are a major bottleneck in the uptake of modern inputs and production techniques, public
funding (although not necessarily provision) of extension can be a cost-effective use of public funds.
Moreover, higher returns to investments in agricultural extension are expected if the rate of developing
new technologies for Sub-Saharan Africa is increasing, enabling farmers to adjust more quickly to
changing circumstances.27

Extension services are coming back on the agenda, and in a few countries now make up substantial
shares of the budget. But there is the risk that extension will once again be viewed as ineffective.
Attention to extension services peaked in the 1980s and early 1990s, when money was poured into
systems that mainly promoted agricultural technology adoption in a centralized, linear, one-size-fits-
all method.28 In the late 1990s, when many of these traditional systems were shown to be deficient
in their quality and relevance, public spending on extension declined. However, the rapid adoption
of digital technologies in rural areas shows promise in reviving some aspects of extension services
and consequently improving productivity.29 Innovative models are being implemented in Kenya and


                                                                              REAPING RICHER RETURNS        21
     Nigeria. New tools and approaches have helped overcome information problems that hinder market
     access for many small-scale farmers, promote knowledge and skill development, and stimulate
     opportunities for agricultural supply chain management.

     The balance between R&D and extension has long been an issue, with critics suggesting that many
     of these extension agents had nothing to extend owing to weak R&D‚Äîand that extension systems
     tended to be the poor relation at the bottom of the funding chain. As a result entire budgets were
     spent on recurrent items such as salaries, while there was no fuel for vehicles and thus no farm visits.30
     In funding the new generation of extension programs, the lessons from the past need to be taken
     into account to better balance spending across subcategories and make extension more effective,
     particularly in reaping the benefits from irrigation (box 4).


        BOX 4. Africa‚Äôs potential for increasing irrigation

        The irrigated area as a share of total cultivated area is estimated at 6 percent for Africa, compared
        with 37 percent for Asia and 14 percent for Latin America. Food production in Africa remains almost
        entirely rainfed, despite highly variable and in many cases insufficient rainfall together with a high
        incidence of droughts. The potential for profitable irrigation development for Sub-Saharan Africa
        remains large, given the existing water resources, the high value of irrigated agriculture on the
        continent, and the large number of rural poor who could benefit from productivity improvements as
        a result of irrigation.

        The returns to many irrigation projects in the past were relatively low in Africa, and the negative
        externalities high. But recent advances in planning and design techniques have provided the ability
        to minimize adverse environment and social consequences of large irrigation infrastructure. Recent
        studies show that irrigated land can be expanded from 13 million hectares to 24 million hectares
        in economically viable ways, with returns ranging from 17 percent for large-scale irrigation to 43
        percent for small-scale irrigation.31 Sub-Saharan Africa has significant unexploited potential to
        develop both large and small-scale irrigation, but economic viability depends on keeping costs
        down. Although there is significant potential for rehabilitating existing irrigated areas in the region,
        the expertise, knowledge, and capacity to manage irrigation investments are low.32



     Improve post-harvest practices and market access
     Investments in post-harvest processing facilities, access to markets, and accompanying
     infrastructure and policy reforms that foster commercial agriculture are critical for transforming
     African agriculture. A large literature on the impacts of investments to improve market access
     for farmers has found that benefits are significant, come in different forms, and can be realized
     through several channels. Reduction in transport costs reduces both trade costs and interregional
     price gaps.33 The spillover effects are that farmers pay less for their inputs and get more for their
     outputs, increasing incomes.34

     Proximity to rural roads has significant effects on poverty and agricultural productivity overall.35 This
     is particularly critical in Africa, where less than half of the rural population lives close to an all-season

22   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
road. Trader surveys in Benin, Madagascar, and Malawi find that transport costs account for 50‚Äì60
percent of total marketing costs.36 In Tanzania, the maize price pass-through from broader markets
to farmers was significantly lower even 25 miles away from a paved road.37 Higher profitability
from road access also increases the value of farmers‚Äô land.38 Not surprisingly, access to markets
facilitates economic diversification in rural areas and creates incentives to adopt modern production
technologies by farmers.39

Shift government spending from private to public goods
Research from Latin America and the Caribbean finds that it is crucial to shift public spending from
providing goods and services to speciÔ¨Åc groups of producers toward the increased provision of public
goods. On average, 51 percent of total government spending in rural areas was on subsidies to private
goods during 1985‚Äì2001. A reallocation of 10 percentage points of public expenditures from subsidies
to public goods would increase per capita agricultural income by about 2.3 percent without increasing
total spending.40 These findings from cross-country analysis for Latin America are consistent with
the analysis for Asia, where spending on rural infrastructure, agricultural research, and dissemination
had large poverty alleviation effects (box 5). Governments in Africa and other developing regions
have invested heavily in state-owned enterprises (parastatals) to perform commercial functions
that generally are carried out more efficiently carried out by the private sector, crowding out private
investment and dragging down overall sectoral performance. While this situation has improved over
time, state-owned enterprises are still more involved than they should be in the agriculture sector,
particularly in marketing inputs and outputs.


   BOX 5. Reform policies and invest well: Lessons from Asia‚Äôs agricultural transformation

   Many parts of Asia have achieved impressive gains in agricultural productivity and poverty reduction
   over the past half-century. By contrast, sustained productivity growth remains elusive in most
   of Africa. What can African policymakers learn from Asia‚Äôs experience? Conditions naturally differ
   in many respects between Africa and Asia, but it is instructive to understand the mix of public
   investments and policies of many Asian countries, and their relative importance in driving growth
   and reducing poverty. Spending on productive investments related to the development and diffusion
   of technological improvements, greater connectivity in rural areas, and irrigation development did
   the most to reduce poverty.

   In India, the relative performance of subsidies evolved over time, with somewhat higher returns in
   the early years of the Green Revolution but declining rapidly thereafter. Fertilizer, power, and irrigation
   subsidies were among the least significant contributors over the four decades.

   The findings of these studies provide potentially important implications for enhancing agricultural
   growth and poverty reduction in Africa. There are strong reasons to believe that the policy reforms
   and investments that generated high payoffs in Asia can drive growth and reduce poverty in most of
   Africa as well.




                                                                                             REAPING RICHER RETURNS   23
     Target spending to reduce poverty
     The scope is considerable for crafting investments to magnify their pro-poor impacts. Rural roads
     and irrigation infrastructure can be geographically targeted at areas where there are concentrations
     of poor. Research can be aimed at crops, livestock, and technologies that are likely to be most useful
     to the poor rather than, say, for example, plantation export crops. Efforts to connect farmers to
     markets can be focused on smallholders. Country studies in Uganda and Tanzania indicate that such
     investments can have a large payoff in both economic growth and poverty reduction (box 6).



        BOX 6. Impacts of policy options to raise agricultural productivity in Sub-Saharan Africa

        Recent research has quantified the potential improvement in productivity from policy reforms and
        several kinds of spending on agriculture or in rural areas. While comprehensive development of
        Africa‚Äôs agricultural sector requires investments across multiple areas, a TFP decomposition shows
        that productivity improvements in Africa have been led by investments in development of new
        technologies, wider adoption of new technologies (proxied by farmer education), and policy reforms
        to strengthen economic incentives to farmers (box table 1).

        BOX TABLE 1. Drivers of agriculture productivity in Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                                Contribution to cumulative
                                                                                                       TFP growth
           Agriculture research and development                                                         51 percent

           Improvement in agriculture‚Äôs terms of trade with
                                                                                                        20 percent
           market and trade policy reform

           Reduction in conflict                                                                        18 percent

           Increase in farmer education	                                                                 8 percent

           HIV/AIDS therapy to adult population infected                                                 2 percent

        Source: Fuglie 2013; Fan et al. 2008, 2012.




     These must be conscious decisions in the design and targeting of spending programs. Of course,
     this kind of pro-poor targeting has limits, since the investments will benefit the landless poor only
     indirectly, for instance. As far as we know, there are no comprehensive cross-country studies on the
     extent to which current spending policies are taking advantage of opportunities to target in this way.
     Anecdotal evidence suggests that decisions are being made this way (for example, almost all World
     Bank projects to improve market linkages are aimed at smallholders), but there undoubtedly is room
     for improvement.




24   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
Address emerging priorities arising from climate change
Public spending policy will need to remain flexible to cope with future challenges, and for agriculture,
probably none is more urgent than climate change. It is a threat for agriculture across the world, but
the lack of resilience of poor farmers makes it particularly serious in Sub-Saharan Africa. Projections
show yield decreases in the near term of 5 percent, potentially growing to 15‚Äì20 percent across all
crops and Sub-Saharan regions by the end of the century. Agriculture is also an important contributor
to greenhouse emissions, particularly from deforestation, and Africa is the only region where the
majority of production increases have come from expanding cultivated areas, generally at the expense
of forests. In Africa, as around the world, a more climate-resilient agriculture is needed to achieve
the triple win of enhancing agricultural productivity, mitigating emissions of greenhouse gases, and
helping farmers adapt to climate change.

Most investments to mitigate climate change (low-carbon growth) and adapt to it (resilience building)
will need to be made by farmers and other private agents. But proactive government policies,
planning, and investments will be required to provide information, incentives, and an enabling
environment to encourage communities, households, and the private sector to change their behaviors
and investment choices. Many climate-resilient investments will not be very different from productive
investment choices, even not taking climate change into account. Building resilience has overall
benefits in any case, but their value is amplified by the changes that will occur with global warming.

For public spending priorities, climate-smart agriculture entails using landscape-scale approaches
to invest in managing climate risks through developing drought or flood-resistant technologies,
understanding and planning for transitions to new adapted cropping and livestock systems and
livelihood options, and reducing greenhouse gas emissions from livestock practices and land use
changes that cause deforestation and losses of biomass and soil carbon. Increasing resilience, restoring
degraded lands, and managing ecosystem services better will play key roles in all of these. Efforts to
craft budgetary and policy choices to create a more climate-smart agriculture will have to cope with
special challenges rooted in many uncertainties, distributional issues, and long-term nature of the
problem. To help meet these challenges, public expenditure reviews will need to do a better job than
in the past of incorporating considerations of climate change.


Redress the current excessive focus on
unproductive fertilizer subsidies
Subsidies are resurging
The resurgence of input subsidy programs in Africa has arguably been the region‚Äôs most important
policy development for public agricultural spending in recent years. Ten African governments spend
roughly $1.2 billion annually on input subsidies alone (figure 10), primarily on fertilizers. These
programs were almost phased out in the 1990s, during a period of structural adjustment in Africa, but

                                                                             REAPING RICHER RETURNS        25
       FIGURE 10. The 10 largest African governments spend $1.2 billion a year on input subsidies alone

                                 200
                                                                                          180                183
                                 180
                                         167                   166
                                 160
                                 140
        Millions of US dollars




                                 120
                                 100                                                                92                89
                                  80
                                  60
                                                                          44                                                     43
                                  40               32
                                  20                                               16
                                   0
                                       Nigeria   Senegal     Ghana      Burkina   Mali   Zambia   Tanzania Malawi    Kenya     Ethiopia
                                                                         Faso
          Source: Team calculations.
                                                        Universal subsidy                         Targeted subsidy           Other subsidy


     they have made a strong comeback due partly to residual support for subsidies among African leaders,
     even while pressured to phase them out, and partly to the uncertainties about food supply during
     the 2007/2008 global food and fertilizer price instability. Input subsidies continue to be vastly popular
     among African politicians as a highly demonstrable way to support their constituents.


     Because fertilizer use is supposedly suboptimal
     The economic rationale for fertilizer subsidies comes mainly from the motivation that, because of
     credit and information constraints, fertilizer use is suboptimal in most of Africa. The subsidies could
     overcome these problems by reducing the costs that farmers incur and the barriers of affordability,
     access, and learning. This justification is often based on the fact that fertilizer is used much less
     intensively in Africa than in other regions, particularly Asia, and that fertilizer use in demonstration
     plots provides high returns.

     Even so, there are reasons to question the assumption of suboptimal use. Experimental evidence
     from farmer-managed fields indicates response rates that are considerably lower than on researcher-
     managed fields. On the demonstration plots, crops are grown under conditions much closer to optimal
     than in most farmers‚Äô fields, with better soil and more plentiful water. But in much of Africa, water
     management is scarce, and soil has been degraded, greatly reducing the responsiveness of crops
     to higher chemical fertilizer use.41 Facile comparisons of average fertilizer application rates between
     Africa and Asia suggesting that higher application rates in Africa would produce results comparable to
     those in Asia can be highly misleading. Indeed, policy discussions of low productivity in Africa tend to
     overemphasize fertilizer use and underemphasize the poor farming practices and rainfed conditions
     that limit African farmers‚Äô ability to use fertilizer as proÔ¨Åtably as in other regions.42

26   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
In any case, the evidence from the high agricultural growth periods in South Asia shows that
fertilizer subsidies played little or no role in substantially boosting productivity.43 Studies in four Asian
countries‚ÄîBangladesh, India, Indonesia, and Pakistan‚Äîconclude that fertilizer subsidies were not
significant in farmers‚Äô adoption of technology. They instead identify technology research, irrigation
expansion, and other investments such as roads as the main drivers.44 At the height of the green
revolution, farmers in three of the four countries (not in Bangladesh) were net-taxed for fertilizer
(that is, domestic prices for fertilizers were higher than the world market price), indicating that it was
profitability and not subsidies that drove technology adoption during the Green Revolution.45


But the returns to subsidies are low and variable
Evidence has recently been accumulating on some of the largest input subsidy programs in Sub-
Saharan Africa‚ÄîEthiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Nigeria, Tanzania, and Zambia‚Äîbased on farm-level
surveys.46 The analysis points to several conclusions with important policy implications:

n	 Crop response rates of smallholder farmers are highly variable and usually low because of the
     inability to use fertilizer efficiently and profitably due to low water availability and poor soil,
     to chronically late deliveries of fertilizer, to poor management practices, and to insufficient
     complementary inputs to enable farmers to obtain higher rates of fertilizer efficiency.

n	 The increment in total fertilizer use is smaller than is distributed through the program because even
     with ‚Äúsmart‚Äù subsidies, the crowding out of commercial fertilizer sales, as well as outright diversion
     and theft, remain major problems.

n	 Subsidies are unlikely to address their multiple objectives effectively. It is often argued that
     subsidizing fertilizer is desirable both to boost agricultural production and to help poor farmers. Yet
     there is strong evidence that most of the benefits do not go to poor farmers (targeting is regressive
     with respect to asset wealth and landholding size), and the gains in overall food production have
     been transitory and much smaller than the costs (table 2).


TABLE 2. Benefits are low in relation to costs‚Äîand go to richer farmers
(summary evidence of impacts from farm and household studies)


                                                                                                                           Financial                             Economic
                           Characteristics of recipient households
   Country                                                                                                                benefit‚Äìcost                          benefit‚Äìcost
                           acquiring subsidized fertilizer
                                                                                                                             ratio                                 ratio

                           Households with larger landholding and asset
   Malawi                                                                                                                          0.62                                 0.80
                           wealth get more
   Zambia                  Households with more land get slightly more                                                             0.56                                 0.92
                           Households with higher landholding receive more
   Kenya                                                                                                                           0.79                                 1.09
                           subsidized fertilizer
Note: Ratios are estimated based on five-year estimated response rates. The ratios reported here use baseline calculations, making adjustments to the average partial effect of 1 kilogram of
subsidized fertilizer on total smallholder fertilizer use, as suggested by Chirwa and Dorward (2013), and Jayne et al. (2015). Costs are those of the fertilizer only, while reported yields were
those observed using both the fertilizer and seeds. For this reason, the benefits overestimate the benefits of fertilizer use alone, and the benefit‚Äìcost ratios could be considered upper bounds
of the ratio for subsidized fertilizer.




                                                                                                                                               REAPING RICHER RETURNS                               27
     Add alternative and complementary investments to the policy mix
     In areas where fertilizer or other modern production technologies are actually underused, many
     policy levers are available to encourage greater uptake. The optimal choice of instruments depends
     to a large extent on the constraint. If the main bottleneck is that farmers have few choices of
     appropriate input technologies for the main agro-ecological systems in a country, the best solution
     may be to focus on regulatory reform to encourage spillovers from abroad and investment in
     domestic research. If the problem is a lack of information on the part of farmers, extension may
     the best policy lever. If one of the underlying causes for low fertilizer use is insufficient cash flow
     for farmers to buy inputs, efficiently promoting the emergence and growth of rural credit markets
     (including support for land market development) would address this. Much can be done using
     innovative ways of doing banking and taking advantage of new applications of information
     technologies.

     A number of countries have recently implemented changes to improve the efficiency and
     effectiveness of their input subsidy programs. Countries have replaced public with private
     procurement and delivery mechanisms, and even put in place electronic delivery systems for
     subsidies (as in Nigeria). These appear to be steps in the right direction. Notwithstanding the large
     body of evidence that even ‚Äúsmart‚Äù input subsidies have seldom produced benefits commensurate
     with their fiscal costs, they remain politically attractive. Where subsidies continue to be used, they
     should at least be reduced to a modest amount in national agriculture budgets, with a clear exit
     strategy, and combined with complementary expenditures. In the longer term, no program will
     sustainably raise fertilizer use until it becomes profitable for farmers to buy fertilizer on commercial
     markets after they graduate from the subsidy program. This brings back the issue of complementary
     investments. Creating demand will require lowering the farmgate prices of fertilizers in Africa, where
     they are high relative to other regions. This has clear implications for government spending priorities:
     Spending needs to be aimed at streamlining logistics and reducing costs and risks in fertilizer supply
     chains.47 Much of this investment is most appropriate for the private sector, but governments can
     support the effort by improving the infrastructure for fertilizer distribution, by reducing regulatory
     barriers, and improving profitability by reducing transport costs.

     Also required is enhancing research and extension, and investing in soil analysis and mapping, to
     improve soil fertility management to raise fertilizer response rates.48 Input promotion during the
     high agricultural productivity periods in Asia and South America, for example, addressed systemic
     constraints to productivity through integrated investments in new technologies, extension support,
     water management, and market linkages. Countries in Sub-Saharan Africa could get a bigger impact
     within the existing expenditure envelope by moving away from a heavy focus on fertilizer subsidies
     toward integrative investments. Reforming the design and implementation of these subsidy
     programs while rebalancing government spending in favor of high-return core public goods and
     policies could produce massive dividends.




28   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
Budget for greater impact
In addition to the overall level of spending and its composition, a third dimension of a strategy to
maximize impacts of public spending in agriculture is ensuring that the budgetary process supports
efficient implementation. There is considerable variance in budget preparation and execution capacity
among countries, but there is undoubtedly scope for improvement, as reflected from the analysis of
20 existing agriculture public expenditure reviews sponsored by a joint World Bank‚ÄìGates Foundation
program, examined as background for this book.

Start from a solid foundation
Budgeting needs to start from a stronger foundation of sector strategies and national agricultural
investment plans, few of which currently provide much guidance on budget preparation.
The investment plans need to give more detailed and quantitative guidance on translating
recommendations to spending priorities, and adjustments from the most recent implementation
period need to be accompanied by a monitorable results framework.

Improve budget execution
In many countries, the rate of budget execution is dismal (figure 11). Improving budget execution
rates is essential for demonstrating that the sector can make good use of additional public resources,
and for persuading ministries of finance that their budgets must be increased. The focus ought to
be on improving the implementation of development expenditures, the predictability of releases
from ministries of finance, the procurement planning and implementation system, and the budget
information management systems to inform within-year budget implementation‚Äîso that resources
are used effectively.


  FIGURE 11. Execution rates of total agricultural budgets can be dismal (percent)

     100
       90
       80
       70
       60
       50              98
       40                           85
                                                      73                 70
       30
       20                                                                               37              34
       10
        0
                   Nigeria        Chad              Malawi          Sierra Leone     Madagascar   Congo, Dem. Rep.
                 2008‚Äì2012        2012            2009‚Äì2011             2012           2007         2011‚Äì2013
  Source: Team calculations.




                                                                                             REAPING RICHER RETURNS   29
     Strengthen monitoring and evaluation
     Countries need to strengthen M&E capacity as part of accountability systems that shift resources
     toward effective spending. Ministries of agriculture need more resources and staff doing M&E and
     in exchange to be held accountable for demonstrating that budgets are effectively spent. And the
     ministries of finance need to increase recurrent spending for this purpose. And budget analysis
     capacity has to be established in the sector ministries for expenditure monitoring and adjustment
     within the budget year. Budget information systems appear to be improving with the expanded roll-
     out of computerized systems by ministries of finance and accountant-general offices.


     Capture off-budget financing‚Äîand make flows to state-owned enterprises
     more transparent
     Ministries of finance need to put in place budget information systems that, in some form, capture off-
     budget external partner financing of projects that deliver public goods and services, which in some
     countries is a significant share of the budget (figure 12). Two fiscal management reforms that can
     significantly improve the technical efficiency of expenditure management are implementing a treasury
     single account system and a centralized civil service information system.



       FIGURE 12. Off-budget shares of public agricultural spending can be substantial (percent)

          80

          70

          60

          50

          40
                             72
          30

          20                                 40
                                                                    35
          10                                                                                20
                                                                                                            11
            0
                      Liberia 2011    Cote d'Ivoire 2009        Malawi 2011         Burkina Faso 2011   Guinea 2011
       Source: Team calculations.




30   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
Shift to program budgeting and build local capacity
Two other aspects of budget processes are likely to grow in priority, but require attention over several
years to build the capacity for improving the quality of budget outcomes.
n	 The first is a shift to program budgeting, as some countries have committed to do. Backward-
  looking reconfiguration of sector public spending by program categories to provide the recent
  history of composition and trends helps benchmark the programs and the specifics of their
  expenditure foundation.
n	 The second is decentralization and deconcentration in countries that are moving from political
  commitment to implementation in both the administration and the fiscal management of
  government functions. This flags the importance of building expenditure implementation capacity
  at the local level, and in the case of decentralization, of expenditure planning capacity as well.
  Where implementation momentum is accelerating, budget information systems and information
  sharing need to be developed across the different levels of government, including often
  geographically remote sector agencies and institutes, to enable budget planning that leverages
  potential synergies and avoids duplication in sector spending.


Boost key categories of recurrent spending and administration
Some countries seem to be underfunding certain categories of recurrent expenditures, resulting in
a ratio of recurrent spending to investments that is low and declining. It is perhaps understandable
that politically attuned ministers are reluctant to divert budget resources from front-line activities of
direct constituency benefit to unglamorous back-office functions. But in some countries, despite a
significant scale-up of public spending on the sector, there has been no or little increase in these core
administrative functions, which can provide the sorts of information essential to steering the endeavor
based on evidence.

Examples of public functions that involve mainly recurrent expenditures and appear to be
underfunded are maintenance, core budget planning and implementation, monitoring and evaluation,
and sector regulatory functions. Maintenance is a category of recurrent spending that seems to be
systematically short-changed. Some countries seem not to be adequately funding recurrent goods and
services that are necessary to maintain capital investments, and their continued neglect risks negative
outcomes for sector performance. Underfunding budget planning, monitoring, and evaluation
capacity in ministries reduces the quality and impact of public spending on agriculture. Inadequate
support to undertake project M&E reduces the ability to track results and make adjustments to
improve impacts or reorient approaches. Most countries that have had rapid investment growth
have also allowed a decline in the ratio of M&E budgets (nonwage goods and service spending) to
investment budgets. Recurrent budget planning is typically conducted as an incremental adjustment
to prior year levels. Yet significant policy shifts, such as expanding reliance on private markets for
input provision, do not appear to be accompanied by funding regulatory capacity for input quality in
markets, a recurrent function. One example is Nigeria, which has a minimal nonwage recurrent budget,
despite having carried out a major policy shift to develop private input markets.

                                                                              REAPING RICHER RETURNS        31
     Manage the political economy
     High-return categories of spending are often underfunded
     Some categories of spending that have been shown to have significant positive effects on productivity
     and welfare are often underfunded, and others that generally show unfavorable results often capture
     large shares of the budget. Explaining such discrepancies between impact and prominence in the
     public budget requires understanding how the public resource allocation process is shaped by agents‚Äô
     incentive structures, the characteristics of the investments, and the broader governance environment
     in which agents operate. Budget decisions will always be politically influenced, but understanding the
     sources of bias are likely to drive inefficient or ineffective policies can help avoid those outcomes.

     Move beyond the status quo
     Many African countries have long pursued policies of implicit or explicit agricultural taxation, creating
     a pro-urban, anti-agricultural bias.49 One explanation is that rural populations exhibit greater difficulty
     of organizing collective action among dispersed populations that lack easy means of communication.50
     But if the difficulty of organizing collective action can be overcome, there is also strength in numbers.51
     One way to at least partially offset this natural disadvantage of rural populations is to improve the
     information base of key actors so that they better understand the effects of alternative policy choices.
     Policy processes exhibit a status quo bias, such that policies that have outlived their usefulness often
     are not discontinued. Governments tend to favor the status quo because those who benefit from the
     current state are usually the ones with the power to have ensured enactment of those policies in the
     first place.52 And their political support for current policies is increased by those who have altered their
     behavior to become beneficiaries after policies were put in place.53


     Visibility guides spending
     Different classes of spending influence how politically attractive they are. Types of spending with
     highly visible results that are easily attributable are more attractive. Visible infrastructure investments
     and direct cash or in-kind transfers are more easily connected to the efforts and spending decisions
     of public officials. These can even be conveniently advertised‚Äîfor example, through labels on the
     fertilizer voucher ticket indicating who is responsible for subsidizing the fertilizer‚Äîthus serving as an
     effective tool for patronage.54 In contrast, if a farmer observes that the quality of information provided
     by a new agricultural extension officer has improved, it may be difficult for her to ascertain whether
     that is because the new extension officer is more motivated, or whether the agricultural ministry
     has done a better job in selecting, training, and incentivizing extension officers. The greater visibility
     (and therefore attributability) of large-scale irrigation schemes in Mozambique has made them more
     attractive than small schemes, despite the weaker agricultural performance of the large ones.55




32   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
Time lags in investment
Goods and services with a long lag between the time when resources are allocated and the time
when the benefits become available are less politically attractive for several reasons. A longer lag
tends to break the perceptible link between politicians‚Äô decisions and public officials‚Äô resource
allocations, and politicians may have a short time horizon for their tenure in office. Given the
substantial time lag between investing in research and reaping its rewards‚Äîusually decades, not
years‚Äîagricultural research requires a long-term commitment for sufficient sustained funding. Long
research cycles rarely coincide with short election cycles, shifting political agendas, and changes
in government budget allocations. The inability to extract short-term political credit acts as a
disincentive for policymakers to commit to long-term agricultural R&D investments, thus jeopardizing
future research planning and outputs.

Given low investments by governments, agricultural research in many Sub-Saharan countries is highly
dependent on donor funding, which by nature is mostly short term and ad hoc, often causing major
fluctuations in a country‚Äôs yearly agricultural investments. In contrast to the long gestation to realize
benefits of investing in research, public spending to subsidize agricultural inputs usually requires
a span of only a few months from the time of the investment until the subsidized fertilizer reaches
farmers. In Malawi, the time span from the spending being incurred to the fertilizers being received
by farmers ranged from one to six months,56 and in Ghana, the equivalent time span was about four
months.57


Monitor corruption
Areas of public spending involving large infrastructure or capital investments create opportunities
for rent seeking opportunities. Underperformance of irrigation infrastructures in countries beset with
corruption has been observed with gains that can be extracted in a context of insecurity about access
to functioning irrigation systems.58


From top-down to more participatory budgeting institutions
Institutional mechanisms to make spending more pro-poor have a mixed record and vary in their
strengths and vulnerabilities. In some African countries, the potential benefits of participatory
budgeting have been vitiated by a top-down process closely managed by the party in power, as
in Mozambique.59 The benefit has also been constrained by earmarking transfers from the federal
government, as in Kenya and Uganda,60 or by high administrative and maintenance costs, as in
Uganda.61 Where spending decisions are decentralized, concrete mechanisms to strengthen electoral
accountability need to be put in place to ensure local administrators are responsive to the needs of
individuals and not only to local elite groups. This must be matched by building local officials‚Äô public
management capacity, and to improving citizens‚Äô information base on the actions as well as the




                                                                              REAPING RICHER RETURNS        33
     performance of local governments. The inefficiencies and poor targeting of subsidies can be at least
     reduced through operational features that improve the clarity and reduce the ambiguity of eligibility
     criteria, paired with an increase of transparency and information about which localities, and within
     localities which households, are eligible to receive the transfers.


     Overcome inertia in policymaking
     Too often, countries fail to adopt and implement policies that are known to be necessary for sustained
     economic development. In addition, for reasons described above, there is significant inertia in
     policymaking. How, then, can change occur?


     Be ready to take advantage of opportunities for reform
     Major past reform programs have been necessitated by the realization that more of the same is not
     fiscally sustainable. External (oil and other commodity) shocks have often exposed inefficient and
     unsustainable policies.62 Much of the restructuring and privatizing of marketing boards in Africa came
     about when they became fiscally unsustainable, partially because of movements in the international
     prices of the commodities.63 Severe budgetary constraints have often disturbed the political equilibria
     that supported those policies and opened space for reforms, often with the strategic and financial
     support of external actors such as international financial institutions. These reforms involved profound
     changes in agricultural policies, including major shifts in public spending programs. Among them was
     a reduction in input subsidies, common in the 1980s and 1990s. But as economic recovery progressed,
     some of the same programs and policies (including input subsidies) re-emerged, albeit in improved
     versions, because they remained politically attractive.64 The lesson here is not that reforms must always
     await the advent of shocks, but that reformers ought to be ready with plans and evidence to influence
     reforms and be alert to opportunities that may arise.


     Consider compensating losers
     Improvements in the quality of spending have sometimes been greatly facilitated by partially
     compensating losers. Mexico‚Äôs, Romania‚Äôs, and Turkey‚Äôs comprehensive reforms that reduced
     agriculture subsidies and privatized state-owned enterprises greatly improved the efficiency of
     spending and ushered in rapid sectoral growth. They were accompanied by area-based cash payments
     (much more efficient and less costly to the government than the policies they replaced), without
     which these reforms likely would not have been politically feasible to enact or sustain.


     Find ways to commit to long-gestation policies with high returns
     Other forces can be harnessed to facilitate policy reform. As noted earlier, two major barriers to reform
     are the lack of understanding by the citizenry of the distributional effects of policies (which also
     reduces attributability of positive impacts) and the difficulty that politicians have in making a credible


34   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
commitment to policies with long gestations.65 Farmer cooperatives and other producer organizations
can help identify beneficial policies, disseminate this information to their members, and then lobby
for their enactment. Democratization increases the opportunity for the formation of member-driven
groups that can be effective in promoting policy change as opposed to the top-down organizations.
Other agents of civil society in a country (press, local NGOs, and even competing parties) can also
increase the transparency of policy and the availability of information. Rigorous impact evaluations of
projects and programs hold promise for revealing the distributional and welfare effects of spending
policies, and their wide dissemination would go a long way toward increasing public understanding.


Enhance credibility by committing to an external agent
This is an important principle underlying international trade treaties. The sweeping agricultural reform
program in Mexico, for example, was motivated by the determination to join the North American
Free Trade Agreement and the consequent need to firmly ‚Äúlock in‚Äù the policies that would make this
possible. In a similar vein, regional agreements and institutions in Africa, such as the Comprehensive
Africa Agriculture Development Program, can play this role if commitments are taken seriously.
CAADP‚Äôs peer reviews of National Agricultural Investment Plans and the Joint Sector Review process
with an emphasis on ‚Äúmutual accountability‚Äù mechanisms could potentially enhance credibility. As
noted earlier, the fungibility of resources makes it difficult for donors and development partners
to have a significant influence over the size and composition of agricultural budgets through the
mechanism of funding individual projects. But with agricultural public expenditure reviews becoming
more common, they provide a tool to get a comprehensive view of the entire budget, identify shifts
in overall spending patterns, increase transparency, and facilitate more effective input into budget
planning and implementation.


Improve the efficiency of spending
Irrespective of spending targets, the evidence in this book shows that countries in Sub-Saharan Africa
have consistently lagged behind countries in other developing regions in the quantity of public
agricultural spending. Even so, raising the volume of spending requires political consensus‚Äîamong
development partners, government decisionmakers (particularly ministries of finance), and above all
electorates‚Äîthat money invested in agriculture will be well spent. Measures to raise the efficiency of
existing spending in agriculture‚Äîand demonstrating that it has a high impact on growth and poverty
reduction‚Äîwill make the case for higher levels of spending much more persuasive. The conclusions
and recommendations in this book try to give policymakers options for doing just this.




                                                                              REAPING RICHER RETURNS       35
     References
     Acemoƒülu, D., and J. Robinson. 2001. ‚ÄúInefficient redistribution.‚Äù American Political Science Review 95(3): 649‚Äì661.
     Akiyama, T., J. Baffes, D. Larson, and P. Varangis. 2001. ‚ÄúCommodity Market Reforms: Lessons of Two Decades.‚Äù
       Regional and Sectoral Studies. Washington, DC: World Bank.
     Ali, D., K. Deininger, and M. Goldstein. 2014. ‚ÄúEnvironmental and Gender Impacts of Land Tenure Regularization in
        Africa: Pilot Evidence from Rwanda.‚Äù Journal of Development Economics 110: 262‚Äì75.
     Alston, J., M. Marra, P. Pardey, and T. Wyatt. 2000. ‚ÄúResearch returns redux: A meta-analysis of the returns to
       agricultural R&D.‚Äù Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics 44(2): 185‚Äì215.
     Anderson, K. 2009. Distortions to Agricultural Incentives: A Global Perspective, 1955‚Äì2007. Washington, DC: World
       Bank.
     Banful, A. 2011. ‚ÄúOld Problems in the New Solutions? Politically Motivated Allocation of Program Benefits and the
       ‚ÄúNew‚Äù Fertilizer Subsidies.‚Äù World Development 39(7): 1166‚Äì1176
     Benin, S., L. McBride, and T. Mogues. 2016. ‚ÄúWhy Do Countries Underinvest in Agricultural R&D?‚Äù In J. Laynam,
       N. Beintema, J. Roseboom, and O. Badiane. (eds.) Agricultural Research in Africa: Investing in Future Harvests.
       Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute (Forthcoming).
     Benin, S., T. Mogues, G. Cudjoe, and J. Randriamamonjy. 2012. ‚ÄúPublic expenditures and agricultural productivity
       growth in Ghana.‚Äù In T. Mogues and S. Benin (eds.) Public Expenditures for Agricultural and Rural Development in
       Africa. London and New York: Routledge, Taylor, and Francis Group.
     Bosker, M., and H. Garretsen. 2012. ‚ÄúEconomic geography and economic development in Sub-Saharan Africa.‚Äù The
       World Bank Economic Review 26(3): 443‚Äì485.
     Brooks, K., S. Zorya, and A. Gautam. 2013. ‚ÄúEmployment in Agriculture: Jobs for Africa‚Äôs Youth.‚Äù In Global Food Policy
       Report, 48‚Äì57. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.
     Byamugisha, F. 2013. Securing Africa‚Äôs Land for Shared Prosperity: A Program to Scale Up Reforms and Investments.
       Africa Development Forum Series. Washington, DC. World Bank and Agence Francaise de Developpement.
     Chamberlin, J., L. You, S. Wood, and U. Wood-Sichra. 2007. ‚ÄúGenerating plausible crop distribution maps for sub-
       Saharan Africa using a spatial allocation model.‚Äù Information Development 23(2‚Äì3): 151‚Äì159.
     Chinsinga, B. 2011. ‚ÄúSeeds and subsidies: The political economy of input programmes in Malawi.‚Äù IDS Bulletin
       42(4): 59‚Äì68.
     Chirwa, E., and A. Dorward. 2013. Agricultural Input Subsidies: The Recent Malawi Experience. Oxford, UK: Oxford
       University Press.
     Christiaensen, L., and J. Kaminski. 2015. ‚ÄúStructural Change, Economic Growth, and Poverty Reduction: Micro
       Evidence From Uganda.‚Äù Mimeo. World Bank, Washington, DC.
     Coate, S., and S. Morris. 1999. ‚ÄúPolicy persistence.‚Äù American Economic Review 89(5): 1327‚Äì1336.
     De Ferranti, D., G. Perry, W. Foster, D. Lederman, and A. Valdes. 2005. Beyond the City: The Rural Contribution to
       Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.
     Deichmann, U., A. Goyal, and D. Mishra. 2016. ‚ÄúWill digital technologies transform agriculture in developing
       countries?‚Äù Policy Research Working Paper 7669. Washington, DC: World Bank.
     Delgado, C., N. Minot, and M. Tiongco. 2005. ‚ÄúEvidence and Implications of Non-Tradability of Food Staples in
       Tanzania 1983‚Äì1998,‚Äù Journal of Development Studies 41(3): 376‚Äì293

36   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
Dercon, S., D. Gilligan, J. Hoddinott, and T. Woldehanna. 2008. ‚ÄúThe impact of agricultural extension and roads
  on poverty and consumption growth in fifteen Ethiopian villages.‚Äù American Journal of Agricultural Economics
  91(4): 1007‚Äì1021.
Devarajan, S., V. Swaroop, and H. F. Zou. 1996. ‚ÄúThe composition of public expenditure and economic growth.‚Äù
  Journal of Monetary Economics 37(2‚Äì3): 313‚Äì344.
Drechsel, P., L. Gyiele, D. Kunze, and O. Cofie. 2001. ‚ÄúPopulation Density, Soil Nutrient Depletion, and Economic
  Growth in Sub-Saharan Africa.‚Äù Ecological Economics 38(2): 251‚Äì258.
Fan, S., A. Gulati, and S. Thorat. 2008. ‚ÄúInvestment, Subsidies, and Pro-Poor Growth in Rural India.‚Äù Agricultural
  Economics 39(2): 163‚Äì170.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2015. Monitoring African Food and Agricultural Policies (MAFAP)
  database. Accessed December 10, 2015. Available at: http://www.fao.org/in-action/mafap/database/en/.
Fernandez, R. and D. Rodrik. 1991. ‚ÄúResistance to reform: Status quo bias in the presence of individual-specific
  uncertainty.‚Äù American Economic Review 81(5): 1146‚Äì1155.
Ferreira, F.H., P.G. Leite, and M. Ravallion. 2010. ‚ÄúPoverty reduction without economic growth? Explaining Brazil‚Äôs
  poverty dynamics, 1985‚Äì2004.‚Äù Journal of Development Economics 93(1): 20‚Äì36.
Francis, P., and R. James. 2003. ‚ÄúBalancing Rural Poverty Reduction and Citizen Participation: The Contradictions of
  Uganda‚Äôs Decentralization Program.‚Äù World Development 31(2): 325‚Äì337.
Fuglie, K. O. 2012. ‚ÄúProductivity Growth and Technology Capital in the Global Agricultural Economy.‚Äù In K.O. Fuglie,
  S.L. Wang, and V.E. Ball (eds.) Productivity Growth in Agriculture: An International Perspective. Oxfordshire, UK: CAB
  International.
‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì. 2015. ‚ÄúAccounting for growth in global agriculture.‚Äù Bio-based and Applied Economics 4(3): 221‚Äì254.
Fuglie, K.O., P. Heisey, J. King, C. Pray,¬†K. Day-Rubenstein,¬†D. Schimmelpfennig,¬†S.L. Wang, and R. Karmarkar-
  Deshmukh. 2011. ‚ÄúResearch Investments and Market Structure in the Food Processing, Agricultural Input, and
  Biofuel Industries Worldwide.‚Äù Economic Research Report 130. Washington, DC: United States Department of
  Agriculture Economic Research Service.
Fuglie, K. O., and N. E. Rada. 2013. ‚ÄúResources, Policies, and Agricultural Productivity in Sub-Saharan Africa.‚Äù
  Economic Research Report 145. Washington, DC: United States Department of Agriculture Economic Research
  Service.
Gachassin, M., B. Najman, and G. Raballand. 2010. ‚ÄúThe impact of roads on poverty reduction: a case study of
  Cameroon.‚Äù Policy Research Working Paper Series. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Gautam, M. 2015. ‚ÄúAgricultural Subsidies: Resurging Interest in a Perennial Debate.‚Äù Keynote address at the
  74th Annual Conference of Indian Society of Agricultural Economics, Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada
  University, Aurangabad, India, December 18.
Gisselquist, D., C. Pray, and J. Nash. 2002. ‚ÄúDeregulating Technology Transfer in Agriculture: Impact On Technical
  Change, Productivity, and Incomes.‚Äù World Bank Research Observer 17: 237‚Äì265.
Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and M.E. Waugh. 2013. ‚ÄúThe Agricultural Productivity Gap.‚Äù Policy Note w19628. Cambridge,
  MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute). 2015a. Statistics on Public Expenditure for Economic
  Development (SPEED) database. Accessed September 15, 2015. Available at: http://www.ifpri.org/book-39/
  ourwork/programs/priorities-public-investment/speed-database.



                                                                                        REAPING RICHER RETURNS             37
     ‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì. 2015b. Regional Strategic Analysis and Knowledge Support System (ReSAKSS) database. Accessed
       September 15, 2015. Available at: http://www.resakss.org/about.
     ‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì. 2015c. Agricultural Science and Technology Indicators (ASTI) database. Accessed September 15, 2015.
       Available at: www.asti.cgiar.org/data/.
     Ivanic, M., and W. Martin. 2014. ‚ÄúShort-and Long-run Impacts of Food Price Changes on Poverty.‚Äù World Bank
        Policy Research Working Paper 7011. Washington, DC: World Bank.
     Jacoby, H. 2000. ‚ÄúAccess to markets and the benefits of rural roads.‚Äù The Economic Journal 110(465): 713‚Äì737.
     Jayne, T.S., D. Mather, N.M. Mason, and J. Ricker-Gilbert. 2013. ‚ÄúHow Do Fertilizer Subsidy Programs Affect Total
       Fertilizer Use in Sub-Saharan Africa? Crowding Out, Diversion, and Benefit/Cost Assessments.‚Äù Agricultural
       Economics 44(6): 687‚Äì703.
     Keefer, P., and S. Khemani. 2005. ‚ÄúDemocracy, Public Expenditures, and the Poor: Understanding Political
       Incentives for Providing Public Services.‚Äù World Bank Research Observer 20(1): 1‚Äì27.
     Keyser, J. C. 2013. ‚ÄúRegional Trade of Food Staples and Crop Inputs in West Africa.‚Äù Africa Trade Policy Note 36,
       World Bank, Washington, DC.
     Khandker, S., Z. Bakht, and G. Koolwal. 2006. ‚ÄúThe Poverty Impact of Rural Roads: Evidence from Bangladesh.‚Äù
       World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3875. Washington, DC: World Bank.
     Krueger, A., M. Schiff, and A. Valdes. 1988. ‚ÄúAgricultural incentives in developing countries: Measuring the effects
       of sectoral and economy-wide policies.‚Äù World Bank Economic Review 2(3): 255‚Äì272.
     L√≥pez, R., and G. I. Galinato. 2007. ‚ÄúShould Governments Stop Subsidies to Private Goods? Evidence from Rural
       Latin America.‚Äù Journal of Public Economics 91: 1071‚Äì1094.
     Minten, B., and S. Kyle. 1999. ‚ÄúThe effect of distance and road quality on food collection, marketing margins, and
       traders‚Äô wages: Evidence from the former Zaire.‚Äù Journal of Development Economics 60(2): 467‚Äì495.
     Mogues, T. 2011. ‚ÄúThe bang for the birr: Public expenditures and rural welfare in Ethiopia.‚Äù Journal of Development
      Studies 47(5): 735‚Äì752.
     Mogues, T., and D. do Rosario. 2015. ‚ÄúThe political economy of public expenditures in agriculture: Applications of
      concepts to Mozambique.‚Äù South African Journal of Economics 27(3): 452‚Äì473.
     Mu, R., and D. Van de Walle. 2007. ‚ÄúRural roads and poor area development in Vietnam.‚Äù Working Paper 4340.
      Washington, DC: World Bank.
     Nelson G.C., M.W. Rosegrant, J. Koo, R. Robertson, T. Sulser, T. Zhu, C. Ringler, S. Msangi, A. Palazzo, M. Batka,
       and M. Magalhaes. 2009. ‚ÄúClimate change: Impact on agriculture and costs of adaptation.‚Äù Washington, DC:
       International Food Policy Research Institute.
     Nylen, W. 2014. ‚ÄúParticipatory Budgeting in a Competitive-Authoritarian Regime: A Case Study (Maputo,
       Mozambique).‚Äù IESE Cadernos 13E. Maputo: Instituto de Estudos Sociais e Econ√≥micos, Scientific Council.
     Olson, M. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
       Economic Studies.
     ‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì. 1985. ‚ÄúSpace, agriculture, and organization.‚Äù American Journal of Agricultural Economics 67(5): 928‚Äì937.
     Pardey, P., J. James, J. Alston, S. Wood, B. Koo, E, Binenbaum, T. Hurley, and P. Glewwe. 2007. ‚ÄúScience, Technology,
       and Skills.‚Äù Background Paper for World Development Report 2008. Washington, DC: World Bank.
     Pray, C., D. Gisselquist, and L. Nagarajan. 2001. Private Investment in Agricultural Research and Technology
       Transfer in Africa. Working Paper 13 presented at the ASTI-FARA Conference in Accra, Ghana, Dec 5‚Äì7, 2001.


38   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
Ranis, G. 2012. Vertical and Horizontal Decentralization and Ethnic Diversity in Sub-Saharan Africa. Discussion Paper
  1017. New Haven, CT: Economic Growth Center, Yale University
Rashid, S., P. Dorosh, M. Malek, and S. Lemma. 2013. ‚ÄúModern Input Promotion in Sub-Saharan Africa: Insights
  from Asian Green Revolution.‚Äù Agricultural Economics 44: 705‚Äì721.
Sadoulet, E., and A. de Janvry. 1995. Quantitative development policy analysis. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
  University Press.
Smith, L. E. D., and I. Urey. 2002. ‚ÄúAgricultural Growth and Poverty Reduction: A Review of Lessons from the Post-
  Independence and Green Revolution Experience of India.‚Äù Report for the research project on Institutions and
  Economic Policies for Pro-Poor Growth, Department of Agricultural Economics, Imperial College, London.
Stifel, D., and B. Minten. 2008. ‚ÄúIsolation and agricultural productivity.‚Äù Agricultural Economics¬†39(1): 1‚Äì15.
Thirtle, C., and J. Van Zyl. ‚ÄúExplaining total factor productivity growth and returns to research and extension in
  South African commercial agriculture, 1947‚Äì91.‚Äù South African Journal of Agricultural Extension 23(1): 21‚Äì7.
Tittonell, P., and K. Giller. 2013. ‚ÄúWhen Yield Gaps Are Poverty Traps: The Paradigm of Ecological Intensification in
   African Smallholder Agriculture.‚Äù Field Crops Research 143: 76‚Äì90.
UN (United Nations). 2015. Commodity Trade Statistics (Comtrade) database. Available at: http://comtrade.
 un.org/.
USDA (United States Department of Agriculture). 2015. Economic Research Service (ERS) database. Available at:
  http://www.ers.usda.gov/.
Valdes, A. 2008. ‚ÄúAgricultural Public Spending: Description and Assessment Relevant to Latin America.‚Äù
  Background paper for the Mexico Agricultural and Rural Development Public Expenditure Review, World Bank,
  Washington, DC.
Wade, R. 1982. ‚ÄúThe system of administrative and political corruption: Canal irrigation in South India.‚Äù Journal of
 Development Studies 18(3): 287‚Äì328.
Walter, H., and B. Wolff. 2002. ‚ÄúPrincipal-agent problems in irrigation: Inviting rent-seeking and corruption.‚Äù
 Quarterly Journal of International Agriculture 41(1‚Äì2): 99‚Äì118.
World Bank. 2008. World Development Report 2008: Agriculture for Development. Washington, DC.
‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì. 2012a. Africa Can Help Feed Africa: Removing Barriers to Regional Trade in Food Staples. World Bank Africa
  Region Poverty Reduction and Economic Management, Washington, DC.
‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì. 2012b. Republic of Togo Basic Public Agricultural Spending Diagnostic Review. Washington, DC.
‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì. 2013a. Growing Africa: Unlocking the Potential of Agribusiness. Washington, DC.
‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì. 2013b. Turn Down the Heat. Washington, DC.
‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì. 2015a. World Development Indicators database. Washington, DC.
‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì‚Äì. 2015b. Worldwide Governance Indicators database. Washington, DC.
You, L., C. Ringler, U. Wood-Sichra, R. Robertson, S. Wood, T. Zhu, and Y. Sun. 2011. ‚ÄúWhat is the Irrigation Potential
  for Africa? A Combined Biophysical and Socioeconomic Approach.‚Äù Food Policy 36: 770‚Äì782.




                                                                                          REAPING RICHER RETURNS          39
     Endnotes
     1	 Hereafter ‚ÄúAfrica‚Äù for simplicity.                   34	 Khandker et al. 2006; Minten and Kyle 1999;
     2	 World Bank 2015a.                                        Chamberlin et al. 2007; Stifel and Minten 2008.
     3	 Ferreira, Leite, and Ravallion 2010; Ivanic and      35	 Dercon et al. 2008; Bosker and Garretsen 2012.
        Martin 2014.                                         36	 World Bank 2008.
     4	 Christiaensen and Kaminski 2014.                     37	 Delgado et al. 2005.
     5	 Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh 2014.                     38	 Jacoby 2000; Donaldson 2013.	
     6	 Deininger et al. 2011.                               39	 Gachassin et al. 2010; Mu and van de Walle 2007.
     7	 Fuglie 2015.                                         40	 Lopez and Galinato 2007; Valdes 2008.
     8	 Brooks et al. 2013.                                  41	 Christaenson and Kaminski 2015.
     9	 World Bank 2013a.                                    42	 Jayne et al. 2015.
     10	 World Bank 2012a.                                   43	 Gautam 2015; Fan et al. 2008.
     11	 Benin, McBride, and Mogues 2016.                    44	 Smith and Urey 2002; Rashid et al. 2013.
     12	 Sadoulet and de Janvry 1995.                        45	 Rashid et al. 2013.
     13	 Fan et al. 2008; Mogues 2011; Benin et al. 2012.    46	 Most empirical work refers to the
     14	 Devarajan et al. 1996.                                  fertilizer components of these
                                                                 programs. While many programs
     15	 Lopez and Galinato 2007.                                distributed packets of fertilizer and
     16	 For example, see De Ferranti et al. (2005) with a       seeds together, the cost of fertilizer was
         focus on Latin America.                                 10‚Äì14 times the cost of seeds.
     17	 For agriculture, this would mean that               47	 Jayne et al. 2003.
         the Agriculture Orientation Index (AOI)             48	 Dreshcel et al. 2001; Tittonell and Giller 2012.
         discussed below is equal to 1.
                                                             49	 Krueger, Schiff, and Valdes 1988; Anderson 2009.
     18	 The figures were 15.4% (1972); 10.5% (1975);
         12.4% (1980); 10.9% (1985) and 9.6% (1990).         50	 Olson 1985; Olson 1965.
     19	 AOI = [(Ag PE/ Total PE)]/ (Ag GDP/ GDP)].          51	 Acemoƒülu and Robinson 2001.
     20	 Alston et al. 2000; Pardey et al. 2007.             52	 Fernandez and Rodrik 1991.
     21	 Fuglie and Rada 2015.                               53	 Coate and Morris 1999.
     22	 Gisselquist, Nash, and Pray 2002.                   54	 Keefer and Khemani 2005; Chinsinga 2011.
     23	 Pray et al. 2011.                                   55	 Mogues and do Rosario 2015.
     24	 Keyser 2013                                         56	 Dorward, Chirwa, and Slater 2010.
     25	 Byamugisha 2013.                                    57	 Banful 2011.
     26	 African Union, UN Economic Commission for           58	 Wade 1982; Walter and Wolff 2002.
         Africa, and African Development Bank 2009.          59	 Nylen 2014.
     27	 Fuglie 2015.                                        60	 Ranis 2012.
     28	 Davis 2015.                                         61	 Francis and James 2003.
     29	 Deichmann, Goyal, Mishra 2016.                      62	 World Bank 2008.
     30	 Thirtle and van Zyl 1994.                           63	 Akiyama et al. 2001.
     31	 You et al. 2011.                                    64	 Jayne et al. 2013.
     32	 Rosegrant et al. 2009.                              65	 Keefer and Khemani 2003.
     33	 Casaburi et al. 2013.

40   REAPING RICHER RETURNS
A FR ICA DE VE LO P M E N T F O RU M
