  LE A R N ING PR O DUC T




Findings from
Evaluations of
 Policy-Based
  Guarantees
Findings from Evaluations of Policy-
Based Guarantees

An IEG Learning Product
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org




This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of
Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

         The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
boundaries.


Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full
attribution to this work is given.

         Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-
mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
Contents
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ........................................................................................................................ III

ABBREVIATIONS .................................................................................................................................. V

OVERVIEW........................................................................................................................................... VII

1.          INTRODUCTION........................................................................................................................ 1

2.          THE EVOLUTION OF PBGS ..................................................................................................... 3

3.          THE QUALITY OF THE MACRO-FISCAL FRAMEWORK OF PBGS....................................... 7

4.          DID PBGS IMPROVE ACCESS TO PRIVATE FINANCE AND CREDIT TERMS?................. 11

5.          REFORM AGENDA UNDER PBGS ........................................................................................ 16

6.          LESSONS ................................................................................................................................ 19

REFERENCES...................................................................................................................................... 23



Boxes
Box 2.1. PBGs in the Context of Evolving Bank Policy ........................................................................... 4
Box 2.2. Outcome Ratings of Completed and Evaluated PBGs .............................................................. 6
Box 4.1. An OPCS Metric of Improvements in Financial Terms - 2012 ................................................. 14
Box 5.1. Summary of Reform Contents under Selected PBGs ............................................................. 16


Tables
Table 2.1. World Bank Policy-Based Guarantees, 1975-2016 ................................................................ 5
Table 3.1. Financing Mobilized through World Bank Policy-Based Guarantees...................................... 7
Table 3.2. Macro-Framework for selected PBGs reviewed and evaluated by IEG .................................. 8
Table 4.1. Summary Terms of Commercial Loans Supported by PBGs................................................ 11




                                                                                                                                                      i
CONTENTS


Appendixes

APPENDIX A: ASSESSING THE IMPLIED INTEREST RATE OF NON-GUARANTEED
INSTRUMENT AND THE VALUE OF GUARANTEE: A METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH .............. 21




     Evaluation Managers
        Caroline Heider       Director-General, Evaluation
        Nicholas David York   Director, Human Development and Economic Management
        Anjali Kumar          Acting Manager
        Aghassi Mkrtchyan     Task Manager




ii
Acknowledgments
The task manager of the report was Aghassi Mkrtchyan under the supervision of
Mark Sundberg andAnjali Kumar, and the general direction of Nicholas York and
Caroline Heider. The report was prepared by Aghassi Mkrtchyan with substantial
inputs from Mansoor Dailami and Chad Leechor. Team assistance by Yezena
Zemene Yimer is gratefully acknowledged. The task team is grateful to Mark
Sundberg, Zeljko Bogetic, and Anjali Kumar for substantive guidance and advice in
all stages of the study, and to Lourdes Pagaran and Moritz Piatti for their advice and
comments on the draft. The task team is also grateful to the World Bank colleagues
in the Macro and Fiscal Management Global Practice, in the Treasury Department,
and in Operational Policy and Country Services who substantially discussed early
versions of this learning product. Peer reviewers were R. Sudharshan Canagarajah
and Shahrokh Fardoust.




                                                                                    iii
Abbreviations
DPF     Development Policy Financing
DPL     Development Policy Lending
DPOs    Development Policy Operations
FSAL    Financial Sector Adjustment Loan
IBRD    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
IDA     International Development Agency
IEG     Independent Evaluation Group
IMF     International Monetary Fund
PBGs    policy-based guarantees
PCGs    Partial Credit Guarantees
PPAR    Project Performance Assessment Report
PRSCs   Poverty Reduction Strategy Credit
SSAL    Special Structural Adjustment Loan




                                                                v
Overview
In 1999, the World Bank introduced          undertaken by IEG, in Serbia,
policy-based guarantees (PBGs) to cover     Macedonia, and Montenegro. It also
private lenders against the risk of         draws upon IEG’s evaluations of
default by sovereign borrowers. As a        Ghana’s Poverty Reduction Support
new instrument, the PBG expanded the        Credits, which provide background
menu of financing options through           material on the 2015 Ghana PBG. A
policy lending. PBGs were built on the      recent World Bank review of the
World Bank’s policy-based operations        Albania PBG was also taken into
and existing guarantees, with the goal of   consideration. The report draws on
leveraging the World Bank’s resources       IEG’s technical analyses, coordinated
to attract more private financing to        with relevant units of the World Bank
enhance poverty reduction and growth.       and, finally, interviews with a cross-
                                            section of World Bank staff. It therefore
The World Bank’s early experience with      represents an initial step in building
PBGs was colored by its involvement         greater awareness of a relatively new
with the first guarantee in Argentina,      and important tool in development
which was called in 2002. However,          finance. Based upon these experiences,
interest in using the instrument grew       the learning product offers the
after the global financial crisis. Since    following lessons:
2011, the World Bank has issued eight
PBGs with seven countries. In 2013, the     PBGs can represent an important
operational framework was streamlined       instrument of development policy
to make PBGs more accessible to clients     financing that can be used effectively to
by bringing the instrument fully under      help members overcome difficult
Operations Policy 8.60 that covers all      financing and reform challenges. The
development policy financing . Interest     PBG approach brings a judicious
in PBGs now appears to be on the rise.      combination of client benefits, private
Member countries are particularly           sector participation, and financial
attracted to the scale of financing and     leveraging of World Bank resources.
the market access under financial stress    From the point of view of the Bank,
that PBGs have made possible.               through a PBG, World Bank capital is
                                            tied up for a much shorter period than
This paper is a survey of practices and     for a standard policy loan. Additionally,
results that have been observed in the      the fact that only 25 percent of an issued
implementation of PBGs, drawing             guarantee counts toward the World
largely upon four in-depth Project          Bank’s country exposure limit creates an
Performance Assessment Reports              incentive for the use of the instrument,


                                                                                    vii
OVERVIEW


especially for clients with large             mitigating actions in the policy matrix is
financing needs. And the PBG provides         important if there are substantial
an opportunity for the World Bank to          macroeconomic risks. The World Bank’s
leverage its own resources for the            engagement through PBGs would also
country’s benefit. In parallel, benefits to   benefit from extended macroeconomic
World Bank clients include improved           monitoring that extends beyond the
market access, potential diversification      programs’ closing dates. This could be
of the creditor base, longer maturity,        managed in the context of the World
and lower interest rates. IEG’s review of     Bank’s country partnership framework.
PBGs found that, with World Bank
support, borrowers were able to meet          The impact of PBGs on borrowers’
their financing needs during difficult        credit terms varied from one program to
market conditions.                            another. In all of the PBGs reviewed by
                                              IEG, the aggregate interest rates were
A robust macroeconomic and fiscal             lower than they would have been
policy framework is essential for             without guarantees. However, this fact
sustaining benefits from improved             alone may not be sufficient for assessing
access to private finance for deficit         the effectiveness of PBGs in improving
financing. As a development policy            borrowers’ credit terms. Estimating the
financing instrument, PBGs can                implied interest rate on the non-
facilitate a range of important policy        guaranteed portion of PBG-supported
reforms in client countries. Some of the      loans and the extent of possible
PBG operations evaluated by IEG,              “erosion” in the value of a guarantee is
however, would have benefited from a          important for more comprehensive
stronger focus on mitigating fiscal and       assessment of PBGs. In this respect, the
macroeconomic risks. There are                review finds that the financial benefits
suggestions that in some cases,               from improved credit terms varied
relatively large loans mobilized through      across the five PBGs that supported
PBGs might have created incentives for        commercial loans. The review therefore
sub-optimal fiscal choices, particularly      highlights the importance of
in the absence of an International            maximizing the financial benefits for the
Monetary Fund (IMF) program. The              borrowers from PBGs. Assessing the full
report highlights the importance of           extent of financial benefits using this
rigorous application of the World             metric in World Bank self-evaluation
Bank’s operational policy on the              could further enhance understanding of
macroeconomic framework of                    the overall effectiveness of PBGs.
development policy financing with a
special focus on mitigating sovereign         Greater attention to the modality for
default risks through debt sustainability     raising private finance is needed. The
analysis. Incorporation of necessary          choice between bank loans and bond
                                              issuance in capital markets involves


viii
OVERVIEW


several trade-offs that need to be          interest in PBGs, there is need for more
considered in light of a particular         comprehensive Bank group wide
borrower’s circumstances and lessons        corporate guidance on borrowing
learned from previous operations. Most      modalities and on the roles and
recent PBG transactions have been           responsibilities of relevant departments,
through negotiated deals in the             that could perhaps be undertaken in the
international bank loan markets. For        review of WBG guarantee instruments
bank loan markets to ensure pricing         launched in July 2016. A supportive
efficiency, it is necessary for the World   governance framework for operations
Bank and the borrower to ensure             that make use of PBGs is important for
competitive bidding, transparency, and      enhancing the overall effectiveness of
due diligence. The review also              this important instrument.
emphasizes that, in light of growing




ix
1. Introduction
In 1999, the World Bank introduced policy-based guarantees (PBGs) as a new financing
instrument to expand the menu of financing options in support of clients’ reform
programs. PBGs cover private lenders against the risk of debt service default by the
sovereign borrower. They are structurally the same as the existing “partial credit
guarantees” of the World Bank, but they provide budget and balance of payments
support and are not tied to any specific projects. Building on the World Bank’s policy-
based operations and existing guarantees, the World Bank created PBGs with the
ambitious goal of leveraging its resources in policy lending operations to attract more
private financing so as to enhance poverty reduction and growth, and to reduce its own
capital charges and exposure limits.

With global financial markets regularly going through cycles of boom and bust, and
given limited access to emerging markets and marginal borrowers, the World Bank saw
PBGs as an instrument to enhance sovereign access to commercial financing,
particularly during periods of market downturns. PBGs were expected to combine the
financial role of credit enhancement with the developmental function of supporting
reforms. They targeted a government’s overall performance in macroeconomic
management and structural reforms, rather than specific projects or specific risks, as
was the case under partial credit guarantees (PCGs) and partial risk guarantees (PRGs).

The World Bank’s early experience with PBGs was colored by Argentina’s default on its
guarantee in 2002. Following the call on Argentina’s guarantee, the World Bank’s
appetite for providing PBGs dried up for almost a decade. However, the more recent
experience with Western Balkan countries during 2011–14 and with Albania and Ghana
in 2015, appears to have been more positive. With World Bank support through PBGs,
these countries were able to meet their financing needs during adverse market
conditions in the aftermath of the global financial crisis and during severe financial
distress in Southern Europe.

In 2013, operations policy governing PBGs was reformed, bringing such operations
under OP 8.60, which covers all development policy financing (DPF).1 Today, the




1The report uses “DPF” or “development policy financing” when referring to the instrument.
“DPL” or “development policy lending” was the previous name of the instrument before
incorporation of guarantees under OP 8.60. The report uses “DPOs” or “development policy
operations” when it refers to specific DPF operations.


1
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
interest in PBGs is on the rise. Member countries are particularly attracted to the scale of
financing and the market access under financial stress that PBGs have made possible.

Recent Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) evaluations have generated a body of
evidence and findings concerning completed PBGs. Four project performance
assessment reports (PPARs) covering small Balkan economies (Serbia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and Montenegro) were completed in 2016.2
Evaluations of Poverty Reduction Support Credits in Ghana provided background
material on the 2015 Ghana PBG. A recent review of the Albania PBG conducted by the
World Bank is also relevant. The present note also draws upon IEG’s 2009 thematic
evaluation reviewing all guarantees provided by the World Bank from 1990 to 2007.

This learning product assembles the information and findings from these sources. As
such, the report represents a step toward building a greater awareness of this important
tool of development finance. Section 2 provides an overview of the instrument and its
evolution. Section 3 reviews prerequisites for such operations, and how they were
applied in practice. Section 4 assesses completed PBGs on the degree of access to finance
and resulting financial benefits. Section 5 reviews the extent to which the reform
agenda has been applied to advance the objectives of PBGs and the scope for
improvement. The final section draws preliminary lessons on the potential benefits and
risks of PBGs.




2The four PBGs are: Serbia Private and Financial Sector Policy-Based Guarantee (February
2011); Former Yugoslav Republic (FYR) of Macedonia Policy-Based Guarantee( November
2011); Montenegro Financial Sector Policy-Based Guarantee ( May 2012); and FYR Macedonian
Public Expenditure Policy-Based Guarantee( January 2013)


2
2. The Evolution of PBGs
When they were launched in 1999, PBGs specifically targeted International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)–eligible countries with a strong track record
of performance, a satisfactory structural and macroeconomic framework, and a
coherent strategy for gaining access to international financial markets.3 The PBGs for
Argentina (1999) and Colombia (2001) were designed and implemented under these
eligibility conditions. In addition, the World Bank added the enhancement of an
innovative “rolling reinstatable” mechanism by which IBRD would reactivate the
guarantee if the borrower fully reimbursed IBRD following a default and a call by the
lender on the guarantee.

With a PBG from the World Bank, Argentina was able to borrow $1.5 billion in the
international markets, with a series of six $250 million zero-coupon bonds maturing
sequentially over the period 2000–04. Similarly, Colombia completed a notes issuance of
$1 billion, structured with mortgage-style, semi-annual amortizations. The World Bank
provided a rolling guarantee on the first two debt service payments at a time when
conditions were unfavorable. Both PBGs were undertaken concurrently with other
policy-based operations, including the Special Structural Adjustment Loan (SSAL, 1998)
in the case of Argentina, and the Financial Sector Adjustment Loan (FSAL, 1999) in the
case of Colombia. No special adjustments in the macroeconomic framework and policy
priorities were needed to meet the prerequisite of PBGs. The PBGs simply replaced the
second tranche of existing development policy operations, with no change in the World
Bank’s exposure to the countries.

When Argentina defaulted on its bonds in October 2002, the call on the World Bank’s
guarantee marked a turning point in the use of PBGs. As a consequence, the World
Bank made a payment of $200 million to bondholders as stipulated under the PBG.
Subsequently, Argentina also failed to reimburse the World Bank within the stipulated
60-day deadline to allow for the guarantee to be reinstated. Financial markets reacted
negatively to Argentina’s default, with a spillover to the Colombia PBG-backed bonds.

The global financial crisis of 2007–09 and the Eurozone crisis in its aftermath created a
new impetus for PBGs. As governments of the Eurozone experienced severe financial
distress, with the market values of their debts suffering deep losses, major European
banks which held the bulk of the troubled assets were suddenly threatened with
insolvency. At the same time, more stringent regulatory requirements on capital and


3




                                                                                            3
CHAPTER 2
THE EVOLUTION OF PBGS
liquidity under Basel III standards were taking effect. Investor sentiment turned sharply
negative, even for debt instruments issued by reputable firms with a global franchise.
The demand for securities issued by borrowers from emerging markets was low.

    Box 2.1. PBGs in the Context of Evolving Bank Policy
    Policy-Based Guarantees (PBGs) cover private lenders against the risk of debt service default
    by the sovereign government. Although they are structurally the same as Partial Credit
    Guarantees (PCGs), a project financing instrument, PBGs are offered for balance of payments
    and general budget support. PBGs can be used for any commercial debt instruments (loans,
    bonds) provided by any private institution. As in regular budget support loans, proceeds of
    the guaranteed debt can be used for any budgetary purposes.
    Although PBGs fully count against the World Bank’s capital, only 25 percent of an issued
    guarantee counts toward the World Bank’s country exposure limit. For example, with
    $50 million of credit available to a client, the World Bank could issue a PBG in the amount of
    $200 million, thereby scaling up World Bank assistance substantially without changing the
    World Bank’s exposure to the country. This provision creates an incentive for the use of the
    instrument, especially for clients with large financing needs.
    When they were launched in 1999, PBGs specifically targeted International Bank for
    Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)–eligible countries with a strong track record of
    performance. Specific eligibility criteria included: criterion A—The country should have a
    strong track record of performance and its structural, social and macroeconomic policy
    package should be satisfactory; criterion B—The country should have a sustainable external
    financing plan; and criterion C—The country should have a coherent borrowing strategy,
    which will enable it to become a borrower in its own name without a guarantee in the
    medium term. These criteria were applied in addition to development policy financing (DPF)
    criteria on the macroeconomic framework of DPF per OP 8.60.
    The operational guidance on PBGs was changed in 2013, fully incorporating PBGs under OP
    8.60 which governs the World Bank’s DPF. This resulted in a number of changes, including
    elimination of special eligibility criteria governing PBGs and making the instrument available
    for International Develop[ment Association countries. The treatment of the macroeconomic
    framework under PBGs is the same as for DPF loans except in one detail: PBGs can be
    extended to those IDA-only countries that have low or modest risk of debt distress. In 2015,
    with a waiver from the Board, the World Bank issued a guarantee for Ghana, a country with
    high risk of debt distress.
    Source: IEG, World Bank http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTGUARANTEES/Resources/IBRDPBG.pdf.



In this environment, many borrowers, including the governments of Eastern Europe
and Africa, faced an extraordinary hardship. Unable to raise funds at home or abroad,
many countries turned to the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
for assistance. This gave rise to a new burst of activities involving the use of PBGs,
including four operations in the Western Balkans (one each in Serbia and Montenegro
and two in FYR Macedonia) between 2011 and 2013. Another batch of three followed in


4
                                                                                                              CHAPTER 2
                                                                                                  THE EVOLUTION OF PBGS
2015, with PBGs extended to Albania, Angola, and Ghana. In 2016, the World Bank
approved a PBG to Pakistan. PBGs to Angola and Pakistan were operational at the time
of the completion of this report. Interviews with stakeholders conducted by IEG
indicate growing interest in the instrument among operational staff. Thus a new
generation of PBGs may be on the horizon.

The overall footprint of PBGs in the World Bank’s loan portfolio has been small, despite
successive waves of financial turmoil and the growing scale of financing needs. With a
cumulative guarantee amount of less than $4 billion, as of July 2016 (Table 2.1),
financing through PBGs pales in comparison with private capital flows to these
countries and with the World Bank’s own operations.

Table 2.1. World Bank Policy-Based Guarantees, 1975–2016
                                                                                              Status as
                                                                          Commitment                           Approval
 Operation title                                      Country                                  of June
                                                                         (US$ millions)                          date
                                                                                                2016
 Competitiveness and Growth                           Pakistan                420               Active       21-June-16
 Development Policy Financing
 Macroeconomic Stability for                           Ghana                  400               Active        30-Jun-15
 Competitiveness and Growth Credit
 First Fiscal Management Development                   Angola                 200               Active        30-Jun-15
 Policy Financing Operation
 Albania Public Finance PBG                          Albania                 226.7             Active         27-Mar-15
 FYR Macedonia Public Expenditure                 FYR Macedonia              201.5             Closed          8-Jan-13
 PBG
 Montenegro Financial Sector PBG                   Montenegro                 79.2             Closed         28-Jun-12
 FYR Macedonia PBG                               FYR Macedonia               134.9             Closed         10-Nov-11
 Private and Financial Sector PBG               Serbia                        400              Closed         10-Feb-11
 Colombia PBG                                   Colombia                     220.3             Closed          8-Mar-01
 Argentina PBG                                  Argentina                     250              Closed         16-Sep-99
Note: For active and closed projects, the commitment amount at Board approval is shown in U.S. dollars. These figures do not
reflect any cancellations.

The PBGs that have been reviewed and evaluated by IEG (Serbia, Montenegro, and two
guarantees with FYR Macedonia) were all designed and appraised under the old
framework. More recent PBGs (Albania, Ghana, Angola, and Pakistan) were prepared
under OP 8.60.




                                                                                                                               5
CHAPTER 2
THE EVOLUTION OF PBGS

    Box 2.2. Outcome Ratings of Completed and Evaluated PBGs
    As of the end of FY16, IEG had validated and evaluated four PBGs. The outcome ratings are
    presented in the table below. Serbia’s PBG was found to be successful in providing needed
    financing through the country’s first commercial international borrowing, and supporting
    important sector specific reforms. A weak macroeconomic framework was the key reason
    behind the poor outcomes for Montenegro. The PBGs in FYR Macedonia were rated
    moderately satisfactory because of poor performance on public financial management (in the
    first PBG) and weaknesses in the macro framework (in the second).
                                                       Outcome Rating
                     Serbia                              Satisfactory
                     FYR Macedonia 1                Moderately Satisfactory
                     Montenegro                    Moderately Unsatisfactory
                     FYR Macedonia 2                Moderately Satisfactory
    Source: IEG.




6
3. The Quality of the Macro-Fiscal Framework of
PBGs
Under the World Bank’s operational framework of DPF, PBGs are to be implemented in
the context of a credible macro framework. OP 8.60 governing DPF also stipulates that,
if macroeconomic instability remains a risk, the World Bank needs to require special
macroeconomic and fiscal actions to be implemented as risk mitigation measures.

Data from six operations implemented since 2011 and reviewed by IEG indicate that
because of the guarantee element, PBGs tend to mobilize larger financing compared to
development policy loans (DPLs). On average, these PBGs provided close to 2.3 percent
of gross domestic product in external financing—substantially higher than under
regular DPLs (table 3.1).4 This phenomenon is explained not only by the fact that the
financing requirements of borrowing countries were high at that time, but also because
the magnitude of funding mobilized by PBGs would not, in most cases, have been
possible under regular DPOs because of the World Bank’s country exposure limit.

Table 3.1. Financing Mobilized through World Bank Policy-Based Guarantees
                                                                           Total
                                                                                          Total
                                                                         Financing
                                                         PBG amount                   Financing as
    Operation title                         Country                      mobilized
                                                        (US$ millions)                 percent of
                                                                           (US$
                                                                                          GDP
                                                                          millions)
    Macroeconomic Stability for         Ghana                400           1,000          2.1
    Competitiveness and Growth Credit
    Albania Public Finance PBG          Albania             226.7          283.4           2
    FYR Macedonia Public Expenditure    FYR Macedonia       201.5           325           3.4
    PBG
    Montenegro Financial Sector PBG     Montenegro           79.2           132           3.2
    FYR Macedonia PBG                   FYR Macedonia       134.9           175           1.7
    Private and Financial Sector PBG    Serbia               400            400            1
Source: IEG


The four PBGs evaluated by IEG were deployed in a challenging macroeconomic
context with important fiscal imperatives. Despite the requirement and policy guidance,



4The average size of preceding DPOs in Ghana, Albania, FYR Macedonia, Montenegro, and
Serbia was 0.8 percent of GDP


                                                                                                     7
CHAPTER 3
THE REQUIRED MACRO-FISCAL FRAMEWORK FOR PBGS
the quality of the macro framework supporting PBGs varied. Table 3.2 summarizes key
features of the macro framework for the PBGs for which IEG has evaluative evidence.5

Table 3.2. Macro-Framework for Selected PBGs Reviewed and Evaluated by IEG
    Country                                        Macro-Fiscal Framework
    Serbia             IMF program
    FYR Macedonia I    IMF program
    Montenegro         No IMF program. Substantial macro risks, no specific objectives and policy
                       content in the program to address those risks. The PPAR found that macro
                       eligibility criteria might have not been fully met at the time of issuance of the
                       guarantee.
    FYR Macedonia II   Effectively no IMF program (program was set to expire shortly after the approval
                       of PBG). The PPAR highlighted that the availability of PBG might have
                       postponed adjustments and led to larger fiscal deficits.
    Ghana              IMF program, strong macro-program to mitigate significant risks. Guarantee
                       supported Eurobond issuance for refinancing of short-term domestic debt.
Source: IEG


The PBG for Serbia was implemented in parallel to an IMF program with high
confidence in the underlying macro framework. That was also the case for the first PBG
in FYR Macedonia and the one in Ghana. The situation was different with the second
PBG in FYR Macedonia and the Montenegro PBG. In both cases, IEG evaluations found
that the focus on the macro framework was not adequate.

In the case of FYR Macedonia, the PBG was implemented at a time when unauthorized
capital expenditures and weakened fiscal control created substantial controversy. There
were also legitimate concerns about some spending decisions that could undermine the
fiscal framework, such as ad hoc increases in pensions. The PPAR found that the
availability of a large loan through PBGs might have contributed to an expansion of the
government’s spending program.6 Because the IMF program was scheduled to expire, it
heightened the macro risks and put a special burden on the World Bank to ensure that
the macro and fiscal framework remained adequate. The PPAR concluded that the
second PBG in FYR Macedonia was not used effectively by the World Bank to secure a
proper fiscal policy stance.




5 Evidence on Ghana PBGs is collected through an informal review of the macroeconomic
framework of PBG as part of the PPAR on Ghana.
6   PPAR of PEPBG, FYR Macedonia, IEG, 2016.


8
                                                                                  CHAPTER 3
                                               THE REQUIRED MACRO-FISCAL FRAMEWORK FOR PBGS
In the case of Montenegro, IEG found that the fiscal projections underpinning the PBG
were unrealistic, in contrast to independent projections available at the time, including
those of the IMF.7

In contrast to Montenegro and FYR Macedonia II, the PBG in Ghana was strongly
linked and complementary to an IMF program.8 In 2012, when Ghana was holding
general elections and not implementing an adequate macro framework, the World Bank
stopped the provision of budget support. However, in 2015, with the return of the IMF
program, the World Bank resumed its adjustment lending, and introduced a PBG to
help address the exceptionally large financing needs. The underlying macro framework
was adequate and was endorsed by the IMF. The PBG supported the issuance of
Eurobonds in 2015, with the proceeds earmarked for refinancing and buying back high-
interest debt. No additional spending resulted from the large proceeds made possible
by the PBG. On the contrary, the authorities appeared motivated to implement difficult
adjustments because of the PBG.9

Based on evidence from these IEG PPAR evaluations, this report highlights that the
requirement of an adequate macro framework for World Bank DPFs is especially
important in the context of large policy loans supported by PBGs. Under a
comprehensive and robust macro framework, PBGs, as a DPF instrument, can facilitate
and serve as important leverage for policy reforms in support of fiscal sustainability
and other important policy areas. In the absence of such a framework, PBGs may create
risks of fiscal overspending as a result of the availability of large-size financing.
Evidence gathered by IEG indicates that, in some contexts, the availability of large
financing without an adequate macro framework may dilute the incentive of the
borrower to uphold fiscal discipline. Large financing operations, especially those
magnified by the addition of PBGs, should be avoided if the World Bank is not able to
fully address the existing macro risks through policy lending and dialogue. In the
absence of a parallel IMF program, there is a particular need to pay attention to such
macroeconomic risks.

It is thus imperative, for all policy-based lending, and even more so for such leveraged
operations, that before granting a PBG, the World Bank ensures the integrity of the
macro framework and supports additional corrective measures as needed. Moreover,


7   PPAR of PBG, Montenegro, IEG, 2016.
8“Macroeconomic Stability for Competitiveness and Growth Credit” Program Document,
World Bank, 2015.
9Ghana’s case has been used only for assessing the underlying macro framework - this report
does not examine the borrowing modality used by the Government under this PBG.


                                                                                              9
CHAPTER 3
THE REQUIRED MACRO-FISCAL FRAMEWORK FOR PBGS
the World Bank is required to monitor the program up to the closing date, which is
typically less than a year from approval date, typically covering only a fraction of a
guarantee’s duration. It is essential to monitor the actions of the borrower during the
entire period while the guarantee is in effect. This can perhaps be done as part of the
World Bank’s country partnership strategy with relevant clients.

For these reasons a question may be raised about whether the current operational
framework of DPF adequately ensures a sound macro framework for PBGs. Eligibility
criteria for PBGs prior to 2013 were more demanding, because they were built around
assumptions about a downward public and external debt trajectory. That said, the
Montenegro PBG illustrates that even those criteria alone could not guarantee a
satisfactory macroeconomic framework. An IEG review in 2015 found that most DPOs
are underpinned by an adequate macro framework, and OP 8.60 provides the necessary
guidance on acceptable treatment of macroeconomic issues in World Bank DPF.10 With
a stronger focus on these issues in PBGs, the World Bank should be able to address
macro and fiscal risks and further promote important reforms in fiscal and debt
institutions. Rigorous debt sustainability analysis would be key to ensuring quality
macro and fiscal frameworks for PBGs under OP 8.60. These suggestions could be
reviewed together with the overall re-appraisal of the World Bank Group’s guarantee
instruments, launched in FY17.




10   “The Quality of DPOs’ Macroeconomic Framework” IEG Learning Product, 2015.


10
4. Did PBGs Improve Access to Private Finance
and Credit Terms?
Access to commercial finance with improved credit terms is the key motivation and an
objective in all PBGs, which support not only a particular debt transaction, but also may
pave the way for the regular presence of the borrower in international markets.11 The
definition of “access to finance” has evolved since the introduction of PBGs in the late
90s. Whereas initially the focus of the instrument was to help clients lacking access to
international markets, the emphasis has recently shifted to a broader definition of access
to market, which includes the volume of private financing, maturity, and financial
terms. This enabled provision of PBGs to countries that already have some level of
market access.12

PBGs may be assessed on the criteria of the amount of commercial financing raised and
improvements in financial terms that includes both maturity and interest rates. Though
difficult to measure precisely, these criteria help capture the value of PBGs in terms of
both attracting private creditors and securing advantageous terms, given the prevailing
market conditions and investor sentiment.

Table 4.1. Summary Terms of Commercial Loans Supported by PBGs
                   Serbia       FYR Macedonia I          Montenegro          FYR Macedonia II          Albania
 Effective   February,28,       December 2011         July 2012             January 2013          March 2015
 Date        2011
 Amount      EUR 293 million    EUR 130 million       EUR 100 million       EUR 250 million       EUR 250 million
 Coverage    100% of            76% of principal at   60% of principal at   62% of principal at   80% of principal at
             principal at       maturity              maturity              maturity              maturity
             maturity
 Maturity    6 years            5 years               7 years               7 years guaranteed    10 years
                                                      guaranteed            portion and 5 years
                                                      portion and 5         the rest
                                                      years the rest
 Interest    Euro Swap plus     4.25 percent          350 basis points      3.9 percent           130 basis points
             100 basis points                         spread over 12-                             spread over 12-
                                                      month Euribor                               month Euribor


11Some PBGs had explicit “financial” objectives in the policy matrix (Serbia and FYR
Macedonia), though these objectives were related to the terms of subsequent independent
borrowing rather than the terms of the instruments supported by PBGs.
 “Modernizing the World Bank’s Operational Policy on Guarantees,” Operational Policy and
12

Country Services.


                                                                                                             11
CHAPTER 4
DO PBGS IMPROVE ACCESS TOP PRIVATE FINANCE AND FINANCIAL TERMS?
Source: IEG

Effects on market access. In practice, PBGs helped secure financing that could
otherwise be out of reach when market conditions were unfavorable. The four PBGs
reviewed by IEG opened a pathway to private finance at a time of global financial
distress. Shocked by the exceptional turmoil in major financial centers and crises in
Southern Europe, investors were not receptive to small Eastern European emerging
economies. The four PBGs in the Balkans met their objectives of helping governments
raise the desired volume of private finance at terms that were acceptable. The
guarantees secured total commercial bank credit of EUR 780 million with maturities of
five to seven years.

For Serbia, the PBG facilitated the country’s first external sovereign borrowing
transaction and secured a relatively large loan of long maturity. The loan was extended
by Société Générale in 2011 through competitive bidding. The principal amount was
EUR 296.2 million, fully covered by the World Bank’s guarantee and priced at a 100
basis point spread above the EURIBOR. The maturity of six years was particularly
attractive, given Serbia’s heavy reliance on more expensive short-term local market
funding in the past. Following the PBG, Serbia went back several times to international
markets independently between 2012 and 2015, raising $5 billion through bond issues
with maturities of five to 20 years.

In the case of FYR Macedonia, the first PBG helped the government regain access to
international markets in 2011. Designed as a standalone PBG, the operation allowed the
government to borrow EUR 130 million from Deutsche Bank and Citibank. In January
2013, FYR Macedonia received a second PBG from the World Bank to raise EUR 250
million from Deutsche Bank under somewhat more favorable market conditions than
the first. The second PBG helped cover the government’s large fiscal gap. Between the
two loans supported by PBGs, FYR Macedonia was able to independently tap the
international loan markets in July 2012, although the amount involved was much lower
than expected. The PBGs for FYR Macedonia, especially the second one, were more
important in raising the volume of finance rather than opening access to markets.

The experience of neighboring Montenegro underlines the critical role played by the
World Bank guarantee in overcoming credit constraints during times of financial
distress. Having suffered one of the deepest downturns in the aftermath of the recent
global financial crisis, Montenegro was in a financial straitjacket. The EUR 60 million
PBG helped the government borrow EUR 100 million from Credit Suisse to cover a
large part of its budget deficits in 2012. Montenegro was able to contract a commercial
loan two months prior to the approval of the PBG, but it also needed to provide gold as
partial collateral and to accept a relatively high rate.



12
                                                                                     CHAPTER 4
                               DO PBGS IMPROVE ACCESS TOP PRIVATE FINANCE AND FINANCIAL TERMS?
Effects on maturity. PBGs also helped extend the maturity of loans. The improved
tenor, however, is mostly confined to the guaranteed portion of the loans and not to the
non-guaranteed portion. This result is clear from the loans to FYR Macedonia and
Montenegro, which were split into guaranteed and non-guaranteed portions. The
guaranteed portion of the loans enjoyed an extended maturity. The non-guaranteed
portion did not see an increase in maturity compared to earlier non-guaranteed loans.

Effects on subsequent borrowing. The role of PBGs in improving the terms of credit on
subsequent and non-guaranteed loans is more difficult to determine. In some cases,
when a PBG was followed by an independent debt issuance, the terms were reasonable
and better than those obtainable before or without the PBG. These cases, however,
occurred when market conditions were benign, including the years 2014 and 2015. The
role of PBGs in strengthening the borrower’s position is noticeable in the case of Serbia.
In this case, there were substantial capacity development and knowledge transfers from
the World Bank with respect to debt management. By contrast, FYR Macedonia and
Montenegro already had established a presence in the international markets prior to
PBGs.

Effects on interest rates. The key contribution of the instrument is its effect on interest
rates. To the extent that the World Bank is perceived to have a lower credit risk than the
borrower, the guaranteed loans should carry a lower rate than independent loans as a
result of better credit terms. The standard method used in the World Bank of showing
these benefits is to compare the actual interest rates with hypothetical (counterfactual)
rates that the borrower would have paid for a similar loan without a guarantee. For
some PBGs, the World Bank provided such estimates of the reduction in interest rates
as a result of World Bank guarantees. This is normally presented in program documents
or implementation completion and results reports. Deriving good counterfactuals,
however, is challenging and requires sophisticated market tests, which are not always
possible.

These analyses, while very useful, do not give the full picture of financial benefits. The
difference between the counterfactual and the actual interest rate is not amenable to
straightforward interpretation. How large does the difference need to be to make it a
success? A higher percentage of the loan covered by the guarantee would lead to a
larger reduction in interest rates. For example, the interest rate on an instrument that is
90 percent guaranteed by the World Bank should be lower compared to an instrument
that is 50 percent guaranteed, if other factors are held constant.

An elegant way of determining the PBG’s contribution to the borrower’s credit terms is
to derive the implicit interest rate on the non-guaranteed portion of the PBG-supported
loan. This is based on the premise that the actual borrowing rate of the PBG-supported


                                                                                           13
CHAPTER 4
DO PBGS IMPROVE ACCESS TOP PRIVATE FINANCE AND FINANCIAL TERMS?
loan is the weighted average of the rate on the guaranteed portion and the rate on the
non-guaranteed portion. The guaranteed portion should carry a rate that is the same or
close to the borrowing cost of the World Bank. The rate on the non-guaranteed portion
reflects the borrower’s creditworthiness. This approach was articulated in an
Operations Policy and Country Services (OPCS) paper on enhancing the effectiveness of
PBGs (Box 4.1).


 Box 4.1. An OPCS Metric of Improvements in Financial Terms - 2012
 According to a note on PBGs provided by Operations Policy and Country Services to the
 Bank’s Board for discussion, in 2012, “Improved financial terms refers to the implied spread
 on the unguaranteed portion of the borrowing (which thereby adjusts for the effects of the
 protection that the [World] Bank guarantee provides) being equal to or lower than a
 comparable reference spread on nonguaranteed borrowing. Even with the broadened
 definition of improved market access, at a minimum the implied spread on the unguaranteed
 portion of the borrowing is expected to be equal to a comparable reference spread.”
 Source: World Bank, 2012. “Modernizing the World Bank’s Operational Policy on Guarantees,” Operational Policy and
 Country Services. URL: http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTRESLENDING/Resources/1-5-12-Guarantee-AP-post-CODE-
 clean.pdf.



This implicit rate shows the sovereign risk premium associated with the debt instrument
supported by PBGs. Financial benefits from PBG will fully materialize, or in other
words, the value of PBG will be preserved if the interest rate of the non-guaranteed
component is in line with the sovereign risk premium in the market. The difference
between these two rates can point to the extent of “erosion” of the value of PBG as a
result of structuring of the debt instrument, which can be driven by a number of factors,
including possible additional premium demanded by the markets and other
inefficiencies. 13

For the purpose of this learning product, IEG worked in cooperation with relevant
World Bank units to identify the extent to which the implied interest rates for the five
commercial loans supported by PBGs (four evaluated PBGs and the Albania PBG) were

13There is a hypothetical possibility that as a result of increased investor confidence, the implied
interest rate can be lower than sovereign risks premium in the market. This “halo” effect of
PBGs is possible especially for marginal borrowers that are not well known and monitored
closely by large international lenders. For these borrowers, the World Bank can serve as an
honest broker to alleviate information asymmetry between lenders and borrowers. This effect,
however, is very difficult to detect. Possible changes in market perceptions resulting from PBGs
are more likely to occur at the outset of the program, when markets first learn about World
Bank support, and to be gradually factored in, rather than at the end of the process when the
deal is signed.


14
                                                                                         CHAPTER 4
                                   DO PBGS IMPROVE ACCESS TOP PRIVATE FINANCE AND FINANCIAL TERMS?
different from relevant yields in the market, which would point to the extent of erosion
of the value of the guarantee. (The appendix to this report illustrates the methodological
approach).

Overall, there was a variation across the five loans supported by PBGs. In one case, no
erosion in the value of the PBG was detected. In two PBGs, the observed erosion was
quite low, while in the remaining two operations, the observed erosion was higher.14 In
terms of factors explaining why structuring of a debt instrument could result in a loss in
the value of a guarantee and, subsequently, less than expected benefit for the borrower,
the review highlights that in one case, a substantial improvement in market conditions
took place in the period between the borrower’s commitment to the loan and actual
signing, making the agreed interest rate less favorable compared to market conditions
at the time of signing. There is also evidence that for bank-loan markets to yield pricing
efficiency, competitive bidding, transparency, and due diligence on the part of the
borrower and the World Bank are essential.

It could be a useful exercise for PBG teams to work with clients on the decomposition
and benchmarking of interest rates of debt instruments supported by PBGs to allow for
better assessment of the extent of improvements in credit terms. World Bank self-
evaluation of PBGs through implementation completion and results reports can serve as
an appropriate platform for such analysis.

Based on the cases reviewed, greater attention is also needed to the modality for raising
private finance for maximizing financial benefits for the clients. The choice between
bank loans and bond issuance involves several trade-offs that need to be considered in
light of a particular borrower’s circumstances. Most recent PBG transactions have been
through negotiated deals in the international bank loan markets. For such markets to
ensure pricing efficiency, it is necessary for the World Bank and the borrower to ensure
competitive bidding, transparency, and due diligence. The review also emphasizes that,
in light of growing interest in PBGs, there is need for more comprehensive World Bank-
wide corporate guidance on borrowing modalities and on the roles and responsibilities
of relevant units in the World Bank. Such guidance could be reviewed in the light of the
ongoing Bank Group-wide review of guarantee instruments15. Such a supportive
governance framework for PBGs in the World Bank is essential for enhancing the
overall effectiveness of this important instrument.




14   Specific PBGs are not mentioned due to market sensitivities.
15   “Steering Committee on Guarantees,” An internal World Bank document.


                                                                                               15
5. Reform Agenda under PBGs
IEG reviews indicate that the reform content of PBGs is not materially different from
that of non-guarantee DPOs, and reflect greater or lesser degrees of macroeconomic
stringency, as do other DPOs. Furthermore, nothing in the World Bank’s operational
policy suggests that the reform content of PBGs should be different from other policy-
based operations. As emphasized by the World Bank, for DPOs backed by PBGs, access
to private finance is only one side of the coin. The principal agenda is for the
implementation of policy and institutional reforms.

The reforms underlying all four PBGs in Balkan countries built on previous World
Bank–supported operations and represented part of a broader reform agenda consistent
with current country partnership strategies. For example, FYR Macedonia’s reform
program, supported by its first PBG, was originally designed as the second operation of
a series of programmatic DPLs. At the request of the government in early 2011, the
World Bank converted DPL2 into a standalone PBG, retaining largely the same policy
matrix as was envisaged for DPL1.


 Box 5.1. Summary of Reform Contents under Selected PBGs
 Envisaged reforms in Serbia under its PBG were associated with: (i) improving the business
 environment for the private sector, and (ii) making the financial sector more stable and
 efficient.
 The key policy objectives under the FYR Macedonia first PBG were to: (i) strengthen
 sustainability of public finances and functioning of labor markets; (ii) strengthen social safety
 nets, and (iii) improve resilience of financial sector.
 In many respects, FYR Macedonia’s second PBG—the Public Expenditure Policy-Based
 Guarantee—was, for all intents and purposes, a crisis-related assistance aimed at mitigating
 the impact of the renewed Euro zone turmoil and difficult financial market access. The focus
 of policy measures under the PBG was on improving the efficiency of public expenditures
 and public financial management along with strengthening health systems and improving
 the targeting of social assistance and social inclusion.
 Finally, in the case of Montenegro, FSPBG was designed to support the authorities’ efforts to
 strengthen the banking system and increase its resilience to possible future shocks by
 continuing to undertake sectoral policy reforms and system restructuring.
 Source: IEG



According to OP8.60, the size of financial assistance in the World Bank’s policy-based
operations is irrelevant for the determination of an appropriate reform agenda. The


                                                                                                 16
                                                                                 CHAPTER 5
                                                                 REFORM AGENDA UNDER PBGS

choice of lending instruments, as well as the size of assistance, is dictated by
macroeconomic considerations and by the World Bank’s risk management
requirements. And the reform agenda depends on a different set of variables, including
government priorities, political support, and capacity.

Some stakeholders, however, find that the reform agenda for PBGs should be more
demanding because they tend to give proportionally larger financial support due to
increased leverage. The increase should also be used as leverage for promoting more
difficult actions. Adding a PBG to a DPL offers greater financial support but may merit
attaching deeper reforms. Otherwise, they may represent an opportunity lost, according
to this perspective.

In practice, as IEG’s reviews of PPARs and some other available information illustrate,
World Bank operations have involved both of these approaches. There are cases of
“performance-based” determination of the amount of financing.16 By the same token, an
increase in funding could be provided for strong performance and perhaps for
agreement to a stronger reform program.

IEG finds that the World Bank may have missed an opportunity in some PBGs by not
negotiating a deeper reform agenda when the size of financial support was significantly
increased. In the case of Montenegro, for example, IEG finds that by the time the PBG
was being prepared there was evidence that resolution of nonperforming loans was
moving much slower than expected, and that could have been addressed through the
PBG. In the second FYR Macedonia PBG, IEG finds that at the time of preparation
urgent policy issues had emerged with respect to public financial management. The
conversion of an existing DPL into PBG with much larger funding gave the World Bank
an opportunity to address those issues more comprehensively, which, according to the
PPARs, was not fully used.

The policy content of PBGs should be seen as an important tool to strengthen market
perceptions of debt sustainability and facilitate improvement of financing terms for
clients. The demand for PBGs has been strongest when governments face severe fiscal
needs, sometimes without the support of the IMF. Strong measures, including actions
that the IMF may have called for, are needed to mitigate the underlying risks. With
PBGs, the World Bank hopes to bring about attractive financial terms from private
commercial lenders. The underlying reform program needs to be credible and capable
of standing up to scrutiny by independent parties. And last, there is an element of
elevated risk of financial loss to the World Bank that needs to be mitigated. Therefore,

 For example, downsizing of support under Tanzania’s PRCSs due to the failure to comply
16

with important triggers.


                                                                                           17
CHAPTER 5
REFORM AGENDA UNDER PBGS
the reform agenda should be geared toward ensuring sound macro and fiscal
frameworks through incorporation of fiscal reforms and other structural reforms with
important implications for fiscal sustainability in the policy matrix.




18
6. Lessons
This learning product offers the following lessons.

PBGs represent an important instrument of development policy financing that can be
used effectively to help members overcome difficult financing and reform challenges.
The PBG approach brings a potentially powerful combination of client benefits, private
sector participation, and financial leveraging of World Bank resources. Through a PBG,
World Bank capital is tied up for a much shorter period than for a standard policy loan.
The fact that only 25 percent of an issued guarantee counts toward the World Bank’s
country exposure limit creates an incentive for the use of the instrument, especially for
clients with large financing needs. The benefits to World Bank clients include improved
market access, potential diversification of the creditor base, longer maturity, and lower
interest rates. IEG’s review of PBGs found that, with World Bank support, borrowers
were able to meet their financing needs during difficult market conditions.

A robust macroeconomic and fiscal policy framework is essential for sustaining
benefits from improved access to private finance for deficit financing. As a DPF
instrument, PBGs can facilitate a range of important policy reforms in client countries.
Some of the PBGs evaluated by IEG, however, would have benefited from a stronger
focus on mitigating fiscal and macroeconomic risks. Evidence suggests that, in some
cases, relatively large loans mobilized through PBGs might have created incentives for
suboptimal fiscal choices, particularly in the absence of an IMF program. The report
highlights the importance of rigorous application of the World Bank’s operational
policy on the macroeconomic framework of DPF with a special focus on mitigating
sovereign default risks through debt sustainability analysis. Incorporation of necessary
mitigating actions in the policy matrix is especially important for PBGs. Close
collaboration with IMF is likely to be valuable. The World Bank’s engagement through
large DPOs backed by PBGs will also benefit from extended macroeconomic monitoring
that goes beyond a program’s closing date. This can be managed in the context of the
World Bank’s country partnership framework.

The impact of PBGs on borrowers’ credit terms varied from one program to another. In
all of the PBGs reviewed by IEG, the aggregate interest rates were lower than they
would have been without guarantees. However, this fact alone may not be sufficient for
assessing the effectiveness of PBGs in improving borrowers’ credit terms. Estimating
the implied interest rate on the non-guaranteed portion of PBG-supported loans and the
extent of possible “erosion” in the value of a guarantee is important for more
comprehensive assessment of PBGs. In this respect, the review finds that the financial
benefits from improved credit terms varied across the five PBGs that supported


19
CHAPTER 6
LESSONS FOR THE FUTURE
commercial loans. The review therefore highlights the importance of maximizing the
financial benefits from PBGs. Assessing the full extent of financial benefits using this
metric in World Bank self-evaluation could further enhance understanding of the
overall effectiveness of PBGs.

Based on the cases reviewed, greater attention is needed to the modality for raising
private finance. Whether or not to add a PBG to a DPL, as well as the choice between
bank loans and bond issuance, involves several trade-offs that need to be considered in
light of a particular borrower’s circumstances. Most recent PBG transactions have been
through negotiated deals in the international bank loan markets. For such markets to
ensure pricing efficiency, it is necessary for the World Bank and the borrower to ensure
competitive bidding, transparency, and due diligence. The review also emphasizes that,
in light of growing interest in PBGs, there is need for more comprehensive World Bank-
wide corporate guidance on borrowing modalities and on the roles and responsibilities
of relevant units in the World Bank. Such guidance could be reviewed in the light of the
ongoing Bank Group-wide review of guarantee instruments. Such a supportive
governance framework for PBGs in the World Bank is essential for enhancing the
overall effectiveness of this important instrument.




20
Appendix A: Assessing the Implied Interest Rate
of Non-guaranteed Instruments and the Value of
Guarantees: A Methodological Approach
Commercial loans or bonds partly guaranteed by the World Bank can be seen as a
“bundle” combining two distinct credit risks. “Unbundling” of the instrument and
deriving the implied interest rate on the non-guaranteed portion of the instrument
would therefore allow to observe the sovereign risk premium associated with the
particular transaction. It would also allow to assess the value of guarantee or the extent
of losses from structuring of the instrument by comparing the implied rate with
comparable rates on sovereign’s other borrowing instruments.

For the purpose of this learning product IEG has developed a framework to derive
upper and lower bounds of the implied interest rates associated with PBG-supported
transactions. In addition, some calculations of the “value” of guarantee for commercial
loans were available at the Bank based on the approach outlined in a guide for potential
investors titled “Pricing partially guaranteed bonds” (Financial Solution occasional
Paper 001/16, February 201617). Although somewhat different in their approaches, these
two sets of estimates pointed generally to the same direction in terms of the extent of
financial benefits from guarantees in individual operations.

It should be noted that IEG’s approach does not depend on assumptions about
sovereign yields, but comparing the results with other instruments does depend on
availability of comparator instruments. Bank’s approach in deriving the actual value of
guarantee is based on assumptions about sovereign risks premium. As sovereign yields
for many of Bank’s clients cannot be easily observed both approaches have limitations
and should be interpreted with a caution.

In IEG approach, it is first assumed that the implicit interest rate for the guaranteed
portion of the loan should be equal to the yields on IBRD bonds, and that there is no
erosion in the value of guarantee as a result of structuring of debt instrument (markets
do not require additional premium). The implied interest rate of non-guaranteed
portion can be derived using the formula below.



17http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/723281467998238063/pdf/103282-v1-WP-
Occasional-Paper-001-Partially-guaranteed-bond-valuation-final-Box394864B-PUBLIC-Volume-
1.pdf


                                                                                         21
APPENDIX A:
ASSESSING THE IMPLIED INTEREST RATE OF NON-GUARANTEED INSTRUMENT: AN IEG APPROACH
                                 ING = (AI – WG * IIBRD)/WNG

Where ING is the implied interest rate on nonguaranteed portion of the loan; AI is the
aggregate interest rate on the bundle; WG and WNG are the weights of guaranteed and
nonguaranteed components of the loan based on principle amount respectively derived
from present values of exposure; and IIBRD – is the IBRD bond rate in euros of similar
maturity. The formula captures cases when the maturity of guaranteed and
nonguaranteed components is different, as in the case of the loans reviewed by IEG18.

The formula above will give the lower bound of the implied interest rate of non-
guaranteed portion of the instrument as markets may seek additional premium, for a
range of reasons, on guaranteed component of the instrument in addition to the risk
premium of the reputable guarantor. Due to the fact that the loan to Serbia supported
by PBG was fully guaranteed (based on principle amount), it is the only case where the
difference between IBRD bond rates and spreads on the guaranteed instrument can be
observed. The difference, however, does not appear material: the interest rate on
guaranteed instrument (Euro Swap rate plus 100 basis points) was largely in line with
the IBRD bond rate of comparable maturity. Based on this and available other
information on the extent of possible market fluctuations, IEG uses a 0.5 percentage
point (50 basis points) difference to derive an upper bound for the risk premium for
non-guaranteed component of the instrument with the equation below.

                              ING = (AI – WG * (IIBRD + P)/WNG

Where P is an estimate of empirically observed maximum difference between the
guaranteed component of IBRD guaranteed instrument and comparable IBRD bond
rates.

With these two equations a range for the interest rate of non-guaranteed components of
the instruments guaranteed by the World Bank can be estimated. Comparing this rates
with the interest rates of comparator debt instrument would point to the extent of
efficiencies in structuring of Bank-supported instruments. Identical or similar rates
would indicate that there was no loss in the value of guarantee and, accordingly,
financial benefits were larger. If the implied rate on the non-guaranteed portion of the
loan is higher than it would indicate on possible erosion in the value of guarantee and
smaller financial benefits from PBGs.




18An alternative approach could have been to derive the weights based on cash flows, but for
this exercise the weights based on principle amount were found as more appropriate.


22
References
Bank for International Settlements. 2003. Committee on the Global Financial System, Credit Risk Transfer,
        January, 2003.
Bellas, D., M.G., Papaioannou, and I., Petrova. 2010. “Determinants of Emerging Market Sovereign Bond
         Spreads: Fundamentals vs Financial Stress”, IMF Working Paper.
Comelli, F., 2012, Emerging Market Sovereign Band Spreads: Estimation and Back-testing”, IMF Working
       Paper, December.
Dailami, M. 2010. “Sovereign Debt Distress and Corporate Spillover Impacts,” in Sovereign Debt and the
       Financial Crisis, Carlos A. Primo Braga and Gallina A. Vincelette, ed., World Bank, 2010
_____. 2007. “Credit Spread Determinants and Interlocking Contracts: A Clinical Study of th e Ras Gas
        Project” (with Robert Hauswald), Journal of Financial Economics, October 2007
Datta, S., M. Iskandar-Datta, and A. Patel. 1999. “Bank Monitoring and the Pricing of Corporate Public
         Debt”, Journal of Financial Economics, 51.
Diamond, D. 1984. “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring”, Review of Economic Studies,
      51.
Drazen, A. 2000 . Political Economy in Macroeconomics, Princeton University Press.
Duffie, D. 1999. Credit Swap Valuation”, Financial Analysts Journal, January -February.
Fama, E., 1985, “What is Different about Banks?” Journal of Monetary Economics 15.
Fung. H.G. Min-Ming Wen, and G. Zhang. 2012, How Does the Use of Credit Default Swaps Affect Firm
       Risk and Value? Evidence from US Life and Property/Casualty Insurance Companies” , Financial
       Management, Winter 2012.
Gale D., and M. Hellwig. 1985. “Incentive Compatible Debt Contracts: The One-Period Problem”, Review
        of Economic Studies, 52.
Haas, P. 1992. “Epistemic Communities and International Policy Coordination: Introduction”,
        International Organization, 46(1)
International Monetary Fund, Independent Evaluation Office. 2003. The Role of the IMF in Argentina,
        1991-2002 Issues Paper.
Kiff, J., F.L. Michaud, and J. Mitchell. 2003. “An Analytical Review of Credit –Risk-Transfer Instruments”,
           Banque de France Financial Stability Review, June
Townsend R.M, 1979. “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State Verification”,
      Journal of Economic Theory, 21.
World Bank. 2012. “Modernizing the World Bank’s Operational Policy on Guarantees,” Operational
       Policy and Country Services.
_____. 2009. Independent Evaluation Group, The World Bank Group Guarantee Instruments 1992-2007:
        An Independent Evaluation, Washington DC, 2009.
_____. 2006. Global Development Finance: The Development Potential of Surging Capital Flows.




                                                                                                         23
