 IMPROVING EDUCATION
PERFORMANCE IN MATH &
 SCIENCE IN THE GAMBIA
 An overview of the Progressive Science Initiative and Progressive
 Math Initiative (PSI-PMI) and its implementation in The Gambia

                    RYOKO TOMITA AND TANYA SAVRIMOOTOO
Standard Disclaimer:
This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Devel-
opment/The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this
paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or
the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data
included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown
on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concern-
ing the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.



Copyright Statement:
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of
this work without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and
will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with com-
plete information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA
01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.
All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to
the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA,
fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.

PROGRESSIVE SCIENCE INITIATIVE; PSI and PROGRESSIVE MATHEMATICS INITIA-
TIVE; PMI are registered trademarks of Dr. Robert Goodman and Center for Teaching and
Learning is the exclusive Licensee of these marks.
Table of Contents




I.	Introduction .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 7

II. 	Overview of the Progressive Teaching Initiative Approach.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .                                             11

III. 	Implementation of the PSI-PMI Pilot program in The Gambia. . . . . . . . . . . 17
     Timeline .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 17
     Teacher Training. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
     Detailed Information on Teacher Trainings Activities .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 20
     Technology, Equipment and Facilities.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 22
     Challenges in Implementation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 23

IV.	PSI-PMI effect on education performance in The Gambia .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 27
     Effect on Upper Basic Students (Grade 9) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 28
     Effect on Senior Secondary Students.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 29
     Student and Teacher Perceptions of the Program reported in the 2013 Evaluation.  . 32

V.	 Going forward: Next steps following completion of the Pilot Program .  .  .  .  .  .                                                              35
     Remaining Trainings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Annex .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .                                38

References.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 39




TABLE OF CONTENTS 	3
Acknowledgements




This report was prepared by Ryoko Tomita and Tanya Savrimootoo. Support, advice
and comments were provided by Meskerem Mulatu, Robert Goodman, Rosanna Satter-
field, and Jeffrey Waite. The team wishes special thanks to the Ministry of Basic and
Secondary Education of The Gambia and New Jersey Center for Teaching and Learning
for the close collaboration of designing and implementation of the pilot program.

Finally, the team gives thanks to Laura McDonald for her excellent quality assurance
and editing work.




4	                              Improving Education Performance in Math and Science in The Gambia
Acronyms and Abbreviations




GABECE	     Gambia Basic Education Certificate Examination
HTC	        Higher Teachers Certificate
IDA	        International Development Association
IDF	        Institutional Development Fund
IWB	        Interactive White Board
MoBSE	      Ministry of Basic and Secondary Education
NAT	        National Assessment Test
NJCTL	      New Jersey Center for Teaching and Learning
PDO	        Project Development Objective
PSI-PMI	    Progressive Science Initiative and the Progressive Mathematics Initiative
PTC	        Primary Teachers Certificate
PTI	        Progressive Teaching Initiative
READ	       Results for Educator Achievement and Development Project
SSA	        Sub-Saharan Africa
SSS	        Senior Secondary Schools
STEM	       Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics	
UBS	        Upper Basic Schools
WASSCE 	    West African Senior School Certificate Examination




ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 	                                                            5
PART I.
Introduction




The low quality of education in SSA countries is well-documented, including
the poor performance on science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)-related
subjects in school leaving examinations. The reasons behind the low learning outcomes are
many - lack of adequate textbooks or equipment, low teacher quality, outdated curricula,
among others. On the other hand, effective and efficient solutions to this issue are less forth-
coming. This report documents the implementation of the Progressive Science Initiative®
and Progressive Math Initiative® (PSI®-PMI®) in The Gambia, a program which seeks to en-
hance teacher performance, and thereby improve student learning in science and mathemat-
ics through an integrated approach. The program, which originated in New Jersey, United
States, was founded by Robert Goodman, Ed. D., and has been very successful, gaining trac-
tion within and outside the country. The Gambia is the first SSA country to implement this
program.

There are an increasing number of International Development Association (IDA) funded
projects in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) that focus on supporting improved learning outcomes in
mathematics and science. This stems in part from the growing demand from client countries
to help ensure that the education system is aligned with the needs of the labor market and
that the system is capable of building a competitive and productive workforce. At the same
time, there is an increasing focus on the need for the development of soft skills among the
workforce. This includes the ability to communicate, collaborate, and to be creative in prob-
lem-solving. The PSI-PMI approach is designed to do both- ensuring educational content is
relevant and that the pedagogical methods applied foster the soft skills needed.

The PSI-PMI pilot project in The Gambia was a direct request by The Ministry of Basic and Sec-
ondary Education (MoBSE), stemming from concerns about students’ performance on national
and international examinations. Before this program, the MoBSE already had plans to tackle
the issues of improving learning outcomes in English by providing intensive training to early
grades (Grades 1-3) English teachers. It was also looking for ways to support improvements in



PART I. INTRODUCTION 	7
the quality of science and mathematics education. In the National Assessment Test (NAT), a
limited number of students reached the minimum requirements. The situation was particularly
worrying in grade 5 math and sciences, with average success rates of just 20 percent.
Results at the upper basic and senior secondary levels were scarcely better. Before the proj-
ect, 76 percent of candidates failed to obtain a credit in any of the four core subjects of the
grade 9 national examination, The Gambia Basic Education Certificate Examination (GA-
BECE), and only 4 percent achieved a credit in all 4. Results were poorest in math, with
only 7 percent of candidates obtaining the credit. GABECE results determine which Senior
Secondary Schools students can enroll in. On the grade 12 regional examination, West Af-
rican Senior School Certificate Examination (WASSCE), The Gambia was far behind other
participating countries. In mathematics, the pass rate was just 3.2 percent, compared with
47 percent in some countries.

Given the issues noted above, the Gambian government obtained US$491,860 in July 2012
from the Institutional Development Fund (IDF) through the World Bank to implement the
Teaching Math and Physics through e-learning project (P129888). This pilot project imple-
mented the PSI-PMI with support from the New Jersey Center for Teaching and Learning
(NJCTL) in a total of 24 schools, comprising 11 upper basic schools (UBS) and 13 senior sec-
ondary schools (SSS) (Annex Table 3). Regions 1 and 2 are in the central areas and Region 5
and 6 are in remote areas of the country.

The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the project was to build the MoBSE’s capacity
to develop a secondary education teacher training program in physics and math based on
international best practice. The second objective was to train current, or prospective, UBS
and SSS physics and mathematics teachers, to create a cadre of highly effective teachers
of mathematics and physics, and therefore improve the quality of education provision and
student learning. The third objective was to evaluate the effectiveness of this approach and
to identify its impact and any issues related to implementation. This was useful in deter-
mining whether this pilot program should be scaled up in The Gambia.




Objectives of this report
The objective of this report is to describe how the innovative PSI-PMI pilot program was
designed and implemented in The Gambia, to document the challenges faced during this
process, how these were overcome, and to present the preliminary results of the pilot pro-
gram in terms of improvements in students’ learning outcomes. This can serve as valuable
background information for programming of future projects in the SSA region that aim to
improve mathematics and science learning outcomes in the region. The Gambia pilot pro-
gram has garnered much interest within the World Bank (WB), and as such it will be useful
to have a report that summarizes the program.

In addition, recently the WB initiated a regional technical assistance program, namely the
Mathematics and Science for Schools in Sub-Saharan Africa (MS4SSA). Its objective is to
reinforce the WB’s support of the efforts by countries in SSA to improve mathematics and
science learning outcomes in schools. This program will use a model that is similar to the
PSI-PMI model in selected SSA countries. Therefore, it will also be useful for those coun-
tries that are interested in participating the MS4SSA program to learn how the PSI-PMI
pilot program worked in The Gambia.


8	                                  Improving Education Performance in Math and Science in The Gambia
The report is organized as follows: Chapter II provides a brief overview of the philosophy,
methods and practices behind the PSI-PMI program; Chapter III outlines the implementa-
tion process in The Gambia, including the challenges faced during implementation; Chap-
ter IV presents findings on the effect of the pilot program on student learning; and Chapter
V outlines the next phase of the project in The Gambia.




PART I. INTRODUCTION 	9
10	   Improving Education Performance in Math and Science in The Gambia
PART II.
Overview of the Progressive
Teaching Initiative Approach



The Progressive Teaching Initiative (PTI)1 seeks to transform how education and content
knowledge is delivered, learned and assessed. It represents, in the words of its founder, a true
paradigm shift- an overhaul of the status quo in educational practice which has proven to yield
greater levels of student learning and teacher effectiveness, both of which are relevant con-
cerns in education in SSA today. There are four key aspects that define the transformative
nature of the PTI approach, and the PSI-PMI program in particular: (i) the integration of tech-
nology in the classroom, (ii) a new pedagogy and approach to teaching, (iii) a new approach to
how students participate, learn and are assessed, and (iv) a new sequencing of STEM subjects
that is organic and better aligned with course content.



Integration of Technology in the Classroom
Under the PSI-PMI approach, technology in the classroom is an essential tool that serves as
a facilitator for both the teacher and the students. At its core is the Interactive White Board
(IWB) software which is a platform that allows the creation of digital course content by ex-
perienced teachers. This enables the teachers to create courses that are targeted, accurate
and coherent. Once developed, the course modules are available online, at no cost. As such,
an unlimited numbers of teachers are able to access and adapt the materials. There is no In-
ternet required at the school level as all the modules are downloadable onto computers. This
virtual collaborative work platform helps improve the accuracy, clarity and alignment of the
material to the course objectives by the teachers in their field. In doing so, teachers then have
access to lesson plans that have been peer reviewed and which can be used and adapted as
needed. A fundamental step in the PTI approach, and one of the unique features of IWB, is
the use of student responder technology. This allows each student to have a student respond-
er (polling device) which they use to answer mini quizzes on the material being taught during
the class. The IWB shows on the screen what percentage of students answered A, B, C, or D,
for example, so that the teacher will immediately know how well the students understand
the materials and lessons, and also allow the students to check their understanding of the
material. Under the PTI approach, Student Response questions are built into the lessons and
presentations.

1
 Progressive Teaching Initiative is the umbrella term which regroups any course like PMI and PSI which is based
on the same set of guiding principles.



PART II. OVERVIEW OF THE PROGRESSIVE TEACHING INITIATIVE APPROACH	                                                11
Teaching Approach
The integration of technology into the PSI-PMI approach alters the role of the teacher, from the
course preparation process to the delivery of course content in the classroom. Lesson planning
using this approach does not consume as much of an individual teacher’s time, while it also
ensures that the course content is coherent, accurate, clear, and aligned with the overall objec-
tive. Further, as the lessons are shared with teachers in the same school, district and beyond, it
ensures a fair degree of consistency in the quality of education provided. This also means that
new teachers or less experienced teachers can access materials that have been refined by more
experienced teachers, breaking down some of the barriers to teachers’ learning as well.

This approach also impacts the role of the teacher in the classroom. Through the formative
assessments and use of Students Responders, teachers are able to know in real time if students
understand the material and, if not, they are able to adjust their teaching accordingly. Also, be-
cause the format of class alternates between brief direct instruction and formative assessments
(using Student Responders), the teacher can identify those students that need help the most, as
well as any subject-matter which requires additional attention. On this basis, students are then
given the opportunity to discuss their understanding of the material in a small group where the
teacher can listen and provide input. In this way, a good teacher is no longer so much dependent
on their prior knowledge of the subject itself, but their skills as a teacher – that is their ability to
convey ideas and knowledge and as well as to motivate students, be creative, and foster collabo-
ration. In fact, the PTI model suggests that any teacher with good teaching skills be able to learn
any course content and teach a related course successfully, regardless of their original training
or field of study. This approach significantly broadens the pool of teachers available to teach
each subject, including STEM-related ones, while ensuring high standards are maintained.

Under this program, teachers who wish to teach PSI-PMI courses are first certified by the
NJCTL. They participate in training courses delivered by the NJCTL to ensure that they have
mastered the course content, and are familiar and comfortable with the pedagogical methods
used in the program. Upon completion of their training, teachers receive a certificate confirm-
ing that they have met the requirements in terms of mastering the PTI approach as well as the
specific course content.



Student participation
Under the PTI approach, the classroom is a student-centered environment where interactive
participation, which aims to stimulate learning, is key. Ideally, classrooms are equipped with
round student tables which are about five feet in diameter around which students gather and
where discussions related to student response questions are encouraged. This is believed to
foster constructive social interaction, one of the principles of underpinning the PTI approach.
Moreover, since the IWB presentations replace textbooks and are available to students online
and in print, the student no longer needs to spend classroom time writing down notes me-
chanically. Instead, the focus becomes on absorbing, understanding and testing their compre-
hension of the material taught in real time. As described earlier, students are encouraged to
discuss questions with their peers and to work together on resolving them. Top students have
the opportunity to verbalize their thought process, reinforcing their understanding of the
material, while weaker students are exposed to alternative thinking and approaches on how
to tackle a question or a problem, which also allows them to progress. Top students are also
encouraged to provide after school tutoring to their peers.


12	                                    Improving Education Performance in Math and Science in The Gambia
Content, sequencing of subjects, and assessment
The PSI-PMI approach pays close attention to the sequencing of the mathematics and sci-
ence courses in the curriculum and this sequencing is an essential feature of the program.
In particular, the PSI program uses a Physics-Chemistry-Biology sequence which is coupled
with a parallel curriculum in Mathematics (Algebra- Geometry- Algebra II- Pre-Calculus/
Calculus) spanning grades 9 to 12. This sequencing was developed to ensure that mathematics
and science courses were taught in a way that reinforced each other, resulting in an organic
progression of STEM courses. For example, grade 9 Algebra is either taught right before or
at the same time as Physics (which is Algebra-based) which allows the material taught and
learned in the mathematics class to be applied immediately in the science class. This is differ-
ent from traditional course sequencing which begins with Biology (grade 9) Chemistry (grade
10) and Physics (grade 11). As such, Algebra (taught in grade 9) does not become relevant until
Chemistry in grade 10 and Physics in grade 11 (Figure 1). Using the PSI-PMI approach, the
sequencing ensures the curriculum is relevant and applied.

 Figure 1: Traditional course sequencing (top) and simplified sequencing
                under PSI-PMI (bottom) from grades 9 to 11




        Source: NJCTL presentation, October 2015



PART II. OVERVIEW OF THE PROGRESSIVE TEACHING INITIATIVE APPROACH	                            13
Assessments and homework serve a new purpose- under the PTI approach, homework be-
comes a formative assessment tool where answers are provided immediately and where stu-
dents are able to retake and redo the assignment until they are sure they have understood the
material. As such, homework is no longer tied to the students’ grade, and instead becomes
part of the learning process. This is also logistically possible for teachers since assignments
are made available online and do not require individual grading. At the same time, assess-
ments are designed to build up to the end of course test and therefore ensure that the material
taught and learned is feeding into the content being assessed at the end of the course. This
ensures greater alignment between the continuous assessments during the year and the end-
of-course test.




14	                                 Improving Education Performance in Math and Science in The Gambia
PART III.
Implementation of the PSI-PMI
Pilot program in The Gambia



The following provides an overview of the key aspects of the implementation
of the Program in The Gambia including the timeline, description of training activities, as well
as some of the challenges encountered.



Timeline
The IDF grant, which supported the PSI-PMI Pilot Program in The Gambia, was signed in
July 2012 and became effective immediately. The three-year program closed in July 2015. The
Pilot was implemented in 24 schools. Training was first provided to teachers in August and De-
cember of 20122 (training is provided over the course of the entire Pilot program during school
holidays and this aspect of the Pilot is described in greater detail below).

The Program was initially rolled out to a total of 12 upper basic schools (UBS) and senior sec-
ondary schools (SSS) in regions 1 and 23 beginning in January 2013. In these 12 schools (Cohort
1), the PSI-PMI approach was used to teach Algebra I and Algebra-Based Physics in January
2013 (halfway through the school year which spans September to June). This meant that stu-
dents had been studying for four months using the traditional curricula when the PSI-PMI
approach was introduced. Between the spring of 2013 and the fall of 2014, the PSI-PMI ap-
proach was rolled out to another 12 UBS and SSS in regions 3 through 64 for Algebra I and Alge-
bra-Based Physics (Cohort 2). The first cohort focused on Regions 1 and 2 because it was logis-
tically easier to start there. As the participating schools were close to teach other, the teachers
were able to communicate with each other and discuss the PSI-PMI courses and classroom
sessions. Figure 2 shows the timeline of main events during the implementation phase of the
program. Following this Pilot Program, the Government has supported teacher training for an-
other group of teachers (cohort 3) in the same 24 schools supported under this Pilot Program
using its own resources.


2
 It was decided, together with the MoBSE, that the initial teacher training would focus on Algebra I and Alge-
bra-Based Physics because teachers were teaching general science but their content knowledge on physics was low,
and this would be in line with the program’s approach.
3
    Regions 1 and 2 are those central areas near or in the country’s capital city, Banjul.
4
 Regions 3 through 6 are those areas that are farther from the capital, with the higher number indicating a greater
distance from the capital.



PART III: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PSI-PMI PILOT PROGRAM IN THE GAMBIA 	17
In January 2013, the teachers for Cohort 1 began teaching Algebra I and Algebra-Based Physics
to grades 9 and 10 students. In the 2013/2014 school year, students in grades 10 and 11 in these
Cohort 1 schools continued with these courses5 while new students in grades 9 and 10 began
learning Algebra and Algebra-Based Physics using the PSI-PMI approach. Since the delivery
of the SMART interactive projectors and Student Responders was delayed (only being provid-
ed to Cohort 2 schools in March 2014), the start of the program was delayed in some of these
schools. Some however, began the program using the student copies and a blackboard in the
Fall of 2013 – to avoid further delays. In the 2014/15 school year, teachers began also teaching
physics and math (Algebra I and Geometry) in September, 2014. The first group of students to
participate in the PSI-PMI program (beginning in January of 2013) sat for the WASSCE phys-
ics and math exams in June of 2015 (Annex Figure 6).

Under the original design, the Pilot Program was to be implemented in only 12 schools. How-
ever, cost savings were realized due to: (i) a reduction in the price of the equipment (e.g., IWBs
and Student Responders); and (ii) cohort 2 teachers were trained by the best performing teach-
ers from cohort 1, under the supervision of the NJCTL- implying lower training fees. As a
result of these savings, it was decided that the Pilot Program would be scaled up to 24 schools.
All teachers in the 24 schools were given the option of participating in the PSI-PMI program
and each participating teacher was given a per diem compensation during each of the trainings.

The NJCTL provided continuous support throughout the implementation of the Pilot Pro-
gram. At the very beginning of the Pilot Program in August 2012, NJCTL participated in: (1)
the launch of the program, (2) conducting pre-test of teachers, (3) discussing the traditional
Gambian curriculum and the NJCTL curriculum and assessment of students’ learning, and (4)
the training of teachers for 5 days including one day session to master the technology needed
for PSI-PMI to be successfully implemented. In terms of the curriculum and assessment, the
MoBSE, the WB and the NJCTL discussed and determined which courses the teacher train-
ings would cover. Further, additional topics which are not part of the PSI-PMI curriculum but
are covered in the GABECE, national examination at grade 9, were identified for inclusion in
the curriculum (additional details are discussed in the Challenges section). The support of the
NJCTL throughout the process was crucial in ensuring the approach was adequately imple-
mented at all stages of the Program.

Prior to the teacher training, the NJCTL reviewed the mathematics and science curricula used
in The Gambia and determined that they were similar to those used by PSI-PMI, with 90 per-
cent of The Gambian curriculum covered by the PSI-PMI program. Therefore, the adaptation
of the PSI-PMI program to The Gambia’s curricula was minimal.




Teacher Training
As described above, teacher training for Cohort 1 schools/teachers began in August 2012, only
one month after project effectiveness. Training for Cohort 2 schools/teachers began in August
2013. Cohort 1 training continued even after Cohort 2 training started. Throughout the project,


5
 In The Gambia, Grade 9 and 10 students complete Algebra I in a little less than two years and then move on to
geometry, as opposed to the US, where students learn the same subjects in one year. This is due to the difference in
contact hours between the two systems. In The Gambia, the contact hours is about 60 percent of that in the US, so
it takes longer to complete each course.



18	                                         Improving Education Performance in Math and Science in The Gambia
the NJCTL provided important support to training activities – travelling to The Gambia seven
times in August 2012, December 2012, April 2013, August 2013, April 2014 and in December
2014 (though this mission focused primarily on planning). The following provides detailed
information on training provided to each cohort across the life of the Pilot Program.



Cohort 1
Five teacher trainings were held for the first cohort during school holidays. Training was held
for two weeks in August 2012, one week December 2012, 5 days in April 2013, 10 days in Au-
gust 2013 and 5 days April 2014. Forty-six teachers participated in the August 2012 training
(about 50 percent in each subject). The number of teachers who attended the trainings varied
slightly each time, however, most of the teachers remained in the training for the whole period
(from the August 2012 training to the April 2014 training). The first year of trainings focused
on Algebra I and Algebra-Based Physics. Since these courses are taught at the same time using
the PSI-PMI approach, it is useful to teach teachers in both subjects at the same time. In the
second year, this cohort completed training in Geometry and started Advanced Physics.



Cohort 2
Due to funding constraints, it was not feasible for NJCTL to train Cohort 2 teachers entirely.
However, NJCTL trained teachers such that best performing teachers could become teach-
er-trainers for subsequent cohorts. As such, a ‘train-the-trainer’ model was implemented,
where two of the best math and two of the best science teachers were selected from Cohort
1 to train Cohort 2. The NJCTL trainers supervised the training sessions conducted by these
teachers. This helped build sustainability for the project as the country created ownership
of the project, and eventually be able to train teachers without external support. The only
drawback was that these four teachers could not attend the Cohort 1 training, which was
still ongoing by the NJCTL staff when the Cohort 2 training started. Cohort 2 teachers are
from remote regions, i.e. Regions 3 through 6 so their content knowledge and computer skills
were lower than that of Cohort 1 teachers and they learned about 80 percent of what Cohort
1 teachers learned.



Cohort 3
In 2016, the MoBSE supported a third cohort of teachers in the 24 schools which were target-
ed by this Pilot – without support from the WB or NJCTL. Training was provided to cohort
3 teachers after the project closed. So far, one week of training has been held (during Easter
holiday in 2016) in which 91 teachers were trained (38 math teachers and 53 science teach-
ers in the same 24 schools). This training was conducted by the same four teachers who had
taught Cohort 2 teachers.




PART III: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PSI-PMI PILOT PROGRAM IN THE GAMBIA 	19
Detailed Information on Teacher Trainings Activities
The following provides details of each teacher training undertaken throughout the implemen-
tation of the Pilot Program and a diagram describing the training is also provided below (Fig-
ure 2). The cohort 1 training was provided by NJCTL while the cohort 2 training was provided
by the best performing teachers trained in Cohort 1 (and supervised by NJCTL). Attendance
was monitored by the MoBSE. Training was held either at a regional training site and/or at the
schools themselves.

      August 2012 training: At the start of the training, teachers took a pre-test to
      gauge their academic ability in the subject they were teaching (math or science).
      These pre-tests were the Algebra I final exam and the Algebra-Based Physics final
      exam which are given to grade 9 students when they have completed the course. The
      results on these pre-tests were much lower than expected. The average scores on the
      Algebra test was 50 percent and on the Algebra-Based Physics test was 28 percent
      respectively. Follow-up discussions held by NJCTL with the teachers after the test,
      confirmed the teachers’ limited subject knowledge, so the NJCTL decided to focus
      on identified areas of weakness during the training.

      December 2012 training: This was the last training prior to the start of the pro-
      gram in January 2013. The majority of teachers which participated in the August 2012
      training, participated in this training (18 in Algebra-Based Physics and 17 in Algebra
      I). The tests were undertaken again after the December 2012 training. A notable in-
      crease in the average scores in Algebra I and Algebra-Based Physics were observed
      – increasing to 93 percent in Algebra I and 90 percent in Algebra-Based Physics.

      April 2013 training: Of the 18 teachers trained for the Physics course in De-
      cember 2012, four of them did not continue in the April 2013 training. However, they
      were replaced by two teachers so a total of 16 teachers participated in the Physics
      training during this session. Of the 17 Algebra I teachers who participated in Decem-
      ber 2012 training, only one did not join the April 2013 training. An additional teacher
      participated – maintaining a total of 17 teachers in Algebra I training. During this
      training, the Cohort 1 Algebra-Based physics teachers were trained in the first half
      of the Algebra-Based Physics course (covering the mechanics portion of the course)
      and tested on this. In the training which followed in August, they were given a mid-
      term assessment. Analysis of results found a strong correlation between the average
      grade in the Mechanics portion of the course and the average grade on the midterm
      assessment in August.

      August 2013 training: Cohort 1 continued training in Algebra-Based Physics
      focusing on the Electricity and Magnetism sections of the course. At the end of the
      August 2013 training, Cohort 1 teachers took the test on Electricity and Magnetism
      and the mean score was 90 percent. The training for cohort 2 started at this time,
      with training in Algebra I and Algebra-Based Physics. Twelve physics teachers and
      14 math teachers participated in this training. NJCTL, on the basis of teachers’ per-
      formance in training and exams, identified four teachers to be teacher-trainers for
      cohort 2. At this training, cohort 2 teachers had the opportunity to practice the PSI-
      PMI approach using the IWBs and student response system - although the power
      supply at the training center was not reliable and electricity was only available for
      part of the training. They also had the opportunity to learn course content. Assess-



20	                                   Improving Education Performance in Math and Science in The Gambia
                         Figure 2: Timeline of Project Implementation


                                                        July 2015: Pilot Project closed
                                                        Pilot project closed. After review of 2 evaluation reports
                                                        on preliminary impact of program, government engaged
 December 2014: Follow-up mission                       in discussions on the expansion of the project.

NJCTL met with the government to discuss the
2014/2015 data collection and the 2015/2016 school      April 2014: Teacher training (5)
plan. Cohort 1 teachers were administered a post-test
assessment. Results were substantially higher.          5 day training conducted- Cohort 1 completed
                                                        Algrebra-based Physics training and Cohort began
                                                        Geometry
 January 2014: Program roll-out cont.
All Cohort 2 students begin PSI-PMI instruction.
Unfortunately SMART technology was not made
available until March 2014 for cohort 2.
                                                        December 2013: NJCTL 4th mission
                                                        NJCTL met with the government to discuss and plan
                                                        expansion of the train-the-trainer model. This was a key
                                                        cost-saving strategy which also enabled greater owner-
 September 2013: Roll-out continued                     ship of the program and ensure continuity

Students from cohort 1 schools/classes continue
instruction using PSI/PMI. Students from grades 8 and
10 in those schools begin learning PSI-PMI. Only one
school from cohort 2 began instruction.
                                                        August 2013: Teacher training (4)
                                                        Cohort 1 teachers receive 10 additional days of training.
                                                        In addition, 29 teachers from Cohort 2 from regions 3-6
                                                        begin PSI-PMI training. They were trained by Cohort 1
 April 2013: Teacher training (3)                       teachers under NJCTL supervision.

Students from cohort 1 schools/classes continue
instruction using PSI/PMI. Students from grades 8 and
10 in those schools begin learning PSI-PMI. Only one
school from cohort 2 began instruction.
                                                        January 2013: First cohort of students
                                                        12 UBS and SSS in Regions 1 and 2 started teaching
                                                        Algebra I and Physics to grades 9 and 11 students using
                                                        the PSI-PMI model in January 2013, halfway through
 December 2012: Teacher Training (2)                    the school year which spans Sept to June.
Same 24 teachers from the 12 UBS and SSS schools in
cohort 1 from regions 1 and 2 received an additional
week long training in Algebra and Algebra-based
Physics. Training was delayed due to delayed procure-
ment and installation of SMART technology.              August 2012: Teacher training (1)
                                                        Teachers from cohort 1 were pre-tested to assess their
                                                        baseline knowledge content in Algebra I for math
                                                        teachers and Algebra based Physics for science teach-
 July 2012: IDF is signed                               ers. Overall performance on the pre-test was low.
                                                        Two-week training for 24 teachers was conducted.
After consultations with the government and the
NJCTL, the IDF grant was signed.




Source: Author’s presentation




PART III: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PSI-PMI PILOT PROGRAM IN THE GAMBIA 	21
      ment of teachers participating in the training (cohort 2) found that the four Gambian
      trainers were effective in teaching physics and math content to the new group of
      teachers.

      December 2013: This mission was largely devoted to organizing the trainings for
      the spring and summer of 2014 training, as well as to discuss potential scale up of the
      program using the effective Train-the-Trainer model.

      April 2014 training: The four selected Gambian trainers from Cohort 1 returned
      again to teach the Cohort 2 teachers. During this training, teachers had more oppor-
      tunity to practice using the interactive technology and adopting the pedagogy, tak-
      ing turns “micro-teaching” portions of the material. Cohort 1 Algebra-Based Physics
      teachers returned to complete the Algebra-Based Physics course training and took
      the final exam and Cohort 1 teachers were also trained in Geometry. At this time, co-
      hort 1 teachers were awarded certificates of completion. The mean scores of Cohort 1
      teachers’ exams in Geometry and Physics (Waves and Lights) were 93 percent and 94
      percent, respectively. Cohort 2 teachers were trained in Algebra I and Algebra-Based
      Physics. Cohort 2 teachers’ took tests at the end of this training (covering what had
      been taught during this month’s training) and the mean scores on the exams for Alge-
      bra I and Algebra-Based Physics were 83 and 86 percent, respectively.

      December 2014: During this planning-focused mission, NJCTL and MoBSE staff
      discussed data collection for the 2014-2015 school-year and plan scheduling and pac-
      ing for the 2015-2016 school-year. A post-test was also administered for Cohort 1 Al-
      gebra I and Algebra-Based Physics teachers.




Technology, Equipment and Facilities
The technology for the training site for the first cohort was installed just before the training
course began. For cohort 2, technology was installed in 9 of the 12 schools over the course
of the training whereas 3 schools required further improvements prior to installation of the
technology. Moreover, in a number of the schools (cohorts 1 and 2), minor rehabilitations were
required to reinforce the security of the classrooms so that the equipment would be secure and
protected from dust. Delays in the reinforcement of security (e.g., protected windows) resulted
in delays of the delivery of the equipment to schools.

Although small round tables (around five feet in diameter) without legs around the perimeter
would have been ideal for students to flexibly move around the table to work in groups, pro-
curing such tables proved difficult and so classrooms used those tables that were available to
them. In some instances, students’ desks would be placed together so that students could face
each other. Others used rectangular tables that were available in the schools. Most schools in
the Pilot Program (like most schools in The Gambia) had a very limited, if any, connection to
the internet. However, this limitation was addressed through the use of flash drives which
could be used to install the PSI-PMI modules. Further, only an initial internet connection is
needed to install the SMART Notebook software.
 




22	                                   Improving Education Performance in Math and Science in The Gambia
Challenges in Implementation
Some of the challenges identified in the implementation of the Pilot Program include
the following:

    Differences in The Gambia’s math and science curriculum and the PSI-PMI
    curriculum and ensuring that the curriculum responds to The Gambia context.
      •	   Alignment of the PSI-PMI curriculum with the GABECE. All grade 9 students in
           The Gambia take the GABECE. This is a very important exam because admission to
           SSS is based on passing the core subjects - English, Mathematics, Science, and Social
           and Environmental Studies. There were discussions for students in UBS who are
           studying PSI-PMI courses because the GABECE is based on the regular math and
           science curriculum and PSI-PMI curriculum is slightly different. In consultation
           with the West African Examinations Council (WAEC), which administers the GA-
           BECE, it was decided that an alternate version of the GABECE was to be provided
           to PSI-PMI participating students so that they would not face any disadvantage.
           Thirty out of 40 questions in the assessment was drawn from the standard GABECE
           for science and math and the remaining 10 PMI midterm for Algebra I.
      •	   Alignment of the PSI-PMI curriculum with the content coverage in the school leav-
           ing examination, WASSCE. The NJCTL examined the coverage of the WASSCE to
           determine if the PSI-PMI curriculum covered all the modules. They determined
           that PSI-PMI covers about 90 percent of it, but alerted the MoBSE on a few areas in
           WASSCE that are not in PSI-PMI so that the teachers can teach these areas to the
           PSI-PMI participating students in order to ensure they are adequately prepared for
           the WASSCE. Currently, under the Results for Education Achievement and Devel-
           opment (READ) project, financed by the WB and Global Partnership for Education
           (GPE), the NJCTL has been developing the modules of these areas not covered by
           the PSI-PMI model.

     The Pilot Program focused on in-service training support. Given the importance of
     pre-service training in overall teacher effectiveness, the PSI-PMI approach should be
     integrated into pre-service training activities to promote sustainability and enhanced
     efficiency of the program. The training activities supported under this Pilot Program
     were limited to in-service training. The READ project has provided Technical Assis-
     tance (TA) to: (i) review the existing Primary Teachers Certificate (PTC) and Higher
     Teachers Certificate (HTC) programs6 in the Gambia College (GC), and (ii) redesign the
     programs to focus more strongly on relevant subject content knowledge, pedagogical
     skills and relevant use of ICT. The NJCTL together with the consulting firm which has
     been providing TA have collaborated to include the PSI-PMI in both the PTC and HTC
     programs so that teacher trainees learn the PSI-PMI approach while they are attending
     pre-service training at the GC.

     Differences in teaching hours in the US and The Gambia required a longer period
     for covering each subject in The Gambian context. As the modules were originally
     developed by NJCTL for use in the U.S., its implementation did not match the Gambian
     context which has a much lower number of contact hours. Contact hours for science and
     for math range between 120 and 160 minutes (180 minutes maximum) per week in The

6
 PTC and HTC are required to teach at Lower Basic Schools (LBS) and UBS respectively. They are pre-service
programs at the Gambia College.



PART III: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PSI-PMI PILOT PROGRAM IN THE GAMBIA 	23
      Gambia while New Jersey contact hours for math and physics are 200 minutes and 220
      minutes per week respectively based on the US school curriculum. Therefore, PSI-PMI
      in The Gambia was able to cover about 60 to 70 percent of each course in a full year since
      these courses were designed by the NJCTL to be taught in 180 days with classes meeting
      for 200-220 minutes per week. Therefore, it takes longer to finish each course in The
      Gambia. In order to fully implement the PSI-PMI curriculum in the selected schools, the
      course was extended beyond one school year into the next. Moving forward, it has been
      suggested that these courses begin in an earlier grade (e.g. grade 7 instead of grade 9).

      Lack of stable electricity: All 24 schools were connected to the grid, however, access to
      electricity was not stable during the implementation of the Pilot Program (in either the
      training or classes). Therefore, teachers and students were required to use hard copies
      when there was no electricity in the classroom – making it impossible at certain times
      to use the student responder technology and IWBs, which are essential to the PSI-PMI
      approach. The READ project will provide all 24 schools with solar panels to help address
      this issue.

      Lack of technology and adequate facilities: For each class, the following technology and
      facilities were needed - electricity, a laptop, an interactive projector, Students Responders
      (one for each student). Since the available budget could not cover the cost of a full set of
      equipment for each school, it was necessary to determine the minimal quantity of each
      type of equipment that was needed in each school, and which items could be centrally
      located to be shared by the 12 schools. NJCTL advised on how to procure the necessary
      equipment within the available budget by providing model numbers and suggesting to buy
      directly through each specified supplier.




24	                                   Improving Education Performance in Math and Science in The Gambia
PART III: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PSI-PMI PILOT PROGRAM IN THE GAMBIA 	25
PART IV.
PSI-PMI effect on education
performance in The Gambia



The implementation of the Pilot Program in The Gambia was considered suc-
cessful and the results in terms of student learning outcomes have been very encouraging. An
independent consulting firm was hired to measure the effects of the adapted PSI-PMI Pilot
Program on student learning in The Gambia, using both quantitative and qualitative informa-
tion. They undertook two evaluations of the Pilot Program – the first was carried out in 2013,
about one year after the PSI-PMI approach was introduced for grades 9 and 10 students, and
the second was undertaken in 2015 on grade 12 students7. The first assessment looked at per-
formance of grade 9 students on the national examination as well as the progress of SSS stu-
dents based on the PSI-PMI tests (NJCTL administered exams; using both pre-test and post-
test results). The second assessment in 2015, assessed the performance of grade 12 students on
the international examination, WASSCE.

The aim of these assessments was to look at the successful aspects of the program, and to de-
termine, based on the findings, whether the program could be effectively expanded to more
schools. These assessments also aimed to explore some of the issues faced during implemen-
tation and draw lessons learned from them that would be useful in any potential future ex-
pansion of the program. Background information on the evaluations and the main findings of
these assessments and findings (also included in two separate reports) are presented below.

It should be noted that these evaluations are considered to show conservative and prelimi-
nary estimations of the effect of the PSI-PMI program primarily due to the fact that (i) the
grade 9 students and SSS students evaluated in 2013 had only been exposed to PSI-PMI for
half a year, due to delays in the start of the program, and (ii) the cohort of students that sat for
the WASSCE (grade 12 examination) in 2015 were the same grade 10 students who received
half a year of PSI-PMI instruction in 2013. As the program continues to be implemented in
the 24 schools participating in the Pilot Program in The Gambia, it is expected that the effects
will be much stronger and more robust. The students who took the WASSCE in 2016 are the
first students to take the WASSCE having received more than one year of exposure to the pro-
gram. The 2016 WASSCE results, not yet available, are expected to show improved learning
outcomes in math and science. These two evaluations were essential monitoring and evalu-
ation instruments for both the MoBSE and NJCTL to help support effective implementation
of the PSI-PMI approach.

7
    Reports can be made available upon request



PART III: PSI-PMI EFFECT ON EDUCATION PERFORMANCE IN THE GAMBIA 	27
Effect on Upper Basic Students (Grade 9)
The effect of the PSI-PMI program on grade 9 students was assessed during the first program
evaluation in 2013. An analysis compared test score performance of students participating in
PSI-PMI to students not participating in PSI-PMI from the same schools on the GABECE
(grade 9 examination which comprises four core components - English, Mathematics, Sci-
ence and Social Studies). The exam was held in June 2013. The sample of students was taken
from three UBS and included 177 student participants from the PSI-PMI program and over
1,330 students not participating in the PSI-PMI program from the same three schools8.

Some of the key findings of this evaluation, included: (i) students participating in PMI outper-
formed non-PMI students in the same school by an average of 27 percentage points in Mathe-
matics. The mean score of students participating in the PMI was 52.1 percent in Mathematics
on the GABECE compared to an average of 25.1 percent among students not participating in
PMI; and (ii) students participating in PSI outperformed students within the same schools
who did not receive PSI instruction by an average of 12.4 percentage points in Science (Figure
3).


            Figure 3: Summary of effect of PSI-PMI on Grade 9, Science

                                           N                         MEAN                          SE

  TREATMENT

  Greater Banjul
                                          39                         0.306                       0.016
  Upper Basic School
  St. Therese's
                                          52                          0.342                      0.017
  Upper Basic School

  22nd July Academy                       86                          0.381                      0.015

  Overall                                 177                         0.353                      0.027

  CONTROL

  Greater Banjul
                                          355                         0.158                      0.004
  Upper Basic School
  St. Therese's
                                         668                          0.251                      0.006
  Upper Basic School

  22nd July Academy                       312                         0.222                      0.007

  Overall                                1,335                        0.219                      0.009

  DIFFERENCE

  Greater Banjul
                                          394                       0.148***                     0.016
  Upper Basic School
  St. Therese's
                                          720                       0.091***                     0.018
  Upper Basic School

  22nd July Academy                       398                       0.159***                     0.016

  Overall                                1,512                      0.124***                     0.029


8
  The three schools included: Greater Banjul Upper Basic School, St. Therese's Upper Basic School and 22 July
Academy



28	                                        Improving Education Performance in Math and Science in The Gambia
       Figure 3: Summary of effect of PSI-PMI on Grade 9, Mathematics

                                     N                 MEAN                     SE

 TREATMENT

 Greater Banjul
                                     39                0.394                   0.028
 Upper Basic School
 St. Therese's
                                     52                0.519                   0.025
 Upper Basic School

 22nd July Academy                  86                 0.581                   0.023

 Overall                            177                0.521                   0.043

 CONTROL

 Greater Banjul
                                    354                0.155                   0.004
 Upper Basic School
 St. Therese's
                                    668                0.304                   0.008
 Upper Basic School

 22nd July Academy                  315                0.247                   0.010

 Overall                           1,337               0.251                   0.012

 DIFFERENCE

 Greater Banjul
                                    393               0.238***                 0.029
 Upper Basic School
 St. Therese's
                                    720               0.215***                 0.027
 Upper Basic School

 22nd July Academy                  401               0.333***                 0.025

 Overall                           1,514              0.270***                 0.046

Source: Hanover, 2013



Effect on Senior Secondary Students
The impact of the program on the performance of the first SSS cohort in 2013 was measured
by (i) the evolution of the pre-test and post-test results on the PSI-PMI tests (NJCTL ad-
ministered exams) for PSI-PMI students, and (ii) comparing the performance of PSI-PMI
students and non-PSI-PMI students on these PSI-PMI tests.

Findings from the assessment on the impact of the PSI-PMI program on senior secondary
students found that: (i) PMI students showed an average of 11.3 percentage point increase
between the pre-test and post-test results on the PMI assessment, increasing from an average
of 37.1 to 48.4 percent. The improvement varied across schools and also across the course
units tested. Unsurprisingly, schools which covered more material and units, were inclined to
perform better. The test results from the first unit content showed the greatest improvement
across all schools, reflecting the fact that all students were exposed to this material; and (ii)
PMI students also performed better than non-PMI students on the PMI test by an average of
8.8 percentage points. In addition, (iii) PSI students showed an average of 21 percentage point
increase between the pre-test and post-test results on the PSI assessment, increasing from an


PART III: PSI-PMI EFFECT ON EDUCATION PERFORMANCE IN THE GAMBIA 	29
average of 21.8 to 42.8 percent. Increases were recorded in all 6 science subjects (Kinematics,
Dynamics, Uniform Circular Motion, Gravitation, Energy, and Momentum) although some
variation is noted across schools (see Figure 4).


            Figure 4: Summary of effect of PSI-PMI on SSS, Science by topic

                           NO. OF OBS.                 PRETEST                     POSTTEST        DIFFERENCE

  Kinematics                    258                      0.312                      0.530           0.219***

  Dynamics                      258                      0.259                      0.476           0.217***

  UCM                           258                      0.257                      0.498           0.240***

  Gravitation                   258                       0.141                     0.479           0.338***

  Energy                        258                      0.163                      0.343           0.180***

  Momentum                      258                      0.183                       0.271          0.088***

  PSI Score                     258                      0.218                      0.428           0.210***


  Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. The number of observations in the
  pretest and posttest is 129. Statistical significance computed using a t-test.




                            Longitudinal Student Learning Growth –
                            PMI Students, by School in Mathematics
                           NO. OF OBS.                 PRETEST                     POSTTEST        DIFFERENCE

  22nd July
                                38                       0.323                      0.446           0.124***
  Academy

  Gambia SSS                     6                       0.261                      0.464           0.203***

  Kotu SSS                      38                       0.382                      0.542           0.160***

  Muslim SSS                    30                       0.246                      0.328           0.081***

  Nusrat SSS                    62                       0.456                      0.575           0.119***

  Sifoe SSS                     26                       0.358                       0.391           0.033

  St. Joseph SSS                 14                      0.435                      0.534           0.099**

  Overall                       214                      0.371                      0.484           0.113***

  Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. The number of observations in the pretest and posttest
  is symmetric across all schools and overall. Statistical significance computed using a t-test.
  Numbers representing the pretest, posttest, and difference are in percentages

Source: Hanover, 2013




30	                                            Improving Education Performance in Math and Science in The Gambia
In the second evaluation in 2015, the assessment focused on the performance of grade 12 stu-
dents on the WASSCE – an international exam taken at the end of the senior secondary cy-
cle. The examination comprises several subjects although there are five core areas which all
students must take in addition to three or four electives. The core subjects include: English
Language, Mathematics, one science subject (Science, Chemistry, Physics or Biology), one of
either English Literature, Geography or History, and either Agricultural Science or Vocation-
al/Technical subjects. It is important to note that the assessment for this cohort is expected to
yield relatively weaker results than could normally be expected since the PSI-PMI students
from Cohort 1 who took the WASSCE in 2015 (Figure 6) were exposed to the program for only
half a year at most. As such, the PSI-PMI program is expected to have stronger results on the
Physics and Mathematics components (primary subjects), than on the Chemistry, Math and
Science components (primary residual subjects). No impact would be expected on other sub-
jects. Nonetheless, the analysis shows those students participating in PSI-PMI still performed
better than their peers who did not participated in the PSI-PMI program. The analysis is based
on data on WASSCE results from 74 schools over four years, where 16 of the schools participat-
ed in the PSI-PMI program (8 in 2012/2013 (Cohort 1) and 8 in 2013/2014 (Cohort 2)).

Some of the key findings of this assessment included: (i) PSI-PMI students showed consid-
erable gains on the Physics exam, with 6 percent of students obtaining the highest score (a
credit of 1) in 2015 as opposed to 1 percent in 2012. The gains in the control group were much
lower, increasing from 1 percent to 2 percent. (ii) the number of WASSCE takers to have ob-
tained a credit of 1 (highest score) in Further Mathematics, increased from 4 percent to 12
percent for Cohort 1 schools and from 0 to 10 percent for Cohort 2 schools. The percentage of
those from the control group who obtained a credit of 1 in Further Mathematics increased by
only 1 percentage point over the same period from 6 to 7 percent (see Figure 5). Additionally,
(iii) performance on primary residual subjects also showed some strong results, especially
for Cohort 1 students. For example, the percentage of students obtaining the highest score in
Chemistry increased from 2 percent to 6 percent among Cohort 1 schools, from 1 to 2 percent
among Cohort 2 schools and decreased in the non-PSI-PMI group.

The full effect of the program on grade 12 students is expected to be captured in 2016 when
the WASSCE takers would have been exposed for at least a full year. Upcoming results are
expected to be even stronger than those reported in 2015.


                       Figure 5: Summary of effect of PSI-PMI
                   program on WASSCE Physics and Mathematics

                              PHYSICS 512                      FURTHER MATHEMATICS 401

                  COHORT 1     COHORT 2     CONTROL       COHORT 1      COHORT 2      CONTROL

 2012                   2%        1%            4%           16%           50%          19%
 2013                   0%        0%            1%            3%           25%           4%
 2014                   7%        5%            3%            9%            --           2%
 2015                   11%       15%           5%           24%           30%          17%
 All Years              5%        5%            3%           13%           35%          11%
 Total N            1,376         331         1,552          531            16          391

Source: Hanover, 2015




PART III: PSI-PMI EFFECT ON EDUCATION PERFORMANCE IN THE GAMBIA 	31
Student and Teacher Perceptions of the Program reported
in the 2013 Evaluation
The perceived effectiveness of the PSI-PMI program among students and teachers is also a
key metric of program success, as it captures, among other things, increased motivation and
interest in the course material. To that end, a survey was conducted among Cohort 1 students
and Cohort 1 and 2 teachers in PSI-PMI schools during the spring in 2014 to capture quali-
tative data related to the perceived effectiveness of the Pilot Program. Overall, both student
and teacher feedback were very positive and indicate successful implementation, although
there remains some room for improvement.

Some of the key findings of the qualitative analysis include the following observations:
      •	 Students enjoyed the new classroom dynamics - over 92 percent indicated that
         they enjoyed working with their peers in solving math and science problems, 94
         percent felt that it had improved their learning and 92 percent reported feeling
         comfortable learning from mistakes in class. In addition, 83 percent indicated that
         the student responders helped them in their learning, further supporting the need
         for embedded formative assessments in the class, and 82 percent thought this new
         way of teaching and learning was better than the previous methods. Eighty-two per-
         cent thought the IWB was helpful. The students also felt that they had learned more
         physics and mathematics and that they were more interested in pursuing sciences as
         a result of the program;
      •	 Teachers’ responses indicated that they were comfortable in using the program
         and adapting their teaching methods accordingly. Among Cohort 1 teachers for ex-
         ample, 100 percent recognized that students enjoyed learning in social groups and 94
         percent believed that the program will lead to higher levels of students’ achievement,
         and 87 percent of teachers believe that students learn more mathematics and science
         using the PSI-PMI curriculum. At the same time, 82 percent preferred teaching using
         the PSI-PMI curriculum. Ninety-three percent felt they had received enough training
         and 73 felt they had the necessary equipment to successfully implement the program.
         Eighty-eight percent felt that the curriculum was not too difficult for their students;
      •	 Although there were some variations in the frequency of adoption of PSI-PMI
         teaching methods, almost all teachers reported adopting all teaching techniques.
         Among Cohort 1 teachers for example, all teachers encouraged the students to talk to
         each other and solve problems in groups at least some of the time (69 percent did so
         all of the time, 15 percent most of the time and 15 percent some of the time), and all
         teachers seated their students in collaborative learning groups (46 percent did so all
         the time). Ninety-two percent used embedded formative assessments and the SMART
         notebook presentations at least some of the time. All teachers made use, to some ex-
         tent or another, of the results from the formative assessments in class to decide on
         whether to review, reteach the topics or to move on to the next topic or lesson. The
         only teaching method not as widely adopted was the use of the grading correlation
         table to report student grades, with only 58 percent of teachers using this method at
         least some of the time.
      •	 Cohort 2 teachers answered less positively in the survey. This could be driven in
         some degree by the fact that Cohort 2 teachers, as noted earlier, were from regions 3-6
         while Cohort 1 teachers were from regions 1 and 2, with perhaps less familiarity and
         exposure to the technology used. It could also be partly due to the fact that training
         of Cohort 2 teachers was done by the Ministry of Basic and Secondary Education, re-


32	                                   Improving Education Performance in Math and Science in The Gambia
    lying on some of Cohort 1 teachers. It also has to be noted that Cohort 2 teachers had
    not yet begun PSI-PMI instruction at the time of the survey. While this reinforces the
    sustainability of the program, it also implies that the first iterations will be subject to
    some shortcomings that can and will be improved upon with time.

 




PART III: PSI-PMI EFFECT ON EDUCATION PERFORMANCE IN THE GAMBIA 	33
PART V.
Going forward: Next steps following
completion of the Pilot Program	




The following provides an overview of cost of the Pilot Program and an
overview of training still needed.

The total amount of the IDF grant was US$491,860. Of this amount, the contract with NJCTL
was US$273,780, of which the cost of training amounted to US$157,500 and travel fees were
US$116,280. This covered 5 training sessions in math and physics (face-to-face). For the first
cohort (12 classrooms), 12 interactive projectors and 32 SMART Responders per classroom
cost Euros 98,000. For the second cohort, SMART Technologies have agreed to a standard
price set far below the first contract for the same quantity and products. The price of 12 in-
teractive projectors and 32 student responders per classrooms was US$33,720 or US $40,548
including freight and taxes. The remaining budget of approximately US$40,000 was used to
reinforce the security of 24 classrooms and also to purchase computers.



Remaining Trainings
The pilot program could not provide trainings for all the PSI-PMI courses (for UBS and SSS)
due to limited funding. The training provided by NJCTL ended when the project funds were
fully disbursed in April 2014. The list of remaining courses and length of time required (in
order to fully train teachers who participated in the Pilot Program) is provided below.



PART IV: GOING FORWARD: NEXT STEPS FOLLOWING COMPLETION OF THE PILOT PROGRAM 	35
 Courses and length of training remaining for teachers in the pilot program

                       COURSES                        ESTIMATED LENGTH OF TRAINING BY NJCTL

  Advanced Physics                                                      3 weeks

  Chemistry                                                             4 weeks

  Biology and Advanced Biology                                          4 weeks

  Algebra II                                                            2 weeks

  Trigonometry                                                          4 weeks

  Calculus                                                              4 weeks


The READ project has reallocated about US$200,000 to fund at least half of the remaining
courses. This includes funding of training of these teachers in Physics, Chemistry, Biology,
Algebra II, Trigonometry, Pre-calculus and Calculus for SSS level.



Expansion and Scale up of the PSI-PMI Approach
The MoBSE has decided to expand the PSI-PMI program to all 150 public upper basic and
senior secondary schools in the country. The ministry has been exploring financial resourc-
es to do that and it may be possible that they will receive financial support from the Islamic
Development Bank (IDB), who has been discussing this plan with the MoBSE. Regarding the
sustainability, trained teachers are expected to teach other teachers which has already been
happening in Cohort 2 and 3. Once Cohort 1 teachers participate in training of all the courses,
it will be sustainable as the MoBSE will be able to train teachers in their own system.

In The Gambia, grades 7 and 8 have not started the PSI-PMI program and teachers have not
been trained. However this option may be explored in the future after the expansion of the
program in grades 9-12. For grades 7 and 8, middle school science- basic science foundation
and math (pre- algebra and geometry) will be taught. Starting the program even earlier in
upper basic level would help reinforce the students’ readiness in later classes and is expected
to help further strengthen the learning outcomes.

It would cost approximately US$6 million to expand the PSI-PMI program to all 150 public
UBS and SSS in the country (Table 2). For training on Science, the training would include a to-
tal of 700 teachers, consisting of 200 UBS Physics, 200 UBS Advanced Science, 100 SSS Phys-
ics, 25 SSS Advanced Physics, 75 SSS Chemistry, 25 SSS Advanced Chemistry, 50 SSS Biology,
and 25 SSS Advanced Biology teachers. For training on Mathematics, it would include a total
of 650 teachers, consisting of 200 UBS general mathematics, 200 UBS Algebra I Geometry I,
100 SSS Algebra I & Geometry I, 75 SSS Geometry II & Algebra II, 50 SSS Trigonometry &
Pre-calculus, and 25 SSS Calculus teachers. The equipment and supplies would include 600
interactive projectors, 600 student polling device, 270,000 copies of materials for students,
150 science equipment and 600 laptops for teachers.




36	                                 Improving Education Performance in Math and Science in The Gambia
                  Table 2: Cost of training, equipment, and supplies
                         to expand the program nationwide.

                           ITEM                             PSI-PMI

 Local Training                                         $      527,730

 NJCTL Cost of Training                                 $     1,254,480

 Interactive Projectors                                 $     1,380,000

 Student Polling Devices                                $      720,000

 Student Copies                                         $      912,162

 Science Equipment                                      $      652,500

 Teacher Laptop                                         $      480,000

 Local Monitoring & Supervision                         $       60,000

 NJCTL Monitoring & Supervision                         $       98,120

 Total                                                  $    6,084,992




PART III: PSI-PMI EFFECT ON EDUCATION PERFORMANCE IN THE GAMBIA 	37
Annex
                  Figure 6: Implementation timeline for Cohort 1 and 2

          TIMELINE                       COHORT 1                               COHORT 2

                          WASSCE administered. Students            WASSCE administered. Students
  Spring 2012             in this Cohort have not received         in this Cohort have not received
                          any PMI/PSI instruction.                 any PMI/PSI instruction.

                          Two-week training for 24 9th
  August 2012
                          and 10th grade teachers

                          Week-long training with 24 9th
  December 2012
                          and 10th grade teachers

  February 2013           Partial PMI/PSI instruction begins
                          PMI/PSI instruction continues (and
  Spring 2013             roll-out continues at more schools as
                          additional schools receive technology)

                          WASSCE administered. Students who        WASSCE administered. Students
                          take the WASSCE would have been in       in this Cohort have not received
  Spring 2013             12th grade when PMI/PSI instruction      any PMI/PSI instruction.
                          began, and are thus not direct
                          beneficiaries of PMI/PSI instruction.

                          Teachers complete 10 additional          29 9th and 10th grade teachers
  Summer 2013
                          days of PMI/PSI training                 begin PSI/PMI training

                          Students return to school and            One school—St. Peters—begins
  September 2013
                          continue PMI/PSI instruction             instruction with PMI/PSI

                          Students take benchmark exams            Students take baseline
  November 2013
                                                                   benchmark exams
                                                                   All Cohort 2 students begin
  January/February 2014
                                                                   receiving PMI/PSI instruction

                          WASSCE administered. Students who        WASSCE administered. Students
                          take the WASSCE would have been in       who take the WASSCE would
                          11th grade when PMI/PSI instruction      have been in 12th grade when
  Spring 2014
                          began, and are thus not direct           PMI/PSI instruction began, and
                          beneficiaries of PMI/PSI instruction.    are thus not direct beneficiaries
                                                                   of PMI/PSI instruction.
                          9th and 10th grade teachers complete     9th and 10th grade teachers
  August 2014
                          additional PMI/PSI training.             complete additional PMI/PSI training.

                          Students return to school and            Students return to school and
  Fall 2014
                          continue PMI/PSI instruction             continue PMI/PSI instruction

  November 2014           Students take benchmark exams            Students take benchmark exams

                          WASSCE administered. Students who        WASSCE administered. Students
                          take the WASSCE would have been in       who take the WASSCE would
                          10th grade when PMI/PSI instruction      have been in 11th grade when
  Spring 2015
                          began, and have received approximately   PMI/PSI instruction began, and
                          half a year of PMI/PSI instruction.      are thus not direct beneficiaries
                                                                   of PMI/PSI instruction.

Source: Hanover, 2015



38	                                   Improving Education Performance in Math and Science in The Gambia
Table 3: Schools that have been implementing the PSI-PMI in The Gambia
         REGIONS           SCHOOL NAME                 TYPE OF SCHOOL
            1              Charlesjaw (July 22nd)      UBS/SSS
            1              Gambia                      SSS
            1              Greater Banjul              UBS
            1              Kanifing East               UBS
            1              Kotu                        SSS
            1              Latrikunda -LK              UBS
            1              Muslim                      SSS
            1              Nusrat                      SSS
            1              Saint Joseph's              SSS
            1              St Theresa's                UBS
            2              Mayork                      UBS/SSS
            2              Sifoe                       UBS/SSS
            2              St. Peter's                 UBS/SSS
            2              St Edwards                  UBS
            3              Essau                       SSS
            3              Njaba Kunda                 UBS/SSS
            3              Sinchu Njabo                Basic Cycle Schools (BCS)
            4              Tahir Ahmadiyya (Soma)      SSS
            4              Kwinella                    UBS
            5              Bansang                     UBS
            5              Kaur                        SSS
            5              Niani                       SSS
            6              Fatoto                      UBS/SSS
            6              Diabugu                     UBS/SSS




References
Hanover Research (2016). 2015 Gambia Program Evaluation (WASSCE Outcomes),
Arlington, VA.
Hanover Research (2014). Progressive Math and Science Initiatives in The Gambia.
Arlington, VA.
Goodman, R. (2011). The Progressive Teaching Initiative (PTI): A New Paradigm for
Education, New Jersey Center for Teaching and Learning & Bergen County Technical
Schools, New Jersey.


ANNEX 	39
