Colombia: Policy strategy for
public financial management
of natural disaster risk
Acronyms

ANI		National Infrastructure Agency

Cat DDO	     Development Policy Loan with Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option

CCE		National Procurement Agency

CEPAL	       The United Nations Economic Commissions for Latin American and the Caribbean

CONPES	      National Council for Economic and Social Policy

DNP		National Planning Department

FNGRD	       National Fund for Disaster Risk Management

GoC		Government of Colombia

IADB		Inter-American Development Bank

MHCP		Ministry of Finance and Public Credit

PND		National Development Plan

PPP		Public-Private Partnership

SECO		Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs

SGC		Colombian Geological Service

UNGRD	       National Disaster Risk Management Unit
                                    Colombia: Policy strategy for public financial management of natural disaster risk                         1




Introduction

Disasters resulting from natural hazards represent an important challenge for Colombia’s fiscal
sustainability and stability. Colombia is one of the countries with the highest recurrence rate of disasters
caused by natural hazards in Latin America (see the Annex)1. As the country’s population and economy
continue to grow, so will the economic losses resulting from such events – an average of 600 disaster
events of which is reported per year2. Colombia’s rate of economic growth is increasing the base of assets
exposed to disaster risks, which may lead to significant increases in losses, particularly if investments in
new assets are not accompanied by plans for mitigating disaster risk3.

The Government of Colombia (GoC) recognizes the importance of mitigating these events and has taken
several steps to mainstream disaster risk management into its policy and programs, as evinced by the
National Development Plan “2014-2018”, “All for a New Country”. The MHCP is committed to developing
strategies for reducing its contingent liabilities in relation to disasters and to managing the fiscal risk
resulting from these events.

This document presents the priority policy objectives that have been established to assess, reduce, and
manage fiscal risk due to natural disasters. It also describes the MHCP’s efforts to progress its policy
objectives in the long term. These policy objectives represent the MHCP’s ex ante policy framework
regarding management of financial and fiscal disaster risk.

The MHCP identifies three priority policy objectives in order to strengthen management of the Government’s
contingent liabilities and thus support the goal of achieving macroeconomic stability and fiscal balance.
The policy objectives are: (i) Identification and understanding of fiscal risk due to disasters; (ii) financial
management of natural disaster risk, including the implementation of innovative financial instruments; and
(iii) catastrophe risk insurance for public assets.

Supported by various international organizations, the MHCP works with different public entities, such as
the National Procurement Agency - Colombia Compra Eficiente (CCE), the National Planning Department
(DNP), the National Disaster Risk Management Unit (UNGRD), the National Infrastructure Agency (ANI),
and the Colombian Geological Service (SGC), among others, to implement these policy objectives. The
MHCP has a strong ongoing partnership on financial management of disaster risks with the World Bank’s
Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Program (DRFIP), supported by the Swiss State Secretariat of
Economic Affairs (SECO) and the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR). These
policy objectives were developed with the active support and advice from a team of multidisciplinary
experts who have helped to foster major advances in their design and implementation.




1. The annex includes detailed information on the impact of natural disasters on Colombia.
2. Independent Evaluation Group-World Bank. Natural Hazards, Risks to Development: An Evaluation of World Bank Assistance for Natural
Disaster Events (Washington, DC). 2006.
3. World Bank (2012). Campos A.; Holm-Nielsen N.; Díaz C.; Rubiano D.; Costa C.; Ramírez F.; Dickson E. (Coordinators and Editors). Analysis
of Disaster Risk Management in Colombia: A Contribution to the Creation of Public Policies. Bogota, Colombia: World Bank – GFDRR, 2012.
2   Colombia: Policy strategy for public financial management of natural disaster risk




      Legal mandate for financial
      management of natural disaster
      risks in Colombia

      The Government of Colombia (GoC) is designing a financial strategy for covering contingent
      liabilities generated by disasters caused by natural hazards. This initiative falls within the government’s
      regulatory and institutional framework for managing explicit contingent liabilities generated through public
      credit operations, legal actions, and administrative contracts (including public-private partnerships). The
      origin of this comprehensive approach to fiscal risk assessment and management can be found in Law 448
      of 1998, which requires entities to include resources in their budgets for covering contingent liabilities. Law
      819 of 2003, which establishes requirements for the development of a Medium-Term Fiscal Framework,
      stipulates that the valuation of explicit contingent liabilities must be included in this Framework. In addition,
      the identification and assessment of fiscal risk sources, including implicit and explicit contingent liabilities,
      are in line with recommendations in the International Monetary Fund’s Code of Good Practices in Fiscal
      Transparency (2007).

      Within this context, the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (Ministerio de Hacienda y Crédito Público—
      MHCP) promotes the government’s efforts in assessing, reducing, and managing fiscal risk associated
      with natural disasters.
                           Colombia: Policy strategy for public financial management of natural disaster risk   3




Policy Objectives

This document describes the three priority policy objectives established by MHCP for assessing,
reducing, and managing the fiscal risk resulting from natural disasters. It aims to strengthen
the management of its contingent liabilities and to support macroeconomic stability and fiscal
balance. The MHCP has identified these policy objectives in order to present the prioritized actions for
reducing fiscal vulnerability to disasters. These areas have been established based on the role of financial
management of natural disaster risks in three important agendas in Colombia: first, as a component of the
fiscal management strategy headed by the MHCP; second, within the government’s approach to disaster
risk management, which includes financial management of natural disaster risks as a component of the
National Law on Disaster Risk Management of April 2012 (Law 1523); and finally, as part of the MHCP’s
efforts to manage public debt sustainability and transparency.

The mentioned priorities are reflected in the National Development Plan 2014–2018, entitled “All
For a New Country (PND)” (Act 1753 of 2015), under which Article 220 of the previous PND, entitled
“Prosperity for All” (Law 1450 of 2011), remains in effect. MHCP will support the management of fiscal
risk related to natural disasters, within the broader context of macroeconomic stability and fiscal balance.
Article 220 of Act 1450 of 2011 (in force by express provision of Article 267 of the current PND) states that
the MHCP will design a strategy for reducing the State’s fiscal vulnerability to natural disasters.

The MHCP has identified three priority policy areas for assessing, reducing, and managing fiscal
risk arising from natural disasters:

I.	 Identification and understanding of fiscal risk due to natural disasters;
II.	 Financial management of disaster risk, including the implementation of innovative financial instruments;
      and
III.	 Catastrophe risk insurance for public assets.

Through the advancement of parallel activities in these three areas, the GoC will improve its financial
response capacity in the case of a disaster and will mitigate the long-term fiscal impacts from such an
event.

It is important to note that financial management of disaster risk requires long-term commitment.
The MHCP has made progress in this area for several years and is committed to further strengthening its
approach.
4   Colombia: Policy strategy for public financial management of natural disaster risk




      Policy objective 1.
      Identification and understanding of fiscal risk due to natural disasters

      The identification and understanding of fiscal risk due to natural disasters is the first step in
      managing natural disaster risks. Using probabilistic catastrophe risk model developed for Colombia4,
      the MHCP has assessed that a 1-in-250 year earthquake event would cause fiscal losses related to its
      contingent liabilities estimated at approximately 1.4% of the GDP5 (Table 1).


      Table 1. Estimated contingent liabilities




      Source: MHCP (2011).
      *Contingent liability related to natural disasters is calculated from the 1-in-250 year probable maximum loss (PML) for earthquake for public
      assets, US$4.417 billion, as estimated in UNISDR (2011).


      Although the GoC has made progress in the assessment of its contingent liability related to natural
      disasters, further analysis is required to refine this assessment. The GoC has only partial information,
      and the available information is scattered throughout various government entities. In order to improve the
      understanding of the fiscal risk generated by disasters, the MHCP will prioritize the following activities:

      •	 Improve information on the exposure of public buildings and infrastructure to natural disasters,
         as well as historical information on disaster losses to the public sector. In particular, the MHCP
         seeks to better understand the potential losses in the case of disasters, to inform decision-making
         on investment in disaster risk mitigation and in new assets, and to improve insurance coverage for its
         portfolio of assets. In this context, the MHCP developed databases of physical characteristics of public
         assets and of insurance policies for public assets. In alignment with the National System for Disaster
         Risk Management (Law 1523 of 2012), an entity will be established to maintain the databases.

      In addition, the MHCP improves its understanding of its fiscal risk profile by collecting further
      information on the government’s historical losses from disasters. In particular, it improves its
      understanding of risks generated by less severe but recurrent events that accumulate over time. These
      efforts are being coordinated with the entities with relevant respective responsibilities.

      •	 Use and promote the use of financial and actuarial decision making tools. These tools help the
         MHCP assess its financial response capacity post-disaster and to improve decision-making on its
         disaster risk financing. They go beyond assessment of physical damages to buildings and determination


      4. Probabilistic catastrophe risk models assess the expected losses and probable maximum losses of disaster risks using information on
      hazard, exposure, and vulnerability.
      5. Contingent Liability Management in Colombia and the Financial Strategy Associated with Natural Disasters, Government of Colombia, in
      Improving the Assessment of Disaster Risks to Strengthen Financial Resilience (World Bank, 2012).
                                   Colombia: Policy strategy for public financial management of natural disaster risk   5



    of replacement costs estimated by catastrophe risk models to provide financial information that enables
    the MHCP to design an optimal combination of financial instruments through cost-benefit and dynamic
    financial analysis.

•	 Evaluate and adopt tools to assess possible increases in natural disaster risk generated by
   new public works and public-private partnerships (PPP). The GoC has already initiated this effort,
   and the MHCP has started to collaborate with other national entities (e.g., ANI) on this activity, as
   reflected in recent regulations. Law 1508 of 2012, for example, requires the analysis of hazards and
   vulnerability in relation to each infrastructure project and all the sectoral projects that may be exposed
   to the risk of disasters, and CONPES 3714 of 2011 requires the inclusion of disaster risk analysis in
   public procurement processes.

The MHCP applies risk assessment tools to evaluate the contributions of proposed new investments
to fiscal risk, including those made through PPP. One important aspect of this work is the MHCP’s
improvement of insurance requirements for concessionaires. The MHCP and ANI, with technical support
from the World Bank, have jointly established standard terms and conditions and minimum requirements
that meet international insurance market practice.




Policy objective 2.
Financial management of natural disasters

Natural disasters can generate fiscal volatility as a result of the sudden, unexpected expenditures
required during and after a disaster. In the aftermath of a disaster, the government requires timely
access to financial resources in order to finance an effective emergency response.

The MHCP initiated of the design of its financial management strategy for disaster risks in 2004.
The National Council for Economic and Social Policy’s (CONPES) document 3305 of 2004 allowed the
GoC to access financial resources for a project designed to reduce fiscal vulnerability associated with
natural disasters. A US$260 World Bank project included the development of a financial strategy for
reducing fiscal vulnerability and a US$150 million pre-approved line of credit in the case of a disaster. In
2008 the GoC signed its first Development Policy Loan with Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
(Cat DDO),6 for US$150 million—the first World Bank product designed specifically to provide contingent
financing for natural disasters. The GoC fully drew down this Cat DDO in 2010 due to flooding throughout
the country during the La Niña phenomenon. In 2012, the GoC signed a new US$250 million Cat DDO,
which was renovated in 2016.

In 2012 and 2013, the MHCP has made significant progress in designing a comprehensive strategy
for the financial management of disasters. The MHCP strategy considers ex-ante and ex-post
instruments, such as a contingent credit line and insurance, in order to complement ex-post financial
resources that will be accessed after a disaster. The MHCP promotes a multi risk layering strategy for
financial management of disaster risk, based on the assessment of its contingent liabilities, as illustrated
in Figure 1. Less severe but more recurrent losses are retained through reserves and contingent credit,
while losses that exceed the retention capacity of GoC are transferred through market-based financial
instruments. Finally, post-disaster credit is used to finance long-term reconstruction.




6. Following a declaration of a national disaster, the GoC can immediately withdraw funds from the Cat DDO.
6   Colombia: Policy strategy for public financial management of natural disaster risk




      Figure 1: Multi-layer financial strategy for disasters resulting from natural hazards


         High                                                       Residual Risk
         risk
         layers
                                                  Risk Transfer
                             Risk transfer for assets (e.g., indemnity insurance for                     Post-disaster
                                           public and private property)                                     credit
                             Risk transfer for budget management (e.g., parametric
                                               insurance, cat swap)



                                                                Contingent credit


         Low                   Fund for Disaster Risk Management/Budget reallocation
         risk
         layers




                                                                                                                                       1 from the
      Source: Adapted from the Financial Strategy for diminishing the State’s fiscal vulnerability to natural disasters (MHCP-DGCPTN) and
      World Bank Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Program (2012).


      The MHCP is enhancing its use of and designing additional financial protection instruments in
      order to establish a solid, robust strategy for financial management of disaster risks. The financial
      management strategy is being built on the foundations of the National Fund for Disaster Risk Management
      (FNGRD), created by Law 1523 of 2012, and on the Cat DDO. Historically, the MHCP has retained losses
      from natural disasters. The MHCP recognizes, however, that there are benefits from using risk transfer
      instruments for high risk layers. Thus, the MHCP is analyzing market-based catastrophe risk transfer
      instruments offered by the reinsurance and capital markets to complement its risk retention instruments.

      In particular, the MHCP is implementing and/or evaluating the following instruments:

      •	 National Fund for Disaster Risk Management: The GoC will determine its level of risk retention
         through the FNGRD. The budget allocations to the FNGRD will be the first source of financial resources
         to be used in the case of a disaster. The FNGRD must first be operationalized and strengthened. When
         the FNGRD resources are exhausted, and additional budgetary resources are not available or a more
         severe disaster occurs, the government will access its second layer of risk retention, contingent credit.

      •	 Contingent credit: In light of the benefits the Government realized from access to its first Cat DDO
         during the 2010 La Niña phenomenon, the MHCP secured a second Cat DDO for US$250 million in
         2012. In the case of a severe natural disaster triggering a national disaster, the MHCP can immediately
         drawn down part or all of the Cat DDO to fund emergency relief and recovery efforts. Beyond the benefit
         of immediate access to liquidity, a notable benefit of the Cat DDO is that it is currently offered at a lower
         interest rate than conventional loans.
                              Colombia: Policy strategy for public financial management of natural disaster risk        7



•	 Evaluation of financial protection instruments: Currently, MHCP is evaluating different instruments
   offered by the capital market and the insurance market, such as catastrophic derivatives, catastrophe
   bonds, and weather derivatives. Technical advice for the evaluation, including the design of financial
   analytical tools to support the decision-making process, is being provided by the Disaster Risk
   Financing and Insurance Program of the World Bank and SECO. These instruments aim to improve the
   government’s disaster response capacity in case of infrequent but potentially devastating and costly
   natural disasters. The MHCP is analyzing these instruments comprehensively in terms of their coverage,
   costs, and legal dimensions. If an instrument can improve the MHCP’s financial management strategy
   for disaster risks in terms of (i) cost-efficiency, (ii) access to liquidity, and (iii) reduction of post-disaster
   fiscal pressure, the MHCP will integrate the instrument into its comprehensive strategy.




Policy objective 3.
Catastrophe risk insurance for public assets

In the longer term, the MHCP aims to reduce the government’s contingent liabilities related to
natural disasters through a combination of risk mitigation investments and catastrophe insurance
for public assets, taking into account the best insurance practices at international level. The
insurance of public assets is compulsory, and its omission is liable to disciplinary action and fiscal
responsibility in accordance with the provisions of Colombian law. The relevant laws are (i) Act 42 of
1993, regarding the organization of the financial fiscal control system, which stipulates that public officers
and individuals in charge of managing funds or assets of the state are obliged to protect the public
assets and funds through insurance policies or special funds created for this purpose under penalty of the
imposition of fines; according to the provisions of Act 1474 of 2011 (on mechanisms for the prevention,
investigation and punishment of corruption and effectiveness of public management control), fines are
imposed where behavior is attributable to criminal intent or gross negligence; and (ii) Act 734 of 2002, the
disciplinary code, which subjects the failure to “ensure assets by their real value” and failure to “make the
appropriate [insurance-related] budgetary appropriations” to sanctions—either dismissal or disqualification
from holding public officer. However, an analysis conducted in 2012 on the insurance policies for buildings
of the central government found that the insurance coverage could be improved. For example, each
infrastructure was found to be individually insured, so that the benefits of diversification associated with
pooling risks of all buildings in a single portfolio, such as lower costs, were not available. Consequently, the
priority policy in this area is to strengthen the insurance of public assets.

In coordination with, and with the support of, other public entities, MHCP will develop policies
or guidelines to improve the quality of catastrophe insurance of public assets. The strategy aims
to improve the coverage and price of catastrophe insurance for public assets and road infrastructure
(particularly priority transportation infrastructure, one of the sectors that have been most severely affected
by disasters). The risk of fire and allied lines (including earthquake, among others) will be considered initially.

The GoC will consider various ways to improve the insurance strategy for public assets:

•	 Information system on public buildings: In keeping with their responsibility, several public entities
   are gathering additional information on the GoC’s portfolio of assets as well as insurance policies in
   force. More detailed information on public assets will allow the private insurance industry to offer better
   coverage and prices, based on improved quantification of risk.
8   Colombia: Policy strategy for public financial management of natural disaster risk



      •	 Standardized approach through demand aggregation tools for hiring insurance for public
         buildings: By allowing the government to pool its assets and create a portfolio with a greater critical
         mass, this approach will offer risk diversification benefits and greater bargaining power. The National
         Public Procurement Agency (CCE), the agency recently created by the GoC to increase efficiency in
         public procurement, will participate in the process. MHCP and CCE will work together to define and
         analyze the technical, legal, and financial requirements of implementing a standardized approach using
         insurance demand aggregation tools for the insurance of public buildings. Additionally, they will also
         propose guidelines for strengthening the insurance of public buildings held by entities different from
         those at the central level.

      •	 Improvement of insurance of road infrastructure through a PPP scheme: As discussed under
         Policy Objective 1, the MHCP and ANI have developed enhanced insurance requirements for PPP.
         With technical support from the World Bank, the government has developed technical guidelines for
         infrastructure insurance based on international market standards. These guidelines have been used
         to develop the technical requirements for concessionaires for the latest generation of infrastructure
         investment and are currently being implemented and improved.

      •	 “Best practices” insurance guidelines for decentralized public entities: With the experience
         obtained in the process of improving the insurance strategy for public assets, guidelines to strengthen
         the insurance of buildings and other assets will be developed for territorial-level entities, the other
         branches of the public sector, attached and linked control bodies, and entities with special legal or
         constitutional status. With the support of the CCE, the DNP, and the UNGRD, training will be held
         for institutions at these levels; the purpose is to provide general recommendations to encourage and
         promote financial protection against disaster risks, taking into account standard terms and conditions
         for underwriting insurance policies.
                            Colombia: Policy strategy for public financial management of natural disaster risk      9




Conclusion

Each year, natural disasters adversely impact the Colombian people and economy; in addition, the
country is exposed to the risk of rare but severe natural events, such as earthquakes, that could
affect the State’s fiscal balance. For these reasons, it is essential that the MCHP devise a financial
protection strategy for natural disasters, with the objective to reduce the State’s fiscal vulnerability to these
events and to improve its post-disaster financial response capacity.

The MHCP has identified three priority policy objectives for public financial management of disaster
risk. These policy objectives are reflected in this document, which describes those areas that have been
identified as essential for assessing, reducing, and managing the fiscal risk related to natural disasters.

The MHCP’s primary goal is to improve the capacity of the Government of Colombia to effectively
manage natural disasters and their associated fiscal risks. The MHCP is currently working on three
priority policy objectives to achieve this goal: (i) Identification and understanding of fiscal risk due to
disasters; (ii) financial management of disaster risk, including the implementation of innovative financial
instruments; and (iii) catastrophe risk insurance for assets. To achieve these objectives, the MHCP is
collaborating with entities from across the government and with international partners such as the World
Bank, Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) and the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction
and Recovery (GFDRR).
10   Colombia: Policy strategy for public financial management of natural disaster risk




      Bibliography

      Cardona et al. Definición de la responsabilidad del Estado, su exposición ante desastres naturales y
         diseño de mecanismos para la cobertura de los riesgos residuales del Estado. 2004.

      CEDERI-Universidad de los Andes, 2002. Retención y Transferencia del Riesgo Sísmico en Colombia,
         Evaluación Preliminar de una Posible Estrategia Financiera y del Mercado Potencial.

      Corporación OSSO, 2011. Comportamiento del riesgo en Colombia. Estudio realizado en el contexto
         del Proyecto Análisis de la Gestión del Riesgo de Desastres en Colombia para el Banco Mundial y
         GFDRR.

      Corporación OSSO, 2009. Atlas de las dinámicas del territorio andino: población y bienes expuestos a
         amenazas naturales. Proyecto elaborado en el contexto de Apoyo a la Prevención de Desastres en la
         Comunidad Andina (PREDECAN).

      Cummins, J.D. and O. Mahul, 2009. Catastrophe Risk Financing in Developing Countries: Principles for
         Public Intervention. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

      IEG-World Bank (Independent Evaluation Group - World Bank), 2006. Hazards of Nature, Risks to
          Development: An Evaluation of World Bank Assistance for Natural Disaster (Washington, DC).

      Inter-American Development Bank and the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean,
           2012. Appraisal of Damages and Losses: Winter Wave in Colombia 2010-2011.

      Ghesquiere, F and O. Mahul, 2010. Financial protection of the state against natural disasters: a primer.
         Washington, DC: The World Bank

      Government of Colombia, 2012. “Contingent Liability Management in Colombia and the Financial Strategy
         Associated with Natural Disasters.” Article elaborated for the publication Improving the assessment of
         disaster risks to strengthen financial resilience. A Special Joint G20 Publication by the Government of
         Mexico and The World Bank. Ed. The Government of Mexico and The World Bank. Washington, DC.
         133-142.

      Miller y Queipa, 2006. Estrategias e instrumentos financieros para la gestión de riesgos de desastres en
           América Latina y el Caribe.
                           Colombia: Policy strategy for public financial management of natural disaster risk    11



PNUD, 2010. El Cambio Climático en Colombia. Proyecto de integración de riesgos y oportunidades
   del cambio climático en los procesos nacionales de desarrollo y en la programación de país de las
   Naciones Unidas. http://www.pnud.org.co/img_upload/61626461626434343535373737353535/
   Brochure%20resumen%20Proyecto.pdf

República de Colombia, IDEAM-DNP,2009. Circunstancias Nacionales. Segunda Comunicación Nacional
   Ante La Convención Marco de las Naciones Unidas Sobre Cambio Climático. http://www.crid.or.cr/
   digitalizacion/pdf/spa/doc18157/doc18157-b.pdf

Risk Sub-Direction, General Direction of Public Credit and National Treasury, Ministry of Finance and Public
    Credit, 2012. “Estrategia financiera para disminuir la vulnerabilidad fiscal del Estado ante la ocurrencia
    de un desastre natural.” . <www.minhacienda.gov.co/portal/page/portal/HomeMinhacienda/
    creditoydeudapublicos/Riesgo/PasivosContingentes1/Estrategia%20de%20Desastres%20
    Naturales.pdf>

United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction, 2011. Probabilistic modeling of disaster
    risk at global level: Development of a methodology and implementation of case studies. Phase 1A:
    Colombia, Mexico, Nepal. Prepared by the Consortium Evaluación de Riesgos Naturales – América
    Latina.

World Bank. Campos A.; Holm-Nielsen N.; Díaz C.; Rubiano D.; Costa C.; Ramírez F.; Dickson E.
   (Coordinators and Editors), 2012. Analysis of Disaster Risk Management in Colombia: A Contribution
   to the Creation of Public Policies. Bogota, Colombia: World Bank – GFDRR.

– (a). Campos A.; Holm-Nielsen N.; Díaz C.; Rubiano D.; Costa C.; Ramírez F.; Dickson E. (Coordinators
     and Editors), 2012. Executive summary. Analysis of Disaster Risk Management in Colombia: A
     Contribution to the Creation of Public Policies. Bogota, Colombia: World Bank – GFDRR.
12   Colombia: Policy strategy for public financial management of natural disaster risk




      Annex 1. Disaster impacts in
      Colombia

      According to the World Bank (2012), disasters in Colombia over the last 40 years have caused accumulated
      losses amounting to US$7.1 billion. Between 1970 and 2011, over 28,000 disaster events were registered,
      with approximately 60 percent reported since the 1990s.

      According to the same report, 44 percent of Colombia’s territory is exposed to high and medium seismic
      hazard, mostly in the Pacific and Andean Regions (departments of Huila, Choco, Valle del Cauca, Nariño,
      Risaralda, Cauca, and Quindio), which means that 960 municipalities, including those with the largest
      populations, are exposed. Some 12 percent of the national territory is located in areas with increased
      vulnerability to floods, affecting 79 municipalities mainly in the departments of Valle del Cauca, Atlantico,
      Cundinamarca, Magdalena, Antioquia, Cordoba, Cesar, Cauca, and Meta. Additionally, 18 percent of the
      national territory is located in areas that have high and very high landslide risk, especially in the departments
      of Quindio, Risaralda, Caldas, Nariño, Cauca, Arauca, Meta, Huila, Cundinamarca, Boyaca, Tolima, and
      Santander.

      The distribution of the exposure of the population to natural hazards such as flooding, earthquakes, and
      landslides is illustrated in the following figures.
                                 Colombia: Policy strategy for public financial management of natural disaster risk                         13




Figure A.1. Area exposed to floods, landslides, and earthquakes in Colombia




Source: World Bank (2012). Campos A.; Holm-Nielsen N.; Díaz C.; Rubiano D.; Costa C.; Ramírez F.; Dickson E. (Ed). Análisis de la gestión
del riesgo de desastres en Colombia: un aporte para la construcción de políticas públicas. Bogotá, Colombia.



Figure A.2. Population exposed to floods, landslides, and earthquakes in Colombia




Source: World Bank (2012). Campos A.; Holm-Nielsen N.; Díaz C.; Rubiano D.; Costa C.; Ramírez F.; Dickson E. (Ed). Análisis de la gestión
del riesgo de desastres en Colombia: un aporte para la construcción de políticas públicas. Bogotá, Colombia.
14   Colombia: Policy strategy for public financial management of natural disaster risk




       Figure A.3. Economic Losses per Presidential Period for Colombia




      Source: UNISDR (2011).
