         DISCUSSION PAPER	            NO. 1611




Pensions for Public-Sector Employees:
        Lessons from OECD Countries’
                           Experience
                             Edward Whitehouse




                               October 2016
                  Pensions for Public-sector Employees:
                Lesssons from OECD Countries’ Experience

                                         Edward Whitehouse1

                                               October 2016


Abstract

In 27 out of 34 OECD member countries, there is institutionally separate retirement-income provision
for some or all public-sector workers. But the scope of these pension schemes varies significantly:
from a modest top-up to the national pension arrangements (covering private-sector workers as well)
to entirely independent retirement-income regimes. Average expenditure on these schemes
amounts to about 1.5 percent of GDP, or nearly a quarter of total public pension spending.

Public-sector pension reform is an issue of great political importance in many countries. Central
governments’ workforces are ageing rapidly in all but four of the 26 countries for which data are
available. One in three of central-government employees were aged 50 and over in 2009, compared
with 22 percent in 1995. This rapid ageing is pushing up the cost of pension schemes at a time when
many OECD countries are embarking on fiscal consolidation.

This paper examines the arguments and the options for reforming public-sector pension schemes
from an international viewpoint. It assesses five different policies to reduce expenditures or increase
contribution revenues, showing how these can have very different effects in a public-sector scheme
than with national retirement-income arrangements.

JEL Classification: H55, J14, J26, J32

Key words: pensions, retirement, public-sector employees


1
 Edward Whitehouse is director of Axia Economics, a consultancy specialising in the microeconomic anlaysis of
public policy. He was previously head of pensions-policy analysis in the social policy division of the Organisation
for Economic Co-Operation and Development. The author is grateful to colleagues at the OECD—Anna D’Addio,
John P. Marttin, Monika Queisser and Andrew Reilly—for their comments and advice. The paper has also
benefited from discussion at a conference on “Civil Service and Military Pension Arrangements in Asia and the
Pacific” held at Hitotsubashi University, Tokyo, in January 2011, at an Institute of Public Policy Research meeting
on international experience of public-sector pension reform in London in Dcember 2010 and at various World
Bank events. Zahid Hasnain of the World Bank provided particularly useful comments. The paper builds on
earlier work with Robert Palacios of the World Bank: Palacios and Whitehouse (2006). Nevertheless, the usual
disclaimer applies: in particular, the findings of this paper commit neither the OECD, the World Bank nor any of
their member countries.
                                                         Table of Contents


Pensions for Public-sector Employees: Lesssons from OECD Countries’ Experience...................... 1
   1.     Institutional arrangements .................................................................................................... 2
   2.     Size of government ................................................................................................................ 6
   3.     Demographic pressures ......................................................................................................... 8
   4.     Fiscal costs ........................................................................................................................... 11
   5.     Reform options: Improving pension-scheme finances ........................................................ 15
   6.     Pension portability and labour mobility .............................................................................. 20
   7.     Conclusions and policy implications .................................................................................... 26
References ...................................................................................................................................... 31



Tables

   Table 1. Public-sector workers’ pensions: institutional arrangements in OECD countries ........ 5
   Table 2. Overall financial impact of reform measures for different types of pension scheme17


Figures

   Figure 1. General-government employment as percentage of the labour force ........................ 7
   Figure 2. Ageing trends in the central-government workforce ................................................... 9
   Figure 3. Labour-force demographics: central/federal government and total workforce
             compared .................................................................................................................... 10
   Figure 4. Fiscal costs of public-sector pensions ......................................................................... 13
   Figure 5. Costs of pensions for public-sector employees, per cent of total public pension
             expenditure................................................................................................................. 14
   Figure 6. Pension cost of moving jobs ....................................................................................... 24




                                                                            ii
                Pensions for Public-sector Employees: Lesssons from
                            OECD Countries’ Experience


The pace of reform of pensions for public-sector workers has quickened in recent years. This
has followed a period during which changes in these retirement-income arrangements
seemed, in many countries, to lag behind wider pension reforms. There are two main drivers
of recent reforms, the first of which is cost. The aftermath of the financial and economic crisis
has been a rapid rise in budget deficits in most OECD countries. Many of them are now
embarking on fiscal consolidation, with pension expenditure coming under increasing
scrutiny. The immediate economic shock has both highlighted and exacerbated the long-
term pressure on pension costs arising from the phenomenon of population ageing. Pension
schemes for public-sector workers have a somewhat different demographic profile from the
population as a whole; the ageing trend is, generally, more pronounced.

The second driver of reform is comparability of retirement-income provision with the private
sector.   France aimed to harmonise pension arrangements between sectors, before
undertaking a wider pension reform affecting private- and public-sector workers alike. In the
United Kingdom, there has been much debate about pension entitlements of public-sector
workers since most private-sector workers have seen final-salary, defined-benefit schemes
(similar to those in the public sector) replaced by less generous defined-contribution plans,
which also expose their members directly to investment risk.

This paper begins with an overview of the institutional arrangements for providing retirement
incomes for public-sector employees. In particular, it looks at the degree to which there are
separate programmes for the public sector or a single system that covers both public and
private sectors. In what follows, the term “national” pension scheme will be used to describe




                                               1
pension provision for private-sector workers, which may also provide some or all of the
retirement incomes of public-sector workers.

Section 2 provides cross-country evidence on the variation in the role of government
employment in the wider labour market, and on how this has changed over time. Section 3
examines the demographic profile of central-government employment. It also compares the
trends in ageing between central government and society at large. The finances of public-
sector schemes are explored in section 4, which presents data on the level of government
spending on these programmes.

Section 5 then turns to reform options designed to improve the financial position of public-
sector retirement-income provision. Microeconomic issues, particularly the portability of
pension rights for people moving between public and private sectors, are addressed in
Section 6. The final section sets out the main policy implications of the findings.

1.       Institutional arrangements

The organisation of retirement-income provision for public-sector workers differs
significantly between the 34 OECD countries. This is unsurprising: there are also major cross-
country differences in the architecture of pension systems for private-sector workers, as
documented in Pensions at a Glance. Table 1 summarises the pension position of public-
sector employees.

The simplest arrangements are at the left- and right-hand ends of the spectrum in Table 1.
At the left are seven countries where public-sector workers have exactly the same pension
arrangements as their private-sector counterparts. These are all former socialist countries of
central and eastern Europe. History seems to matter: the private sector was a minority of
employment before the economic transition. So, separate pension arrangements between
public and private sectors did not make sense. There were, however, differences in the
parameters and rules applying to different groups of workers in some cases that persisted




                                               2
after the transition period, most notably in Poland. But most of these have now been
eliminated.

At the other end of the spectrum, shown across Table 1, lie nine countries in which there are
entirely separate retirement-income arrangements for the public and private sectors. Here,
public-sector workers are not covered by the national pension scheme. Moreover, the
parameters and rules that determine benefit levels and eligibility are different from the
national plan. Either pension benefits differ for people with the same earnings and career
profiles, indexation procedures for pensions in payment vary or access to pensions is possible
at different ages than in the national scheme, or some combination of these. In some cases—
such as France and Greece—pension provision for the public sector is highly fragmented at
the moment, with numerous different schemes covering different groups of workers. In
others, there is one separate scheme for the public sector or many public employees are
covered by the national arrangements. Even in these countries, some low-paid, public-sector
employees might be eligible for the safety-net benefits that are part of national retirement-
income provision, such as means-tested benefits or non-contributory minimum pensions.
This, of course, also applies to countries elsewhere in Table 1.

In the second column from the left of Table 1, there are five countries in which there are
again separate schemes for the public and private sectors. Unlike the countries in the right-
hand column, however, benefit levels, indexation policies and pension eligibility ages are very
similar. In Finland and Iceland, private-sector workers must be covered by occupational
pension schemes which have the same or very similar parameters and rules to the schemes
for the public sector. In Denmark and the Netherlands, nearly all the private-sector workforce
is covered by occupational plans, but these are not compulsory. Instead, this is achieved
through industrial-relations agreements and so the OECD calls them “quasi-mandatory” in its
Pensions at a Glance reports. In both cases, there is variation in parameters and rules
between different schemes. However, public-sector arrangements are broadly similar to the
typical plan for private-sector workers. Similarly, the recent conversion of Israel’s public-
service scheme from defined-benefit to defined-contribution and the introduction of



                                               3
mandatory defined-contribution schemes for private-sector workers mean that the two sets
of arrangements are fairly closely aligned.

Public-sector workers in the 12 countries in the central column of Table 1 are covered by the
same arrangements as their private-sector counterparts. Unlike the countries in the first
column, however, there are top-up arrangements to provide additional benefits to the
national scheme. These vary significantly. In Italy and Slovenia, for example, the top-up is
relatively small (and the national pension scheme provides a replacement rate well above the
OECD average). Furthermore, it is not a statutory requirement in Italy (rather a result of
industrial-relations agreements) and covers by no means all public-sector workers. In Canada
and Ireland, in contrast, the public-sector scheme provides much more substantial benefits
on top of relatively modest public benefits.          (The replacement rate from national
arrangements is much lower than the OECD average for people with earnings at the
economy-wide mean.) New Zealand is perhaps unique in the world in having abolished its
centralised civil-service pension scheme. Instead, government departments and agencies are
free to set up their own arrangements if they wish.

Australia and Switzerland might, arguably, be moved from “integrated with top-up” to the
second column. Both have mandatory private pensions for private-sector workers. Australia
recently changed its public-service scheme from the defined-benefit to the defined-
contribution type, matching the arrangements for the private sector. However, government
contributions as an employer are above the statutory minimum, although many private-
sector employers offer similar deals. Similarly, many Swiss workers in the private sector
receive benefits above the mandatory minimum. However, data for both countries on the
proportion of private-sector workers receiving above-statutory benefits are not available.
Nevertheless, this proportion is likely to be less than the near-universal coverage of quasi-
mandatory schemes in Denmark and the Netherlands.




                                              4
        Table 1. Public-Sector Workers’ Pensions: Institutional Arrangements in OECD Countries

    Fully               Institutionally       Fully integrated   Partially integrated   Entirely separate
    integrated          separate with         with top-up        with top-up            institutions and
                        similar benefits      arrangements       scheme                 benefits
    Chile               Denmark               Australia          United Kingdom         Austria
    Czech Republic      Finland               Canada                                    Belgium
    Estonia             Iceland               Ireland                                   France
    Hungary             Israel                Italy                                     Germany
    Mexico              Netherlands           Japan                                     Greece
    Poland                                    New Zealand                               Korea
    Slovak Republic                           Norway                                    Luxembourg
                                              Slovenia                                  Portugal
                                              Spain                                     Turkey
                                              Sweden
                                              Switzerland
                                              United States



The United States offers an interesting example of the steady integration of groups of workers
into the national pension arrangements (known as social security). 2                     State and local
governments were allowed to enrol their employees in social security; and the military and
federal employees not covered by the Civil Service Retirement System were enrolled during
the 1950s. From 1983, new civilian employees of the federal government were also covered
by social security, the value of the additional defined-benefit element was significantly
reduced and a new, defined-contribution scheme, the Thrift Savings Plan (with government
contributions as employer and voluntary employee contributions) was added on top.

The United Kingdom has a category of its own. Public-sector employees are covered by the
basic pension, part of the national pension arrangements. However, they are not covered by
the earnings-related part of the scheme, now known as State Second Pension (S2P). The
same is true of some private-sector workers, who have been able to “contract out” of S2P
and its predecessor. Provided the employee has a private pension meeting some minimum
standards, either the social security contribution rate is reduced or part is transferred into
the private-pension account in return for forgoing S2P benefits. Around 35 percent of all
employees are contracted out, a figure that includes all participants in public-sector schemes.

2
    See Schreitmueller 1988 for a comprehensive review.



                                                          5
However, this complex mechanism will soon disappear as part of wider pension reform and
so the United Kingdom would move into the central column, the category of “fully integrated
with top-up”.

The focus of the analysis has to be on the countries with some degree of separation of
pension arrangements: all but the left-hand column of Table 1. This limit is applied in sections
4 to 6 below on the retirement-income system. First, however, it is useful to look at the
numbers involved: how many people are employed in the public service and what is their
demographic profile?

2.       Size of government
The role and scope of government varies significantly between countries, even among the
more developed nations that are members of the OECD. There are significant differences in,
for example, government expenditure and revenues as a percentage of gross domestic
product (GDP). However, a significant part of public spending goes on transfer payments and
capital investment, and so total expenditure is not an indicator of the size of government that
is very relevant for an analysis of public-sector employees’ pension arrangements.

Figure 1 therefore looks at the role of government as an employer. The concept of the public
sector used here is “general government”, as defined in the System of National Accounts
(SNA). This therefore includes both central (or federal) and sub-central (state, provincial or
local) levels of government. But it excludes publicly owned corporations providing goods and
services, which in OECD countries can include, among others, the postal service,
broadcasting, railways and utilities. The number of employees of general government is
shown as a percentage of total employment. Countries are ranked from the highest to lowest
share, first down the left-hand panel of the figure and then down the right-hand side.

Government employment, in the 33 countries for which data are available, averages a little
less than 15 percent of the total labour force. Four Nordic countries are at the top of the
scale, with an average of 27 percent of employees working for government. Other European




                                               6
countries are spread across the range, with the German and Greek governments employing
less than 10 percent of the workforce, compared with more than 20 percent in France. Two
East Asian countries are at the bottom of the scale: Japan and Korea, where the government
share is 6.7 percent and 5.7 percent, respectively. Ireland, Italy, Slovenia, and the United
States are all close to the OECD average.

Some care is needed in interpreting these comparisons. Even though the SNA aims to
standardise definitions across countries, there may be differences in classifications at very
detailed levels. In some countries, many public-sector workers are employed in public
corporations and so are not included in Figure 1. This group of employees averages just 3.6
percent of total employment in the 25 countries for which data are available. It is most
significant in Greece (12.8 percent of total employment) and Poland (11.7 percent), which in
both cases exceeds general-government employment.3 Despite these caveats, these data
give some indication of the importance of pension arrangements for government workers.

          Figure 1. General-Government Employment as Percentage of the Labour Force, 2008

             Norway                                               Czech Republic
            Denmark                                                        Spain
             Sweden                                                      Portugal
              Finland                                                Netherlands
              France                                                      Austria
             Hungary                                                      Turkey
             Estonia                                              Slovak Republic
         Luxembourg                                                 New Zealand
      United Kingdom                                                      Poland
                                             OECD                                                        OECD
             Belgium                                                  Switzerland
                                             average:                                                    average:
             Canada                          14.7%                      Germany                          14.7%
               Israel                                                       Chile
            Australia                                                     Mexico
              Ireland                                                     Greece
            Slovenia                                                       Japan
        United States                                                      Korea
                 Italy
                    0     5    10   15    20    25      30                       0    5    10   15    20     25     30
           General government employment, per cent of total            General government employment, per cent of total



         Note: Data for Iceland are unavailable.
         Source: OECD 2011b, Figure 21.1.

3
    OECD 2011b, Figure 22.2.



                                                              7
A comparison of general government employment over time shows a stable size of the
government workforce in the past 15 years or so. Data are available back to 1995 for 18 OECD
countries. For this group, the proportion of the workforce employed by general government
was exactly the same in 2008 as in 1995: 14.3 percent. There were large increases in the
government payroll—of 20 percent or more—in Slovenia, Switzerland, and Turkey and
reductions of a similar magnitude in Germany and Mexico.

3.       Demographic pressures

Long-term changes in the size and scope of government have a significant implication. The
demographics of public-sector pension schemes—in particular, the relationship between the
number of beneficiaries and the number of contributors—are often very different from that
of the population as a whole.

Figure 2 shows the extent to which demographic change has affected the central-government
workforce over a period of nearly 15 years: from 1995 to 2009. (Data on the age structure of
general-government employment are not available.)             The youngest (demographically
speaking) central governments in 2009 were those of Chile, Estonia, Japan and Korea: 25
percent or fewer workers were aged 50 and over. In contrast, more than 40 percent of
central-government employees were aged 50 or over in Belgium, Germany, Iceland, Italy,
Sweden, and the United States at that time.

Looking at the time-series pattern, the workforces of most central governments have aged
(demographically) over the past 15 years. Exceptions are Japan, Korea, and Switzerland,
where the proportion of over 50s in the central government was relatively stable. But the
most manifest outlier is Mexico, where the share of older workers fell from 36 percent to 27
percent in a period of just four years (2005-09). General-government employment fell from
11.1 percent of the total to 8.8 percent during this period. This decline, as noted previously,
is equivalent to a cut of one fifth of the relative size of the public workforce. Taken together,
these two developments suggest that the significant reduction in government employment
was heavily focused on older workers as it affected the central government.



                                               8
Of the majority of countries where the proportion of over 50s in the central government
workforce has grown over recent years—22 out of the 26 shown—the share of older workers
increased by an average of nearly 30 percent. The most rapid ageing of the workforce took
place in Greece, Ireland, and the Netherlands. All of these countries had below-average
shares of over 50s in the earlier part of the period illustrated in Figure 2.

 Figure 2. Ageing Trends in the Central-Government Workforce: Percentage of Employees Aged 50
                                        and over, 1995-2009

Percentage aged 50 and over                                       Percentage aged 50 and over
50                                                                50
                                                    Italy

                                                                                                                    Iceland
                                                    Sweden
                                                    Germany
                                                                                                                    United States
40                                                                40
                                          Denmark
                                                                                                        Belgium
                                                    Norway                                          Israel
                                                    Netherlands
                                                                                                                    Canada
                                                    Ireland
                          Greece
                                                    Switzerland                                                     United Kingdom
30                                                                30            Finland
                                                    France                                                          New Zealand
                                                    Mexico                                                          Australia
                                                                              Austria
                                                    Japan                                                           Estonia

                                                    Chile                          Portugal
20                                                                20
                                                                                                                    Korea




 0                                                                10
     1995          2000            2005       2009                     1995               2000   2005             2009




Note:        Data for Czech Republic and Turkey are unavailable. Information for Luxembourg, Poland, Slovak
             Republic, and Spain are only available for a single year and so these countries are not shown. Adjacent
             years are used in some case (see the sources for details). For Estonia and Hungary, the percentage of
             government employees aged over 51 years is shown while for Chile, data represent the percentage of
             government employees aged over 55 years.
Source: OECD 2007b, Figures 1.2 and 1.3; OECD 2011b, Figure 23.1; OECD 2009b, Figure 12.2.


The aggregate demographic situation of OECD countries also varies considerably. Currently,
Chile, Ireland, Korea, Mexico, and Turkey are the demographically youngest countries, with
an average of seven people of working age (20-64) for every one of pension age (65+). The
oldest countries are Germany, Italy and Japan, with fewer than three people of working age




                                                                  9
for every one of pension age.4 To what extent do differences in the age of the central-
government workforce reflect demographic variation in the population as a whole?

Figure 3 addresses this question by comparing the percentage of the central-government
workforce aged over 50 with the same information for the workforce as a whole. In 26 of the
30 countries for which data are available, the proportion of central government employees
aged over 50 is larger than that of the workforce. The exceptions are the four countries at
the bottom of the right-hand panel, which also have the smallest share of older workers in
central government. Indeed, three of them—Chile, Japan, and Korea—are among the
countries with the smallest proportion of employees working in general government.

        Figure 3. Labour-Force Demographics: Central/Federal Government and Total Workforce
                                          Compared, 2009

                                   Central government employees              Total labour force


               Italy                                                       Austria
            Iceland                                                      Hungary
           Sweden                                                         Portugal
           Belgium                                                    Switzerland
          Germany                                                  United Kingdom
      United States                                                        France
          Denmark                                                    New Zealand
    Slovak Republic                                                      Slovenia
            Greece                                                         Poland
              Israel                                                       Mexico
            Norway                                                       Australia
            Finland                                                       Estonia
       Netherlands                                                          Japan
           Canada                                                            Chile
            Ireland                                                         Korea
                       0   10       20     30     40     50                          0   10       20     30    40      50
                                Percentage aged 50 and over                                   Percentage aged 50 and over

Note:        Data are not available for the Czech Republic, Luxembourg, Spain, and Turkey. Information for Italy, Japan, and
             Korea relate to 2008. See also notes to Figure 2 and those in the source.
Source:      OECD 2011b, Figure 23.2.




4
    Source: the indicator of “Old-age support ratios” in Part II.4 of OECD 2011a.



                                                              10
In the other 26 countries illustrated in Figure 3, the average share of people aged over 50
working for the government is about a third higher than that in the labour force as a whole.
The differential is largest—more than one half—in Belgium, Germany, Greece, and Ireland.
Only Australia and New Zealand have very similar age structures between central government
and the labour force. Overall, there is a positive relationship between the proportion of the
labour force and of central government employees aged over 50, but it is a weak and
statistically insignificant one. 5

To conclude the demographic analysis, just over a third of central-government employees
were aged 50 and over in 2009 on average in OECD countries. This implies a large “bulge” of
retirees to come in the next 10-15 years in most of them. This has broad implications for the
human-resources policy of government. Of the ten countries with the highest shares of older
central-government employees, half of them—Denmark, Iceland, Israel, Italy, and the Slovak
Republic—told an OECD survey that civil-service demographics were not explicitly considered
in the forward planning of human-resource managers. 6 A sizeable share of government’s
expertise will leave its employment for retirement over a relatively short space of time. This
trend also has important implications for pension systems, especially in those countries
where there are separate or top-up schemes for civil servants.

4.        Fiscal costs

The profound institutional differences between countries’ retirement-income provision for
public-sector workers make it very difficult to collect comparable data on the cost of these
schemes. Nevertheless, Figure 4 presents the available information extracted from the OECD’
social-expenditure database. Where possible, data on the central government or civil service
are separated out. The remainder of expenditure relates to broader parts of the public



5
  The results of a linear regression (with heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors in parentheses) are:
percentage aged over 50 in government = 23.73 (10.81) + 0.3569 (0.4167) x percentage aged over 50 in
workforce; R2 = 0.0449.
6
  Source: OECD 2011b, Figure 16.2. On the wider human-resources issues, see also the nine country cases in
OECD 2007b.



                                                    11
sector, including sub-national government, public corporations and so on. The average
expenditure, excluding zeroes, is 1.3 percent of GDP for the narrower central government
category and 1.5 percent for the broader public-sector grouping.

The five countries at the top of the range spend between 2.8 percent (Finland) and 3.7
percent (Greece) of GDP on pensions for public-sector workers. In each of these cases,
pensions for the public sector are provided separately from the national scheme.

In contrast, many of the next countries in the rankings—Australia, Japan, the United Kingdom,
and the United States, for example—are countries where the public-sector pension is a top-
up to the national scheme. The relatively high expenditures shown in Figure 4 are probably
a reflection of the fact that their national pension arrangements pay low benefits relative to
most other OECD countries. There is thus more need and demand for top-up benefits than
in countries where national pension programmes have higher target replacement rates.

Figure 4’s number for expenditure on public-sector pensions for Chile is perhaps surprisingly
high. The systemic pension reform of the early 1980s introduced mandatory defined-
contribution schemes. Most public- as well as private-sector workers moved into the new
programme. Thus, the expenditure indicated here relates principally to the uniformed
services—police and military—with some legacy costs of the earlier defined-benefit scheme.

For nine countries, the number for spending on pensions for public-sector workers provided
for the OECD social-expenditure database by national authorities is zero, or no data were
given. In five of these countries, this is the true figure: there are no separate public-sector
schemes. However, the OECD’s understanding is that there should be relatively large
expenditures for Iceland and Luxembourg and positive, albeit small, ones for Italy and New
Zealand. 7 These cases are marked with an asterisk. A similar concern applies to Belgium,
where the reported figures include primarily public corporations and a small sector of local
government. Again, other sources suggest that there are separate arrangements for central

7
 In both cases, not all central-government or public-sector employees are members of schemes that top-up
national pension provision. In Italy’s case, these schemes provide relatively modest benefits.



                                                  12
and regional governments. Swiss occupational pensions—ccompulsory for both private and
public sectors—were discussed previously.                      The expenditure on these schemes for
public-sector workers appears to be reported together with the private sector in the category
of “mandatory private schemes” in the database.

                           Figure 4. Fiscal Costs of Public-Sector Pensions, 2007

                           Central government/civil service            Broader public sector


          Greece                                                      Canada
          France                                                       Poland
          Austria                                                     Sweden
        Portugal                                                       Mexico
          Finland                                                     Slovenia
            Chile                                                     Belgium
                                                                                      *
                                                                   Switzerland
    United States
                                                                                  *
United Kingdom                                                         Turkey
           Israel                                                      Iceland
                                                                          Italy
                                                                                  *
        Germany
                                                                  Luxembourg
                                                                                  *
        Australia
                                                                                  *
                                                                 New Zealand
           Japan
                                                               Czech Republic
                                                                                  *
        Denmark
     Netherlands                                                       Estonia
           Korea                                                      Hungary
          Ireland                                                      Norway
           Spain                                               Slovak Republic
                 0        1        2         3        4                       0        1        2         3        4
            Public pension expenditure, per cent of GDP                  Public pension expenditure, per cent of GDP

Note:       An asterisk (*) next to the country entry shows that the OECD secretariat believes that there are
            expenditures missing from the database. Data for Australia, Canada, Chile, Turkey and United States
            relate to 2008 and for the Netherlands to 2005.
Source:     OECD social-expenditure database (SOCX).


The proportion of total pension expenditure 8 going to public-sector schemes (Figure 5) has a
very different pattern from expenditures relative to national income (which were shown in
Figure 4). The largest shares are in Korea: over 40 percent of pension spending goes to central
government and over 60 percent to the broader public sector. This is explained by the


8
 This refers to old-age and survivors’ cash benefits. The source is again the OECD social-expenditure database
(SOCX).



                                                          13
immaturity of the national pension scheme: it was only established in 1988, and so current
retirees have spent much less than full careers covered by the programme. The public-sector
share will therefore diminish rapidly over coming years as the national scheme matures. The
next highest proportions of pension expenditure going on the public sector occur in Australia,
Chile, Israel, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The high share in these five
countries—above 40 percent—can primarily be explained by the relatively modest size of
national schemes. Replacement rates for private-sector workers on average earnings from
the public component are less than 20 percent in three of them, 32 percent in the United
Kingdom, and 39 percent in the United States. This compares with an OECD average of 42
percent. 9 On average in the 25 countries shown, about a quarter of public pension spending
is accounted for by public-sector schemes.

        Figure 5. Costs of Pensions for Public-Sector Employees, Percent of Total Public Pension
                                           Expenditure, 2007

                               Central government/civil service                Broader public sector


                Korea                                            Netherlands

                 Chile                                                 Denmark

                Israel                                                  Canada

       United Kingdom                                                  Germany

         United States                                                    Japan

             Australia                                                    Spain

               Mexico                                                   Sweden

              Finland                                                    Poland

              Greece                                                    Belgium

             Portugal                                                  Slovenia

               Ireland                                               Switzerland

               France                                                    Turkey

               Austria
                     0    10     20    30     40    50     60                      0      10      20    30     40     50      60
                    Expenditure on pensions for public-sector                          Expenditure on pensions for public-sector
                          employees, per cent of total public                                employees, per cent of total public
                                        pension expenditure                                                pension expenditure


     Note:   Zero figures for the Czech Republic, Estonia, Italy, Luxembourg, New Zealand, Norway, and the Slovak
             Republic not shown. Data are unavailable for Hungary and Mexico.
     Source: OECD social-expenditure database (SOCX).

9
    See the indicator of “Gross Replacement Rates: Public and Private Schemes” on pp. 120-121 of OECD 2011a.



                                                                14
5.        Reform options: Improving pension-scheme finances

The policy options for improving the finances of pension schemes for public-sector workers
are broadly the same as those that might be applied in reforms of national pension schemes.
However, the overall effects may differ between changes to civil-service and national
programmes.

The analysis considers three types of pension arrangement. The first is a national defined-
benefit scheme. It is assumed that this is an earnings-related scheme: basic pensions and
resource-tested benefits are not considered directly here. The second category includes
defined-contribution schemes, which are currently mandatory or quasi-mandatory in 11
OECD countries. It also includes notional accounts, which are generally pay-as-you-go
financed (like most national defined-benefit schemes) but the benefit formula is designed to
mimic the features of defined-contribution plans. Hence, they are often called “notional
defined-contribution” schemes. 10 The final case is the civil-service scheme. To keep things
simple, it is assumed that this is of the defined-benefit type.

Table 2 frames the discussion of the three scheme types in a stylised way. It sets out five
common policies to improve the finances of the retirement-income system. The first two are
designed to reduce benefit expenditure.

Changing the accrual rate—the amount of pension earned for each year of contributions—is
the most direct way of affecting benefits. In practice, such a direct approach is relatively rare.
Far more common are indirect changes to the benefit formula: see Whitehouse et al. (2009)
for a summary of recent reforms in OECD countries. These indirect approaches include
moving the earnings base from a limited number of best or final year’s pay to the whole
career. Another indirect method is to change valorisation: the way in which earlier years’
earnings are revalued when calculating benefits to adjust for changes in costs or standards of



10
  See Whitehouse 2010, 2012 for a discussion of notional accounts and their relationship to other types of
pension scheme.



                                                   15
living over time. All of these changes can be grouped together. And they have the same
effect in defined-benefit schemes whether for private- or public-sector workers (or both).11
Expenditures on the defined-benefit scheme will be lower. However, some of this financial
gain might be offset by higher spending on resource-tested benefits for low earners,
depending on the scale and scope of national safety-net programmes.

The second method of affecting benefit expenditures is to change the way that pensions in
payment are adjusted to reflect changes in costs of living. Many governments have changed
indexation policies (usually to a less generous procedure). But many have often ignored their
own indexation rules when making benefit adjustments.12 The effects of a change in
indexation policy should again be the same for the defined-benefit schemes, whether in the
public or private sector. However, this is not true of defined-contribution schemes. Annuity
values vary automatically with indexation: a price-indexed annuity gives a smaller first-year
payment than an unindexed annuity, for example, reflecting expected rates of inflation. The
annuity calculation should automatically adjust so that the expected lifetime value of
payments remains the same regardless of the indexation procedure. The same should also
be the case with notional accounts (and for the same reasons). 13 Since expected lifetime
benefits are equal ex ante regardless of the indexation method chosen, changes in policy do
not affect pension costs.

Increases in pensionable age—the third policy option in Table 2—have become increasingly
common: more than half of OECD countries are increasing ages for national pension
schemes. 14 In the context of defined-benefit schemes (national or public-service), there are
two unambiguously positive effects. First, the benefit will be paid for a shorter period and so


11
   These adjustments to the benefit formula do not, however, apply to notional accounts or defined-contribution
schemes.
12
    See Whitehouse 2009 for evidence on national pension schemes.
13
   It would be possible to calculate the annuity rate in notional accounts using a different indexation assumption
than that paid on benefits in practice. But this would violate the principles of “actuarial fairness” that are meant
to underlie notional defined-contribution plans. See Queisser and Whitehouse 2006 and Whitehouse 2010,
2012.
14
   See Chomik and Whitehouse 2010; OECD 2011a, Part I.1 and OECD 2012.



                                                        16
the cost over the individual’s lifetime is lower. Secondly, people working longer will pay more
in contributions. Offsetting this, the extra pension component of social contributions will
mean that people will usually have a larger benefit entitlement. The degree of offset depends
on the implicit return on those contributions. If a system pays a high return, then the cost of
the extra benefits will outweigh the extra pension contribution revenues over time. (There
are other taxes and contributions that still benefit the public purse, but the focus here is just
on the pension system.)           The crucial difference between national and public-sector
arrangements is that employer pension contributions are a gain for the public finances in the
case of national scheme: a transfer from employers (on behalf of their employees) to the
government. However, since the government as an employer is simply paying pension
contributions to itself on behalf of its employees, there is no net effect on the public finances
with public-service plans. There is simply a re-labelling of the various flows in the government
accounts. (This important distinction is explored in more detail in the paragraphs on
contribution changes below.)

  Table 2. Overall Financial Impact of Reform Measures for Different Types of Pension Scheme

 Reform                       National for private-sector    National for private-sector         Public-sector
                                       workers                        workers                  workers’ scheme
                                  (defined-benefit)           (defined-contribution or         (defined-benefit)
                                                                 notional accounts)
 Reduced accrual rates etc.   - positive                    - not applicable             - positive
                              - but may be offset by                                     - but may be offset by
                                higher spending on                                         higher spending on
                                safety-net benefits                                        safety-net benefits
 Less generous indexation     - positive                    - none                       - positive
 of pensions in payment
 Increase pensionable age     - positive: extra revenues    - small or zero: extra         - positive: extra employee
                                and shorter benefit           contributions balanced by      contribution revenues
                                duration                      extra benefits and shorter     and shorter benefit
                              - but may be offset by          benefit duration by            duration
                                higher accruals and           higher benefit amount        - but may be offset by
                                higher spending on          - may be offset by higher        higher accruals and
                                unemployment or               spending on other              higher spending on other
                                disability benefits           benefits                       benefits
                              - positive effect if extra    - positive effect if extra     - may be offset by higher
                                benefits reduce spending      benefits reduce spending       pay bill
                                on safety-net schemes         on safety-net schemes        - positive effect if extra
                                                                                             benefits reduce spending
                                                                                             on safety-net schemes




                                                       17
  Table 2. Overall Financial Impact of Reform Measures for Different Types of Pension Scheme
                                            (Continued)

 Reform                   National for private-sector    National for private-sector         Public-sector
                                   workers                        workers                  workers’ scheme
                              (defined-benefit)           (defined-contribution or         (defined-benefit)
                                                             notional accounts)
 Increase employee       - positive: extra revenues     - none: extra contribution - positive: extra revenues
 contributions           - but may be offset by           revenues balanced by       - but may be offset by
                           labour-supply effect           extra benefits               upward wage pressure
 Increase employer       - positive: extra revenues     - none: extra contribution - none: re-labelling
 contributions           - but may be offset by           revenues balanced by
                           labour-demand effect           extra benefits



With notional accounts and defined-contribution plans, the relevant pension schemes’
finances are unchanged with an increase in pension age. The shorter benefit duration is
reflected automatically in a higher per-period benefit.                Furthermore, the additional
contributions match the additional accrual of benefits (exactly in the defined-contribution
case and under certain assumptions of “actuarial fairness” in the case of notional accounts:
see Queisser and Whitehouse, 2006).

In all three categories of scheme, there may be an offset to expenditure savings from a higher
pension age. This is because people who would have retired on an old-age pension may now
effectively leave the labour market early through other pathways, such as unemployment,
long-term sickness or disability benefits. These effects are difficult to quantify. Working in
the opposite direction, people working longer and accruing higher benefits might reduce the
burden of paying safety-net benefits to retirees who had low earnings.

With public-sector schemes, however, there is a further effect from increasing pension ages
not observed for the other scheme types. This arises because these are effectively a “closed”
system. Most civil services have an automatic link between individuals’ length of service and
pay. A study of practices in 18 OECD countries found that five (including Ireland and Spain)
automatically increased pay with seniority in the public service while five (including Hungary
and the Netherlands) linked pay to seniority in a particular post. In some further cases, such




                                                 18
as the United States, length-of-service increments are dependent on achieving an acceptable
level of performance. 15 Employees working longer will therefore see their pay increase
automatically in most OECD countries. If the counterfactual were that new hires with lower
pay would replace worker remaining in their jobs for longer, then the pay bill for the public
service will increase. (This also holds if the new hire is at a relatively junior grade and other
existing workers all move up a notch.) This effect also has implications for defined-benefit
pensions, especially where entitlements are based on final salary. Care is therefore needed
when increasing pensionable ages for public-sector workers to ensure that the savings from
paying pensions for a shorter period are not offset by a higher pay bill in the short term and
higher pensions as people retire on larger salaries.

The final two of the five policy options in Table 2 are designed to generate extra revenues for
the pension system through increases in contribution rates. With a national defined-benefit
scheme, such a change has the expected, positive effect on the scheme’s finances. With
notional accounts and defined-contribution plans, however, this is not the case. There is a
short-term boost to government revenues under notional accounts, for example, but this will
be balanced by a broadly equivalent increase in future benefit expenditures (again,
depending on the degree of “actuarial fairness” in the detailed design of the scheme).

There are, however, potential offsets in economic behaviour in all cases: national defined-
benefit, defined-contribution and notional-account plans. Higher employee contributions
will have the effect of an increase in taxes and may therefore reduce labour supply. Higher
employer contributions increase employers’ labour costs and so may reduce labour demand.
In both of these cases, employment will be lower, offsetting some of the revenues raised by
higher contributions. 16, 17


15
     OECD 2007b.
16
   Some of the extra cost of employer contributions may also be passed on to employees in the form of lower
wages, thus mitigating the impact on employment. But this will reduces the base for contributions and so the
revenues collected.
17
   The degree to which contributions are (or are perceived to be) a tax and its impact on employment is studied
by Disney 2004.



                                                      19
Again, however, the impact of these changes in public-sector schemes is different. Higher
employee contributions are a reduction in the take-home pay of public employees. This may
lead over time to upward pressure on public-sector pay to offset the impact of the additional
levy. Even if maintained, it might hamper efforts to recruit workers for public-sector jobs or
perhaps lower the quality and productivity of new hires.

For employer contributions, the government is simply paying more money to itself. This
might, for example, eliminate a deficit in the finance of the public-sector pension system. But
the economic position of the government is unchanged: either it covers the deficit or it pays
higher contributions to itself. Hence, this is an exercise in re-labelling and has no direct
consequence for the overall state of the public finances.

6.           Pension portability and labour mobility

Most OECD countries have moved towards a much more open recruitment policy of the
public service in recent years. This implies an increase in mobility between the public and
private sectors: often called “revolving doors”. The reasoning is that cross-fertilisation
between the two sectors is of benefit to both, as people bring different skills and experience
to bear in different settings.

The OECD has summarised the degree of openness in human-resources policies in civil
services in 26 countries.            The most open countries—such as Australia, Finland, the
Netherlands, Sweden, and the United Kingdom—follow a “position-based” approach. All
vacancies are published and all or most posts, including senior management, are open to
external applicants. Appointments are made by panels. In contrast, recruitment is relatively
closed in France, Ireland and Japan, for example.            Appointments are often based on
competitive examinations, few posts are published or open to external applicants and senior
managers are either selected early in their careers by exam or through career progression
within the civil service. 18 Whatever the relative merits of these two approaches, it is apparent


18
     See OECD 2007, Figure 2.2 and the discussion thereof.



                                                       20
that most OECD countries are now towards the open end of the spectrum and most have
been moving in that direction.

The pension arrangements for public-sector workers are often ill-equipped to deal with
mobility. They were designed for a situation when people spent all or most of their career in
the civil service from their 20s until retirement. Pension schemes can penalise mobile
workers in two main ways.

The first is through long “vesting” periods. People who leave the public service before their
pension rights are vested often receive nothing from the system, or, at best, a modest lump
sum reflecting individual contributions. The minimum length of service to qualify for a
pension benefit varies significantly. Vesting is immediate (or takes one year or less) in
Canada, Finland, the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom, for
example. At the other end of the spectrum, service of at least 15 years is needed in Austria,
France, Portugal and Spain. In between, there is five-year vesting in Belgium, Germany,
Ireland and Italy, for example.

The second way in which the pension system impedes mobility is through the treatment of
“early leavers”. These are people whose pension rights are vested but who leave the civil
service before retirement. An important concept here is that of “preservation”. The former
public servant’s pension is deferred from the time they leave the job until retirement, but
some adjustment is made to the benefit value to reflect changes in costs or standards of living
during that period. This preserves to some degree the value of the benefit at the time of
leaving the job.19

There are five different kinds of treatment of early leavers. In Finland, the Netherlands and
Sweden, for example, there is full transferability. Workers move to private-sector mandatory
(or quasi-mandatory) occupational plans with similar benefits to the civil-service plan. In



19
  Preservation is thus akin to “valorisation” or pre-retirement indexation of benefits: see OECD 2011a for a
discussion.



                                                    21
France, there is full preservation of pension entitlements. Workers’ accrued rights are
indexed in line with civil-service pay between leaving and retirement. 20

In other cases, moving jobs entails a pension “cost”. The following paragraphs aim to quantify
these costs for some selected countries. Each of these illustrates a particular treatment of
early leavers: deferral without preservation, partial preservation and retrospective loss of
pension privileges.

In the absence of an example within the OECD, the first of these three—deferral without
preservation—is illustrated with the example of Mauritius.21 The left-hand panel of Figure 6
plots accrued pension rights by age. The straight line shows the value of accrued rights if the
civil servant stays until retirement: each extra year adds 1/50 of final salary to the eventual
pension benefit. The complex curve shows the value of accrued rights if the individual were
to leave his or her job at the specified ages. Up to ten years’ service, the pension is zero. At
that point, people become eligible for a lump sum of one year’s salary. At 15 years’ service,
people are eligible for a deferred pension benefit, that is, their rights are vested. The value
of the pension is based on their current salary, with no adjustment to reflect pre-retirement
increases in the cost and standard of living (that is, preservation). This is therefore still much
lower than the accrued rights would be if the individual were to remain until retirement.

The pension cost of leaving a civil-service job is defined as the difference between the value
of accrued pension rights on leaving and the value of accrued pension rights conditional on
staying until retirement (that is, the difference between the line and the curve in the left-
hand chart of Figure 6). The streams of pension defined benefits can then be converted to a
net present value using standard actuarial techniques. This is illustrated in the right-hand
panel of Figure 6, with the pension cost of moving jobs normalised as a multiple of the current
salary. On this measure, the penalty to mobility in Mauritius is large at young ages because
leaving results in a pension of zero, whereas staying to retirement gives multiples of pre-

20
     See Conseil d’Orientation des Retraites 2011.
21
     Piggott and Whitehouse 2001 provide a comprehensive survey of the Mauritian retirement-income system.



                                                     22
retirement salary for each year of service. The pre-retirement salary is obviously much higher
than current pay. The cost falls back once the individual is eligible for a lump-sum payment,
but the penalty for leaving just before pension rights are vested reaches nearly eight times
current salary around age 40. After vesting, there is still a large cost to moving jobs because
the deferred pension is based on current nominal earnings. As retirement age approaches,
the loss of pension benefit due to the difference in salary at retirement age and current salary
diminishes.

The United Kingdom improved protection for early leavers in both public- and private-sector
pension schemes in a series of reforms from the 1970s to the 1990s. Although the civil-
service pension is based on final salary, deferred benefits are adjusted in line with price
inflation (up to a ceiling) between leaving the scheme and drawing the pension. This still,
however, entails a cost to moving jobs if earnings would have grown in real terms if the
individual had remained in the public sector. The pension cost of moving jobs in the United
Kingdom is also illustrated in the right-hand chart of Figure 6, assuming 2 percent annual
growth in real earnings. The peak cost, for people in their early 40s, is just 1.5 times current
salary. This compares with nearly eight times in Mauritius. This shows the significant effect
that Inflation-proofing through partial preservation has on pension rights of early leavers.




                                              23
                                                    Figure 6. Pension Cost of Moving Jobs

             Value of accrued pension rights by age:                                  Lifetime value of lost pension rights by age:
                            Mauritius                                                  Germany, Mauritius and United Kingdom

Value of accrued pension                                                    Cost of leaving, multiple of annual earnings
                                                                            8

                                                                                             Mauritius
                                                                                                                deferred
                                    staying to
                                                                            6                                   pension
                                    retirement

           Area between curves =
           pension cost of                                                                      lump sum
           moving jobs
                                                                            4                                       Germany

                                                  leaving job
                                                                            2

                    lump sum            deferred pension                                                         United
                                                                                                                Kingdom
                                                                            0
 25         30        35           40       45        50        55    60        25      30         35      40       45     50    55    60
                                                                     Age                                                              Age

      Note:          Based on standard OECD 2011a assumptions of 2 percent annual real earnings growth, 2 percent real
                     discount rate and 2.5 percent price inflation. Numbers on scale of left-hand chart omitted
                     deliberately.
      Source:       Author’s calculations: see text and Palacios and Whitehouse 2006 for a detailed discussion of
                    methodology.


      The final treatment of early leavers is loss of pension privileges. In Germany, people leaving
      civil-service jobs lose their rights under the civil-service scheme and are retrospectively
      transferred to the national scheme. The civil-service plan is more generous than the general
      one, so this transfer entails a considerable cost. This is also illustrated in the right-hand chart
      of Figure 6. The pattern of the pension cost of changing jobs with age is considerably different
      to the inverted-U shape in the case of deferred benefits without preservation (Mauritius) and
      with preservation of real values (the United Kingdom). In the case of Germany, it rises
      continuously with age as the loss from the retroactive transfer to the general scheme applies
      to a longer accrued service. 22



      22
        People may, of course, move from the private into the public sector. However, the pension penalties from
      moving jobs are typically confined to early leavers (people who leave the public service before retirement) and
      so are not as significant for people moving from private to public employment. When people move more than
      once between sectors, then the calculations become extremely complex.



                                                                           24
The analysis of the pension cost of moving out of the public service into the private sector
naturally begs the question of whether this affects individual behaviour. Pension systems are
inherently complex and the actuarial calculations underpinning the illustrations in Figure 6
are not easy. Individuals, unaware of the pension penalty they face in moving jobs (or
perhaps discounting these future benefits at a very high rate), might be unaffected. But the
evidence suggests that final-salary, defined-benefit pension schemes—the norm for public-
sector arrangements—do affect job mobility negatively. 23

Can public-sector pensions’ role in reducing job mobility be justified? The answer to this
question lies in the literature on efficient labour-market contracts, which is summarised
briefly.24      The market for labour—as for goods and services—is subject to various
asymmetries of information between sellers (workers) and buyers (employers). The most
important of these is the amount of effort a worker puts into a job, which is impossible for
employers to monitor completely. Assume that employees are averse to effort—so there is
a kind of “moral hazard”—and that the probability of an employer detecting shirking (and
firing the employee) is positive, but less than one. “Back-loading” remuneration provides a
mechanism to encourage effort, and this may be achieved by having earnings profiles that
increase with seniority (by more than productivity would dictate) or through defined-benefit
pensions. This is particularly true of pensions based on final salary, because the benefit value
depends very strongly on tenure in the job. This is the “carrot” part of incentives to work
hard; the “stick” occurs when remuneration in alternative employment is lower.

There are many problems with this analysis. First, back-loading of remuneration means that
younger employees are paid less than their marginal productivity would suggest, while older
workers are paid more.              Younger employees might be tempted by better immediate


23
  McCormick and Hughes 1984 is the classic paper on the United Kingdom; see also Disney and Whitehouse
1996. The literature on the United States is more voluminous: Kotlikoff and Wise 1987, Allen, Clark and
McDermed 1993 and Gustman and Steinmeier 1993 are prominent examples. Note that these analyses look at
both public- and private-sector defined-benefit schemes based on final salaries, but this does not affect the
argument.
24
     Lazear 1981 and 1985, Viscusi 1985, and Ippolito 1991 are the pioneering papers.



                                                        25
remuneration elsewhere, which would be profitable for those employers. Older employees
tend to cling on to their jobs and so rules or incentives are needed to push these people into
retirement (whilst avoiding severance costs). 25 There is also an important question of the
credibility of promises of future wage increases and defined-benefit pensions, given the risk
of bankruptcy (in the private sector), downsizing, underfunded pension schemes etc. Some
job mobility is always optimal, even if only to separate out inefficient matches of workers to
jobs: the problem of “square pegs in round holes”. Finally, pensions are not necessarily the
most efficient form of “golden hand-cuffs”. 26

7.           Conclusions and policy implications

The policy conclusions come in three parts, the first of which returns to the fundamental
design of retirement-income provision for public-sector workers. Two polar cases of pension
architecture were identified: a single national pension system covering public and private
sectors alike and entirely separate pension schemes applying to the two groups of workers.
Most OECD countries lie between these two poles, but they are nonetheless useful
benchmarks for the discussion.

Many analyses of pension provision for public employees in the 21st century begin with
history. Pension schemes for civil servants and other public-sector employees—in the
military, education and publicly owned enterprises, such as railways and postal services—
were often among the first groups of workers to be covered by formal, collective pension
schemes.

Subsequently, mandatory retirement-income provision was extended to employees in the
private sector. There often seemed little point in including public-sector workers—with their
own, existing pension arrangements—in new national pension schemes. Separate pension
schemes also provided additional degrees of freedom in the government’s human-resources
policy as an employer, both in recruitment and retention. At the same time, public servants

25
     This is Lazear’s 1979 explanation for the existence of mandatory retirement rules.
26
     Akerlof and Katz 1989.



                                                         26
and their trade unions have proved powerful in protecting their own financial interests and
governments may have been keen to push the cost of remunerating their employees into the
future by offering pay-as-you-go pensions (effectively deferred pay) instead of higher current
salaries.

For these reasons, special retirement-income schemes for the public sector have often
persisted. The key policy question is whether this “dualism” of retirement-income provision
still makes sense today or whether public-sector workers should be integrated into a single
national pension programme.

First, many of the historical rationales for the original public-sector pension arrangements are
less relevant. For example, a common objective was to retire older civil servants in a
politically and socially acceptable way. Thus, public employees would not be forced, for
financial reasons, to continue working (at the extreme) until the day they died. This no longer
applies now that national pension systems are in place. Pension schemes were often part of
broader reform of the civil service to ensure professionalism (through meritocratic
appointments) and independence of employees from outside influence. The latter was to be
achieved through lifetime employment and pensions, so that public-sector workers could not
profit from their experience in the private sector. This is less relevant today in the world of
“revolving doors” between the two sectors discussed in Section 6. The evidence on the extent
of mobility is somewhat limited, but a number of countries show that few retiring public-
sector workers have spent all or nearly all of their careers in a single scheme. Other
mechanisms have been put in place to avoid conflicts of interest that might arise from
revolving doors. Pension schemes were also designed to enhance the appeal of working for
the public service. Attracting high-quality staff remains an important goal. But public-sector
pensions are often expensive, and it is important to evaluate whether this is a cost-effective
recruitment tool compared with alternative policies. How highly do public-sector workers
value their pension entitlements relative to their cost? 27 Furthermore, many highly qualified

27
  See the National Audit Office’s 2010 critique of the assessment of public-sector pension reforms in the United
Kingdom, for example.



                                                      27
workers today expect a varied career: pension schemes that penalise people who change jobs
may act as a disincentive to public service.

Secondly, there are many arguments against dualism. As often found in economics, the
arguments can be divided into those concerned with equity and those related to efficiency.
On the equity side, the issue of comparability of benefits between public- and private-sector
retirement-income provision was raised in the introduction. After all, it is private-sector
workers’ taxes that finance much of public-sector workers’ pensions. Comparability of
pension packages between sectors is in constant flux. For example, many national pension
schemes have seen significant reforms in the past two decades (Whitehouse et al. 2009).
Furthermore, there has been much change to private pensions for private-sector workers in
most of the countries where coverage of these is broad. In Canada, Ireland, Sweden, the
United Kingdom and the United States, for example, there is a pronounced trend away from
defined-benefit to defined-contribution provision. 28 This can leave defined-benefit schemes
for public-sector workers looking anachronistic. It seems difficult to argue that public-sector
workers require higher income replacement in retirement (or consumption smoothing over
the lifecycle) than their counterparts in the private sector. Similarly, lower pensionable ages
in the public service are enjoyed by rather more workers than might be justified on the
grounds of the nature of the work that they undertake. 29

On the efficiency side, administrative issues can be important.                 There are significant
economies of scale in managing unified pension systems: in contribution collection, record-
keeping and benefit payment, for example.               Dual arrangements can entail significant
duplication and wasted administrative expense, especially in smaller countries. But even in
larger countries, there are cases of very fragmented provision between different groups of
public-sector workers. 30 Furthermore, the people who manage national pension schemes
are generally employees of the civil service or of general government. If they are also


28
   See Box I.1 in OECD 2009a for detailed data on this trend.
29
   Moreover, these arguments might apply to many private-sector workers: see Zaidi and Whitehouse 2009.
30
   See Sliuchynsky 2015 for detailed analysis.



                                                   28
members of the national scheme, they have a direct, personal interest in ensuring that this
programme is well managed. Next, barriers to mobility between public and private sectors
may reduce economic efficiency. (Even if the pension cost of moving jobs does not affect
behaviour, there is an equity issue between the treatment of workers that stay to retirement
and early leavers.) The complexity of pension arrangements in public and private sectors
makes it very difficult for individuals to compare the attractiveness of different jobs. Through
greater transparency, a common pension scheme would make such choices easier.

Starting from first principles, an integrated national pension scheme, covering both public
and private sectors, would make sense.          Governments might wish to offer top-up
arrangements, but these need careful evaluation against alternative policies. However,
because we are not starting from scratch, integration can only be a long-term goal. First steps
towards it would include a degree of harmonisation of parameter and rules between the
separate arrangements. This requires other parts of the terms and conditions of public-sector
employment—including pay—to be taken into account. The argument is often and widely
put that higher pensions for public-sector employees than offered by national schemes are a
form of compensation for lower wages. The vast literature analysing differentials between
the two sectors does not, however, provide robust evidence for such a differential. First, the
differences in characteristics between public- and private-sector employees need to be taken
into account: the public sector, for example, employs a disproportionate share of graduates.
Secondly, the pay differentials have often been found to vary between different kinds of
people: between men and women and between people with high levels of educational
attainment and those with lower education levels. Careful analysis of both pay differentials
and of differences in pension entitlements are needed before a definitive assessment of the
compensation argument for different public-sector pension arrangements.

Within the OECD, Chile, Mexico, and the United States have integrated many or most
public-sector workers into national pension schemes, while in Turkey there is an on-going




                                              29
debate about such a reform. Outside of the OECD, there are a few examples of similar
integration into national retirement-income arrangements.31

Short of full integration, the policy reforms implied by the analysis include those to improve
portability of pension rights between different pension schemes. These comprise shorter
vesting periods, preservation of the value of deferred benefits and basing pensions on
lifetime rather than final salary. Options for improving the financial position of public-sector
pensions are the same as national pension schemes. However, their effects—particularly
increasing pension ages and changing employee or employer contribution rates—can be
different between public-sector and national schemes.

There is not a great deal of analysis of retirement-income provision for public-sector workers
at a cross-country level. In part, policy in this area falls between pension analysis—which
focuses mainly on the design of national schemes or the functioning of private pensions—
and analysis of public sector governance. At the heart of this is the conflict between the
social-policy objective of ensuring adequate retirement-incomes for all and human-resources
goals, such as rewarding long-serving public employees.            It is important that both
perspectives are taken into account.




31
     Palacios and Whitehouse 2006, Table 11.



                                               30
                                           REFERENCES


Akerlof, G.A., and L.F. Katz. 1989. “Workers’ Trust Funds and the Logic of Wage Profiles”, Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 104 (3): 525-536.

Allen, S.G., R. Clark, and A. McDermed. 1993. “Pensions, Bonding and Lifetime Jobs”, Journal of
      Human Resources, 28 (3): 463-481.

Chomik, R., and E.R. Whitehouse. 2010. “Trends in Pension Eligibility Ages and Life Expectancy,
      1950-2050”, Social, Employment and Migration Working Paper No. 105, OECD, Paris.

Conseil d’Orientation des Retraites. 2011. “Neuvième Rapport du Conseil d’Orientation des
      Retraites, Retraites: La Situation des Polypensionnés”, Paris.

Disney, R.F. 2004. “Are Contributions to Public Pension Programmes a Tax on Employment?”
      Economic Policy, 19 (39): 267-311.

Disney, R.F., and E.R. Whitehouse. 1996. “What Are Occupational Pension Entitlements Worth in
      Britain?” Economica, 63: 213-238.

Gustman, A.L., and T.L. Steinmeier. 1993), “Pension Portability and Labor Mobility: Evidence from
      the Survey of Income and Program Participation”, Journal of Public Economics, 50: 299-323.

Independent Public Service Pensions Commission, United Kingdom. 2009. Interim Report. London:
      HM Treasury.

Ippolito, R.A. 1991. “Encouraging Long Tenure: Wage Tilt or Pensions”, Industrial and Labor
      Relations Review, 44 (3): 520-535.

Kotlikoff, L.J., and D.A. Wise. 1987. “The Incentive Effects of Private Pension Plans”. In Issues in
      Pension Economics, edited by Z. Bodie, J.B. Shoven and D.A. Wise. Chicago: University of
      Chicago Press for National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lazear, E. 1979. “Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?” Journal of Political Economy, 87:
      1261-1284.




                                                   31
Lazear, E. 1981. “Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity and Hours Restrictions”, American Economic
      Review, 71: 606-620.

Lazear, E. 1985. “Incentive Effects of Pensions”. In Pensions, Labor and Individual Choice, edited by
      D.A. Wise. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for National Bureau of Economic Research.

McCormick, B., and G. Hughes. 1984. “The Influence of Pensions on Job Mobility”, Journal of Public
      Economics, 23: 183-206.

National Audit Office, United Kingdom. 2010. The Impact of the 2007-08 Changes to Public Service
      Pensions, Report by the Comptroller and Auditor General, HC 662. London: The Stationery
      Office.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2007a. “Public Sector Pensions
      and the Challenge of an Ageing Public Service”, Working Paper on Public Governance no.
      2007/2, OECD, Paris.

_____. 2007b. Ageing and the Public Service: Human Resource Challenges. Paris: OECD.

_____. 2008. The State of the Public Service. Paris: OECD.

_____. 2009a. Pensions at a Glance: Retirement-Income Systems in OECD Countries. Paris: OECD.

_____. 2009b. Government at a Glance. Paris: OECD.

_____. 2011a. Pensions at a Glance: Retirement-Income Systems in OECD and G20 Countries. Paris:
      OECD.

_____. 2011b. Government at a Glance. Paris: OECD.

Palacios, R.J., and E.R. Whitehouse. 2006. “Civil-service Pension Schemes Around the World”,
      Pension Reform Primer Series, Social Protection Discussion Paper no. 06/02, World Bank,
      Washington, D.C.

Piggott, J., and E.R. Whitehouse. 2001. Pensions in Paradise: Modernising the Mauritian Retirement-
      Income System. Port Louis: Ministry of Finance.




                                                  32
Queisser, M., and E.R. Whitehouse. 2006. “Neutral or Fair? Actuarial Concepts and Pension-System
      Design”, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Paper no. 40, OECD, Paris.

Schreitmueller, R.G. 1988. “The Federal Employees Retirement System Act of 1986”, Transactions of
      Society of Actuaries, 40 (I): 543-602.

Sluchynsky, O. 2015. “Defining, Measuring, and Benchmarking Administrative Expenditures of
      Mandatory Social Security Programs”, Social Protection and Labor Discussion Paper no. 1501,
      World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Viscusi, W.K. 1985. “The Structure of Uncertainty and the Use of Pensions as a Mobility-Reduction
      Device”. In Pensions, Labor and Individual Choice, edited by D.A. Wise. Chicago: University of
      Chicago Press for National Bureau of Economic Research.

Whitehouse, E.R. 2009. “Pensions, Purchasing-Power Risk, Inflation and Indexation”, Social,
      Employment and Migration Working Paper no. 77, OECD, Paris.

_____. 2010. “Decomposing Notional Defined-Contribution Pensions: Experience of OECD Countries’
      Reforms”, Social, Employment and Migration Working Paper no. 109, OECD, Paris.

_____. 2012. “Parallel Lines: NDC Pensions and the Direction of Reform in Developed Countries”. In
      Non-financial Defined-Contribution Pension Schemes in a Chaning Pensions World, edited by
      R. Holzmann, E. Palmer and D. Robalino, vol. 1, pp. 85-105. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Whitehouse, E.R., A.C. D’Addio, R. Chomik, and A. Reilly. 2009. “Two Decades of Pension Reform:
      What has been Achieved and What Remains to be Done?” Geneva Papers on Risk and
      Insurance, 34: 515-535.

Zaidi, A., and E.R. Whitehouse. 2009. “Should Pension Systems Recognise Hazardous and Arduous
      Work?” Social, Employment and Migration Working Paper no. 91, OECD, Paris.




                                                 33
               Social Protection & Labor Discussion Paper Series Titles
                                     2014-2016

No.    Title

1612   How to Target Households in Adaptive Social Protection Systems? Relative Efficiency of Proxy
       Means Test and Household Economy Analysis in Niger
       by Pascale Schnitzer, October 2016

1611   Pensions for Public-Sector Employees: Lessons from OECD Countries’ Experience
       by Edward Whitehouse, October 2016

1610   Pension Systems in Sub-Saharan Africa: Brief Review of Design Parameters and Key Performance
       Indicators
       by Miglena Abels and Melis U. Guven, October 2016

1609   Household Enterprises in Fragile and Conflict-Affected States: Results from a Qualitative Toolkit
       Piloted in Liberia, Volume 2 – Annexes
       by Emily Weedon and Gwendolyn Heaner, August 2016

1608   Household Enterprises in Fragile and Conflict-Affected States: Results from a Qualitative Toolkit
       Piloted in Liberia, Volume 1 – Report
       by Emily Weedon and Gwendolyn Heaner, August 2016

1607   Benefits and Costs of Social Pensions in Sub-Saharan Africa
       by Melis U. Guven and Phillippe G. Leite, June 2016

1606   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Germany-
       Turkey Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Michael Fuchs, Seçil Paçacı Elitok and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1605   Do Bilateral Social Security Agreements Deliver on the Portability of Pensions and Health Care
       Benefits? A Summary Policy Paper on Four Migration Corridors Between EU and Non-EU Member
       States
       by Robert Holzmann, May 2016

1604   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the France-Morocco
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Florence Legro and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1603   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Belgium-Morocco
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Jacques Wels and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1602   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Austria-Turkey
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Michael Fuchs, Seçil Paçaci Elitok and Pamela Dale, May 2016
1601   The Greek Pension Reform Strategy 2010-2016
       by Georgios Symeonidis, July 2016

1507   Integrating Disaster Response and Climate Resilience in Social Protection Programs in the Pacific
       Island Countries
       by Cecilia Costella and Oleksiy Ivaschenko, September 2015

1506   Effectiveness of Targeting Mechanisms Utilized in Social Protection Programs in Bolivia
       by Ignacio Apella and Gastón Blanco, September 2015

1505   Kyrgyz Republic: Social Sectors at a Glance
       by João Pedro Azevedo, Paula Calvo, Minh Nguyen and Josefina Posadas, August 2015

1504   Entering the City: Emerging Evidence and Practices with Safety Nets in Urban Areas
       by Ugo Gentilini, July 2015

1503   Pension Patterns in Sub-Saharan Africa
       by Mark Dorfman, July 2015

1502   Social Protection in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries: Trends and Challenges
       by Mirey Ovadiya, Adea Kryeziu, Syeda Masood and Eric Zapatero, April 2015

1501   Defining, Measuring, and Benchmarking Administrative Expenditures of Mandatory Social Security
       Programs
       by Oleksiy Sluchynsky, February 2015

1425   Old-Age Financial Protection in Malaysia: Challenges and Options
       by Robert Holzmann, November 2014

1424   Profiling the Unemployed: A Review of OECD Experiences and Implications for Emerging Economies
       by Artan Loxha and Matteo Morgandi, August 2014

1423   Any Guarantees? An Analysis of China’s Rural Minimum Living Standard Guarantee Program
       by Jennifer Golan, Terry Sicular and Nithin Umapathi, August 2014

1422   World Bank Support for Social Safety Nets 2007-2013: A Review of Financing, Knowledge Services
       and Results
       by Colin Andrews, Adea Kryeziu and Dahye Seo, June 2014

1421   STEP Skills Measurement Surveys: Innovative Tools for Assessing Skills
       by Gaëlle Pierre, Maria Laura Sanchez Puerta, Alexandria Valerio and Tania Rajadel, July 2014

1420   Our Daily Bread: What is the Evidence on Comparing Cash versus Food Transfers?
       by Ugo Gentilini, July 2014

1419   Rwanda: Social Safety Net Assessment
       by Alex Kamurase, Emily Wylde, Stephen Hitimana and Anka Kitunzi, July 2012
1418   Niger: Food Security and Safety Nets
       by Jenny C. Aker, Carlo del Ninno, Paul A. Dorosh, Menno Mulder-Sibanda and Setareh Razmara,
       February 2009

1417   Benin: Les Filets Sociaux au Bénin Outil de Réduction de la Pauvreté
       par Andrea Borgarello et Damien Mededji, Mai 2011

1416   Madagascar Three Years into the Crisis: An Assessment of Vulnerability and Social Policies and
       Prospects for the Future
       by Philippe Auffret, May 2012

1415   Sudan Social Safety Net Assessment
       by Annika Kjellgren, Christina Jones-Pauly, Hadyiat El-Tayeb Alyn, Endashaw Tadesse and Andrea
       Vermehren, May 2014

1414   Tanzania Poverty, Growth, and Public Transfers: Options for a National Productive Safety Net
       Program
       by W. James Smith, September 2011

1413   Zambia: Using Social Safety Nets to Accelerate Poverty Reduction and Share Prosperity
       by Cornelia Tesliuc, W. James Smith and Musonda Rosemary Sunkutu, March 2013

1412   Mali Social Safety Nets
       by Cécile Cherrier, Carlo del Ninno and Setareh Razmara, January 2011

1411   Swaziland: Using Public Transfers to Reduce Extreme Poverty
       by Lorraine Blank, Emma Mistiaen and Jeanine Braithwaite, November 2012

1410   Togo: Towards a National Social Protection Policy and Strategy
       by Julie van Domelen, June 2012

1409   Lesotho: A Safety Net to End Extreme Poverty
       by W. James Smith, Emma Mistiaen, Melis Guven and Morabo Morojele, June 2013

1408   Mozambique Social Protection Assessment: Review of Social Assistance Programs and Social
       Protection Expenditures
       by Jose Silveiro Marques, October 2012

1407   Liberia: A Diagnostic of Social Protection
       by Andrea Borgarello, Laura Figazzolo and Emily Weedon, December 2011

1406   Sierra Leone Social Protection Assessment
       by José Silvério Marques, John Van Dyck, Suleiman Namara, Rita Costa and Sybil Bailor, June 2013

1405   Botswana Social Protection
       by Cornelia Tesliuc, José Silvério Marques, Lillian Mookodi, Jeanine Braithwaite, Siddarth Sharma
       and Dolly Ntseane, December 2013
1404        Cameroon Social Safety Nets
            by Carlo del Ninno and Kaleb Tamiru, June 2012

1403        Burkina Faso Social Safety Nets
            by Cécile Cherrier, Carlo del Ninno and Setareh Razmara, January 2011

1402        Social Insurance Reform in Jordan: Awareness and Perceptions of Employment Opportunities for
            Women
            by Stefanie Brodmann, Irene Jillson and Nahla Hassan, June 2014

1401        Social Assistance and Labor Market Programs in Latin America: Methodology and Key Findings from
            the Social Protection Database
            by Paula Cerutti, Anna Fruttero, Margaret Grosh, Silvana Kostenbaum, Maria Laura Oliveri, Claudia
            Rodriguez-Alas, Victoria Strokova, June 2014


To view Social Protection & Labor Discussion papers published prior to 2013, please visit www.worldbank.org/spl.
Abstract

In 27 out of 34 OECD member countries, there is institutionally separate retirement income
provision for some or all public-sector workers. But the scope of these pension schemes varies
significantly: from a modest top-up to the national pension arrangements (covering private-sector
workers as well) to entirely independent retirement-income regimes. Average expenditure on
these schemes amounts to about 1.5 percent of GDP, or nearly a quarter of total public pension
spending.
Public-sector pension reform is an issue of great political importance in many countries. Central
governments’ workforces are ageing rapidly in all but four of the 26 countries for which data
are available. One in three of central-government employees were aged 50 and over in 2009,
compared with 22 percent in 1995. This rapid ageing is pushing up the cost of pension schemes
at a time when many OECD countries are embarking on fiscal consolidation.
This paper examines the arguments and the options for reforming public sector pension schemes
from an international viewpoint. It assesses five different policies to reduce expenditures or
increase contribution revenues, showing how these can have very different effects in a public-
sector scheme than with national retirement-income arrangements.




About this series

Social Protection & Labor Discussion Papers are published to communicate the results of The World Bank’s
work to the development community with the least possible delay. This paper therefore has not been
prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate for formally edited texts.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s), and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank
and its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments
they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgement on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.
For more information, please contact the Social Protection Advisory Service, The World Bank, 1818 H Street,
N.W., Room G7-803, Washington, DC 20433 USA. Telephone: (202) 458-5267, Fax: (202) 614-0471, E-mail:
socialprotection@worldbank.org or visit us on-line at www.worldbank.org/spl.

                                  © 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
