   LE A R N ING PR O DUC T




Public-Private
 Partnerships
     in Health
       World Bank Group
Engagement in Health PPPs

  An IEG Synthesis Report
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction   This work is a product of the staff of The World   RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
and Development / The World Bank               Bank with external contributions. The findings,    The material in this work is subject to copyright.
1818 H Street NW                               interpretations, and conclusions expressed in      Because The World Bank encourages
Washington, DC 20433                           this work do not necessarily reflect the views     dissemination of its knowledge, this work
Telephone: 202-473-1000                        of The World Bank, its Board of Executive          may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
Internet: www.worldbank.org                    Directors, or the governments they represent.      noncommercial purposes as long as full
                                                                                                  attribution to this work is given.
                                               The World Bank does not guarantee the
                                               accuracy of the data included in this work.        Any queries on rights and licenses, including
                                               The boundaries, colors, denominations, and         subsidiary rights, should be addressed to
                                               other information shown on any map in this         World Bank Publications, The World Bank
                                               work do not imply any judgment on the part         Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC
                                               of The World Bank concerning the legal             20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail:
                                               status of any territory or the endorsement         pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                               or acceptance of such boundaries.
Public-Private Partnerships in Health
World Bank Group Engagement in Health PPPs
An IEG Synthesis Report
Contents
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ........................................................................................................................ IV

ABBREVIATIONS .................................................................................................................................. V

OVERVIEW............................................................................................................................................ VI

MANAGEMENT COMMENTS ................................................................................................................ X

1.          BACKGROUND ......................................................................................................................... 1
            Defining PPPs in the Health Sector .......................................................................................................................... 3
            Objectives ................................................................................................................................................................. 4
            Scope and Methodology ........................................................................................................................................... 5


2.           WORLD BANK GROUP PORTFOLIO ..................................................................................... 7

3.          RELEVANCE OF WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT ........................................................... 10

4.          COORDINATION ACROSS THE WORLD BANK GROUP ..................................................... 15

5.          IFC ADVISORY SERVICES: DRIVERS OF SUCCESS AND FAILURE ................................. 18
            Lessons from the Structuring Process ......................................................................................................................................... 18
            PPPs and the Poor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 22
            Lessons from Operating PPPs ..................................................................................................................................................... 23


6.          LESSONS LEARNED.............................................................................................................. 27




                                                                                                                                                                                                    iii
 Acknowledgments
 The report was prepared by a team led by Stefan Apfalter (team leader and senior
 evaluation officer, IEGFP) and comprising Maria Elena Pinglo (evaluation officer,
 IEGSD), Antonio Giuffrida (lead evaluation specialist, IEGHC), Victor Malca, and
 Houqi Hong (consultants, IEGFP). The review was conducted under the supervision
 of Marvin Taylor-Dormond (Director, IEGSP), Stoyan Tenev (senior manager,
 IEGFP) and Marie Gaarder (manager, IEGHC). Emelda Cudilla provided program
 support. The study also benefited from background research conducted by Salvatore
 Schiavo-Campo (consultant, IEG).

 The team gratefully acknowledges the contributions of present and former World
 Bank Group managers and staff who assisted in the report.




Evaluation Managers
 Caroline Heider            Director-General, Evaluation
 Marvin Taylor-Dormond      Director, Financial, Private Sector, and Sustainable
                             Development Department
 Stoyan Tenev               Senior Manager, Financial and Private Sector Development Unit
 Marie Gaarder              Manager, Human Development and Corporate Program Unit
 Stefan Apfalter            Task Team Leader, Financial and Private Sector Development Unit



 iv
Abbreviations
AS      Advisory Services
CAS      Country Assistance Strategy
CPF     Country Partnership Frameworks
DBFO    design, build, finance, and operate
EIU     Economist Intelligence Unit
HNP     Health, Nutrition, and Population
HSR     health sector reform
ICR     Implementation Completion Report
IDA     International Development Association
IEG     Independent Evaluation Group
IFC     International Finance Corporation
M&E     monitoring and evaluation
PCR     Project Completion Report
PFI     Private Finance Initiative
PFRAM   PPP Fiscal Risk Assessment Model
PPAR    Project Performance Assessment Report
PPP     public-private partnership
PSD     private sector development
SEA     strategic assessment area
SDG     Sustainable Development Goal
UHC     universal health coverage




                                                v
Overview
Access to essential health services is an important aspect of development. Governments from both
developed and developing countries are increasingly looking at public-private partnerships (PPPs) as
a way to expand access to higher-quality health services by leveraging capital, managerial capacity,
and knowhow from the private sector. Originally confined to the traditional infrastructure sectors of
transport, water, or energy, PPPs are increasingly applied also in social infrastructure sectors,
particularly for delivery of health services. PPPs and other forms of private sector involvement in
health are now also an important element of the World Bank Group’s response to country health
challenges, as reflected in the 2013 World Bank Group Strategy, the 2008 World Bank Group Health
Development Strategy, the 2015 joint World Bank Group Approach to Harnessing the Private Sector
in Health, various CASs and CPFs and IFC’s FY17-19 and prior Strategy and Business Outlook reports.
Such a complex form of contracting is likely to generate distinctive set of challenges in developing
country settings. Entering into PPP arrangements imposes certain requirements on the enabling
environment of the respective country and bears risks; however, the same also applies to the
alternatives of remaining inactive or continuing service delivery through the public sector.
The objective of this review is to provide insights into the Bank Group’s work of applying PPP
arrangements in the health sector, to distill knowledge with regard to what works (and what does
not), review the quality of work in structuring PPP arrangements, and identify lessons to be learned
from successful and failed efforts to structure health PPPs approved during FY04-15. The review
encompasses all institutions of the Bank Group engaged in PPPs in health.
The approach is based on a desk-based portfolio review of Bank Group projects, relying on existing
evaluative evidence, primarily project-level evaluation reports and data. Such an approach has its
limitations: project-level evaluation reports are prepared at a quite early stage in PPP contracts whose
duration often ranges from 5–30 years. They mainly shed light on the structuring process, but offer
little or no evidence as to what happened beyond commercial closure of the PPP. Second, this review
has been commissioned at a time when only a few IFC investments in PPPs have been evaluated. Only
one out of four investments have reached operational maturity and, hence, are being evaluated;
therefore, conclusions on the operational effectiveness of PPPs and their impacts are not possible.
The findings in this review have to be seen in this context, that is, as an assessment using a narrowly
defined concept of success, without the ambition to pass a judgment on the longevity of PPPs or on
their effects on shared prosperity or reducing poverty.

KEY INSIGHTS

From FY04 to FY15, the Bank Group approved 78 projects that provided support for health-related
PPP operations, of which 53 were IFC projects (49 of these are advisory projects, and four are IFC
investments) and 25 World Bank lending projects. More projects (58 percent) focused on downstream
issues (structuring and finance) than on upstream issues (42 percent) of policy and sectoral advice.


vi
                                                                                             OVERVIEW


Capacity building was an increasingly prominent focus of the World Bank’s upstream support. This
represents a much-needed effort to strengthen countries’ ability to assess the merits of deploying
PPPs in the health sector and their knowledge of how to structure such engagements. The 2013 IEG
evaluation, World Bank Group Support to PPPs—Lessons from Experience in Client Countries FY2012,
identified the lack of local skills and resources for the preparation of a PPP pipeline to be a serious
limitation across most Bank Group–supported countries. IFC Advisory Services (AS) focused on
downstream support by providing structuring advice and finance. Bank Group support exhibited
significant variability over time.

The Bank Group supported countries that need its support the most. More specifically, the World
Bank engages mostly in countries where the enabling environment for PPPs is weak, and where the
legal and regulatory frameworks have not yet evolved, that is, in “nascent countries” according to a
classification scheme of the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU). On the other hand, IFC supports more
PPPs in countries that the EIU classifies as having “emerging” and “mature” PPP environments, helping
them to develop and deepen the PPP market through advice on structuring PPPs and investments for
specific opportunities. Furthermore, Bank Group support for health PPPs was relevant to countries in
as much as it supported clear development priorities, that is, insofar as the PPPs addressed issues that
were high on the agenda of the country development strategy as expressed by the Country Assistance
Strategy or other related strategy documents.

Overall, the analysis indicates that the type of health PPPs supported by the Bank Group tend to be
more short-term arrangements, compared to infrastructure PPPs. Health PPPs can exhibit
considerable complexity, particularly in the clinical operation of such facilities. Some types of health
PPP can be of lesser complexity with shorter duration, and because they typically involve contracts
for the delivery of quite narrowly defined health services, they are at the lower end of the risk
spectrum. The most commonly supported PPP is combined health service provision, which includes
construction or refurbishment, operation and provision of clinical services. Although this type of PPP
seems the most complex, there is significant variation within the category, placing different projects
at different points along the risk spectrum, ranging from, for example, a 10-year concession for the
construction and provision of a narrowly defined health service unit (for example, diagnostic and
imaging unit) to a 20-year concession for the construction and operation of a hospital and clinics with
a broad range of health services provision (as in Lesotho). However, the review found that this latter
type are rare.
The analysis of Bank Group interventions along the entire value chain from policy to financing shows
that adequate sequencing is rare. Sequencing Bank Group interventions would prepare client
countries for private sector involvement through regulatory or legal advice or defining the space
where such involvement would be desirable, before actual PPPs are structured or financed. In all but
two countries, the Bank provided Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP) lending toward general
health sector reforms and to fight specific diseases or health conditions (other type of HNP support).
In only a few cases, however, do countries appear to have received timely private sector development
(PSD) support for health or specific support toward health PPPs.


                                                                                                    vii
Of all IFC AS health mandates, 63 percent reached contract closure. Among projects that led to
contract closure, the key success factors are government commitment and sound technical design.

Bank Group advice has not been strategic enough with respect to laying out all options for the
provision of health services in a given country. IEG reviewed the extent to which IFC AS presented
public procurement as an option; of 12 Strategic Options Reports reviewed by IEG, public
procurement was presented in one case. The demand-driven nature of IFC AS may explain this finding.
However, the efficiency and desirability from a social perspective of the PPP cannot be established
without a comparison with the alternatives, the main one being the public option. This needs to be
done ex-ante, during, and ex-post the PPP transaction.
There is little evidence that fiscal implications are assessed consistently, even if the proposed PPP
could have significant fiscal implications. This largely corroborates the findings of the 2013 PPP
evaluation. Following the recommendation of that 2013 evaluation, the Bank Group, together with
the International Monetary Fund (IMF), developed a PPP Fiscal Risk Assessment Model (PFRAM).1 It
will be essential to apply this tool kit systematically to PPPs that could affect the fiscal space of client
governments.
Self-assessment reports (prepared two years after completion) indicate positive effects of PPPs in
some areas, for example, access and quality; but evidence is still limited. The current Bank Group
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system for health PPPs is inadequate and needs to be improved to
better track results. Currently, insufficient data limits learning and poses a reputational risk for the
Bank Group.
The review found that the vast majority of World Bank Group–supported PPP interventions have an
explicit emphasis on the poor or underserved population in their design. However, suitable M&E
indicators or proper baselines and targets—needed to track results and assess whether the poor were
able to access the health services—are lacking.
The 2014 OECD report2 indicates that although post-contract award management of PPP projects is
indeed critical for securing the expected benefits, it has generally not been an important priority for
governments. Despite the need, the Bank Group rarely provides “aftercare” for contract
management. Providing aftercare would also give the Bank Group an opportunity to learn ‘first hand’
about post-financial closure results.

As the development community and the Bank Group increasingly partner with the private sector to
improve the delivery of health services, this review finds five lessons: (1) When advising governments
on the various models for providing health services, both the IFC and the World Bank should act as
one Bank Group and discuss the whole range of options from the public and mixed options to the
various types of potential health PPPs, taking account of the sector reform context of a country and

1PFRAM is available at https://www.imf.org/external/np/fad/publicinvestment/pdf/PFRAM.pdf
2 Guasch, J. L. et al. (2014), “The Renegotiation of PPP Contracts: An Overview of Its Recent Evolution
in Latin America”, International Transport Forum Discussion Papers, 2014/18, OECD Publishing,
Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jrw2xxlks8v-en


viii
                                                                                                OVERVIEW


its overall maturity and track record in using PPPs. (2) To be better positioned to deliver such strategic
advice, the Bank Group should better integrate its sector reform and policy work on the structuring
and financing of PPPs. (3) Pro-poor access and affordability need not only be systematically considered
at the design stage; they should also be tracked to ensure that the poor actually benefit from PPPs.
(4) The PFRAM tool should be systematically applied to the structuring of PPPs with substantial fiscal
implications.3 (5) Given the long contractual life of PPPs, the new practice of preparing post-
completion reports after the PPPs have gone into operation should be mainstreamed so that these
reports can be conducted at an appropriate time.




3 PPP projects risks can be divided into five somewhat overlapping categories: construction risk,
financial risk, availability risk, demand risk, and residual value risk (see IMF, 2006. Public-Private
Partnerships, Government Guarantees and Fiscal Risk. IMF, Washington DC).


                                                                                                         ix
Management Comments
INTRODUCTION
The World Bank Group (WBG) thanks IEG for the Synthesis Report on WBG’s support to public-
private partnerships (PPPs) in health. Access to affordable, quality health care is crucial for
people’s well-being and is a key driver of economic growth and development.

Governments play a central role in the provision and regulation of health care. However, there is
an increasing recognition that, on their own, governments cannot deliver enough services to
achieve universal health coverage and meet their populations’ needs. All players in the health
area, including the private sector, will need to be involved if countries are to deliver universal
health coverage and meet SDG 3 on Health.

PPPs are not a panacea, but when well designed, they can strengthen the quality and efficiency
of public health services. Well-structured PPPs can create clearly defined platforms that involve
the private sector in delivering solutions to health challenges in developing countries. They can
also help countries improve their ability to regulate the private sector and find an efficient and
effective mix of public and private sector participation in the health sector.

The Management of the WBG institutions broadly agrees with the findings of the IEG report,
which it finds balanced. These comments describes how IEG’s lessons are being implemented.

WORLD BANK GROUP COMMENTS ON LESSONS
Strategic importance of health PPPs and alignment with country needs. Management welcomes
the IEG finding that WBG support for health PPPs was relevant to countries and that these PPPs
supported clear development priorities that were an important part of country development
strategies. The report articulates the complementary roles of the WBG institutions within the PPP
delivery chain, and captures their specific contributions. As the report points out, WBG support
to health PPPs works across the health care system, from upstream support for the enabling
environment, capacity building, and pipeline development, to downstream transactions and
execution.

Consideration of a range of public, private, and mixed options for addressing health system
challenges. Management agrees that governments should consider the full range of options to
find the best possible solution for resolving health system challenges. When developing Country
Partnership Frameworks and health sector program strategies, the WBG considers a variety of
approaches for increasing access to and improving the quality of health services. IFC Advisory
Services becomes engaged where there is a clear and identified need to strengthen a public health
service that a government has struggled to maintain, and where a PPP has been identified as an
appropriate solution. Before structuring the PPP, IFC Advisory Services systematically conducts
a technical and financial assessment of the way public services are delivered to identify the



x
potential gains or losses from private sector participation and to determine whether a PPP is an
appropriate option to pursue.

Sequencing of WBG interventions. Management agrees with IEG’s finding that proper
sequencing of WBG interventions could better prepare countries for private sector involvement.
As IEG highlighted, the World Bank—and many other development partners—mostly supports
upstream activities such as capacity building, sector reform, and legal and regulatory
frameworks, while PPP transactions are typically supported in countries where the enabling
environment is ready for their implementation. The WBG has paid increasing attention to helping
countries build their capacity to manage and implement PPPs. From 2002 to 2012, the WBG
implemented nearly 800 capacity-building activities to help governments gain the skills and
knowledge to develop and manage PPPs. The WBG has also developed a Country PPP Readiness
Diagnostic Tool, which is being piloted and refined and will be more widely deployed in future
WBG-supported PPP projects.

World Bank Group coordination. The WBG fully agrees that a Group-wide coordinated approach
to health sector strengthening is essential to support lasting and sustainable improvements in
health care provision and management. Every country’s context and needs are unique, so PPPs
are not always the optimum solution. When PPPs are identified as a possible solution for a
country, the WBG is committed to improving coordination among its institutions in assessing the
desirability and feasibility of PPPs and working collaboratively to ensure that any PPP solution
is embedded in the government’s larger health sector policies and contributes to strengthening
the public health system. In the past year the WBG has reviewed its processes, and IFC and HNP
GP are putting in place mechanisms to ensure improved coordination.

Access and affordability for the poor. Management welcomes the IEG finding that the designs of
most World Bank-supported PPP interventions have an explicit emphasis on poor or underserved
populations, and that the majority of health PPPs supported by IFC Advisory Services have a
poverty focus. This is a welcome recognition of WBG efforts to use PPPs to expand health benefits,
including to people in IDA countries and low-income states in middle-income countries.
Management agrees on the need for project documents to be more explicit about how poor
populations are expected to benefit from a health PPP. As part of the post-completion monitoring
of its health PPP projects, IFC Advisory Services will aim to track access for poor populations
wherever reliable data are available and accessible to the Bank Group.

Concerted effort to consider fiscal impacts of health PPPs. Management agrees with IEG about
the importance of assessing the fiscal implications of health PPPs for governments, especially
given PPPs’ long duration. IFC’s Advisory Services conducts a fiscal assessment as part of every
PPP advisory project. However, Management acknowledges that for past projects there could
have been a more systematic approach to documenting these assessments, even when the fiscal
impact was positive or neutral to the government. Going forward, the WBG will mandate the
recording of these assessments in the project documents for health PPPs. Management also agrees
that the fiscal assessments can be more systematic. Since the IEG Evaluation of WBG PPPs
released in 2014, the PPP CCSA has worked with the IMF in developing the PPP Fiscal Risk
Assessment Model (PFRAM) to support the fiscal assessment of PPP projects. Management
agrees with the IEG lesson to use the PFRAM to assess the fiscal implications of all future health
PPPs that carry substantial fiscal implications.


                                                                                               xi
Post-transaction monitoring of health PPPs. Management appreciates the lesson on improving
the monitoring frameworks of health PPPs during the post-completion phase. In the Management
Response to the 2014 IEG Evaluation of WBG PPPs, IFC Advisory Services committed to
implement a program of post-completion monitoring for all successfully closed projects.
Management welcomes IEG’s recognition that this step has been implemented since 2013, and
the program will continue. The PPP CCSA has also taken steps to implement IEG’s 2014
recommendation and has conducted a review of the post-monitoring status and options for PPPs
across the WBG.

Post-transaction support for health PPPs. Management fully agrees with the IEG lesson on the
need for post-contract management support for client governments that lack capacity and
identify the need for it. Management appreciates IEG’s recognition that IFC Advisory Services’
post-transaction advisory support service, which was established in 2013, provides this kind of
aftercare. IFC will continue to proactively assess client capability and needs to implement PPPs,
and will offer post-transaction advisory support whenever it is needed.




xii
1. Background
Access to essential health services is an important aspect of development. One of the targets
for the third Sustainable Development Goal ensuring healthy lives and promoting well-being
for all is to achieve universal health coverage, including financial risk protection, access to
quality essential health care services, and access to safe, effective, and affordable essential
medicines and vaccines for all.
Governments under increasing budgetary pressure are looking to public-private partnerships
(PPPs) as a way to expand access to higher quality health services, leveraging capital,
managerial capacity, and know-how from the private sector. The underlying causes of this
increased interest in PPPs are the rising costs of delivering health care services as population
age in developed and developing countries; increases in chronic diseases; and rapidly
changing and advancing medical technologies.
Originally confined to the traditional infrastructure sectors of transport, water, or energy,
PPPs are also increasingly being applied in the social infrastructure sectors, particularly in the
delivery of health services. Although there is a substantial body of research on the outcomes
from PPPs in high-income countries,4,5 we know very little about applying the concept of
PPPs in low- and middle-income countries and even less about outcomes. Therefore, little
guidance is available to support Bank Group task team leaders (TTLs) and external policy
makers in deciding whether and when private sector involvement in the delivery of health
services in the form of PPPs is likely to be beneficial. Limited knowledge exists also with
regard to the implementation challenges arising from structuring PPPs and managing the
associated service contracts. Given the distinctive set of challenges that such a complex form
of contracting is likely to generate in developing-country settings, these are important gaps
that this evaluation synthesis would like to contribute to addressing.
The Bank Group in its strategy is committed to promoting PPPs because “…such partnerships
can contribute to improved basic service provision in areas—such as health […]—that are
                                                                    6
essential for reducing poverty and boosting shared prosperity.” PPPs and other forms of
private sector involvement in health are also important elements of other Bank Group
strategies, including the 2008 World Bank Group Health Development Strategy, various
Country Assistance Strategies (CASs) and Country Partnership Frameworks (CPFs), and
IFC’s FY17-19 and prior Strategy and Business Outlook reports. The 2015 joint World Bank
Group Approach to Harnessing the Private Sector in Health focuses on an integrated health
system approach, regardless of whether it is public or private, and it recognizes that universal
health care cannot be achieved without the private sector.


4 European Union, 2013. Health and Economics Analysis for an Evaluation of the Public-Private
Partnerships in Health Care Delivery across the EU.
5 James Barlow, Jens Roehrich, and Steve Wright. “Europe Sees Mixed Results from Public -Private

Partnerships for Building and Managing Health Care Facilities and Services. Health Affairs 32, no.1
(2013):146–154.
6 See The World Bank, 2013. World Bank Group Strategy (page 20).




                                                                                                      1
CHAPTER 1
BACKGROUND
The proposed LP will, therefore, assess the performance of a potentially important, albeit not
yet widely used instrument that has gained important traction in the global health debate.7
The proposed study is closely aligned with the IEG strategy of focusing on the World Bank’s
effectiveness in addressing clients’ development challenges and contributing to the Twin
Goals of shared prosperity and reducing poverty. Thematically, the proposed product is
largely in the IEG Strategic Engagement Area (SEA) of Sustained Service Delivery to the Poor.
As such, it will contribute to the rising body of knowledge in this SEA and to the planned
FY18 evaluation on improving access to essential health care services.
This synthesis paper builds on previous IEG work on PPPs and on private sector involvement
in health, notably the 2009 Health, Nutrition, and Population Evaluation8 and the 2013 World Bank
Group Support to Public-Private Partnerships: Lessons from Experience in Client Countries FY02–
12. The 2009 Health, Nutrition, and Population Evaluation was intended to inform the
implementation of HNP strategies so as to make future support more effective. Although the
HNP Evaluation was broader in scope some of its findings were relevant to World Bank and
IFC health, and echoed the findings of the 2013 PPP evaluation. For example, to strengthen
the Bank Group’s ability to help countries to improve the efficiency of health systems, the IFC
should: (i) support PPPs through Advisory Services (AS) to government and industry and
through its investments, and expand investments in health insurance; and (ii) improve
collaboration and joint sector work across the Bank Group, leveraging World Bank sector
dialogue on health regulatory frameworks to engage new private actors and more
systematically coordinate with the World Bank’s policy interventions in private sector
participation in health. The more recent 2014 IEG review of Bank Group support to health
financing over FY03–12,9 found that 70 percent of all IFC AS in health was dedicated to PPP
projects, and highlighted the role of the Bank Group’s Health in Africa Initiative in fostering
private sector participation in publicly funded health.10
The 2013 global evaluation of Bank Group support to PPPs revealed broad-based challenges
applicable to the instrument of PPPs, even though the evaluation builds upon a review of a
Bank Group portfolio comprising mostly infrastructure projects (Box 1.1). This report
recommended to Bank Group Management: i) Translate the Bank Group’s strategic PPP
intentions into an operational framework; ii) Better assist governments in making strategic
decisions regarding the level and nature of private sector participation, and in assessing fiscal
implications; iii) Identify avenues to increase IFC investments in PPPs in countries and
markets that do not yet have a well-developed enabling environment; iv) Ensure broad
stakeholder consultation and government commitment in IFC’s advisory work; v) Provide
authoritative guidance to staff on how to handle unsolicited PPP proposals; and vi) Define
principles for monitoring PPPs over the long term so as to capture all vital performance
aspects of PPPs, including—where relevant—user aspects. Since 2013 IEG has observed
substantial efforts in implementing these recommendations: for example, the recent adoption
of the Public-Private Partnership Fiscal Risk Assessment Model (PFRAM), jointly created by
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), for assessing fiscal implications.


7 WHO. 2015c. Trade, Foreign Policy, Diplomacy and Health: Public –Private Partnerships for Health.
http://www.who.int/trade/glossary/story077/en/ (accessed June 20, 2015).
8 http://ieg.worldbank.org/Data/reports/hnp_full_eval.pdf
9 http://ieg.worldbank.org/evaluations/wbg-support-health-financing
10 https://www.wbginvestmentclimate.org/advisory-services/health/health-in-africa/




2
                                                                                                          CHAPTER 1
                                                                                                       BACKGROUND
This review provides an opportunity to assess the relevance of these previous findings and
the recommendations of the 2009 and 2013 evaluations in the light of challenges posed by the
health sector.

 Box 1.1. Findings from IEG’s Previous Evaluations on PPPs

 The 2013 evaluation found that (i) sector reform is crucial to PPP success, but such efforts often fail because of
 their inherent complexity and because of the political implications they typically entail; (ii) the Bank Group rarely
 gave advice on how to assess and manage fiscal implications of PPPs; (iii) the lack of local skills and resources
 for the preparation of a PPP pipeline and bankable PPP projects poses a serious limitation in most World Bank–
 supported countries; (iv) PPPs supported by the Bank Group were largely rated successful according to their
 immediate development outcome rating, but data are scarce on their actual performance, including fiscal
 implications and effects on the poor; (v) With regard to IFC Advisory Services, IEG found that volatile government
 commitment is the single most important factor in the failure of PPP structuring projects; (vi) Although the three
 Bank Group institutions deploy their respective comparative advantages well, their approach should be more
 strategic and better tailored to countries.
 Source: IEG 2013 “World Bank Group Support to Public-Private Partnerships: Lessons from Experience in Client
 Countries FY02–12,” http://ieg.worldbank.org/Data/reports/hnp_full_eval.pdf



Defining PPPs in the Health Sector
This review adopts a broad definition of PPP, in line with Bank Group policies. Accordingly,
PPPs are “a long-term contract between a private party and a government entity, for providing a
public asset or service, in which the private party bears significant risk and management responsibility,
and remuneration is linked to performance.”11
PPPs can leverage capital, managerial capacity, and knowhow from the private sector. PPPs
encompass a wide variety of arrangements. For example, the initial injection of capital by the
private partners is a key component of many PPPs, particularly those in the hospital sector.12
However, PPPs in the healthcare sector vary in the scope of services covered. The external
literature suggests the typology summarized in Table 1.1 below, which IEG adopted for this
study. The Bank Group’s interventions tend to use all of these PPP models.13
A common critical element of the different types of PPPs is that the private party shares risks
with the government. However, the degree of risk sharing between the private and public
partners is not homogenous; it depends upon the level of capital committed by the private


11 The World Bank, Asian Development Bank, and Inter-American Development Bank 2014. Public-
Private Partnerships Reference Guide. Version 2.0.
12 Martin McKee, Nigel Edwards, Rifat Atun. Public –Private Partnerships for Hospitals. Bulletin of the

World Health Organization 2006; 84:890–896.
13 Alternative typologies available in the health PPP literature identify the full health services

provision model, where a private operator builds and operates a hospital and some or all associated
community primary care provision, with a contract to provide care for a defined geographic area; and
co-location, where a public agency allocates a portion of a public hospital’s land or premises for use
by a private operator in exchange for payment and specified benefits to the public agency.


                                                                                                                    3
CHAPTER 1
BACKGROUND
party, the length of the partnership, the provision for renegotiation, and how payment
mechanisms are structured.

Table 1.1. A Typology of PPPs in the Healthcare Sector

    PPP model                      Common term                             Definition / Explanation
    Health services only     Operating contract,              A private operator is brought in to operate and deliver
    (selective)              performance-based contract       publicly funded health services in a publicly owned
                             (concession, lease)              facility.
    Facility finance         Design, build, finance,          A public agency contracts a private operator to
    (accommodation           operate(DBFO), build, own,       design, build, finance, and operate a hospital facility.
    only)                    operate, transfer (BOOT),        Health services within the facility are (mostly)
                             UK’s PFI                         provided by government.
    Combined                 Twin accommodation/              A private operator builds or leases a facility and
    (accommodation and       clinical services joint          provides free (or subsidized) healthcare services to a
    health services)         venture/ Franchising, PFI+       defined population.
    Source: Adapted from Montagu and Harding (2012) and Barlow, Roehrich, and Wright (2013).
    Note: PFI = private finance initiative.


Objectives
The objective of this review is to provide insights into the Bank Group’s work on applying
PPP arrangements in the health sector, to distill knowledge of what works (and what does
not), to review the quality of the work in structuring PPP arrangements, and to identify
lessons to be learned from successful and failed efforts to structure health PPPs. More
specifically, the study seeks to answer the following questions:
       1. Which products, tools, and services does the Bank Group deploy to support client
          countries in applying the PPP concept in the health sector? And how has its support
          evolved over time?
       2. What can we learn from the way the Bank Group advises client governments on
          whether and how to use PPPs in health?
                a. How did the Bank Group support the conceptualization of PPP in the health
                   sector (identification stage) and what can we learn from this experience?

                b. How did the Bank Group ensure that PPP arrangements would fit into the
                   overall health sector reform efforts, and what can we learn from this
                   experience?

       3. What can we learn from successes and failures in structuring PPPs in the health sector?
       4. To what extent have PPP structures taken into account the needs of the poor and their
          limited access to health insurance?




4
                                                                                             CHAPTER 1
                                                                                          BACKGROUND

Scope and Methodology
The relevant evaluation time period is FY04–15;14 the scope of the review encompasses all
institutions of the Bank Group engaged in PPPs in health. The review focuses on interventions
related to the provision of health services; for example, specific services, such as dialysis, or
more comprehensive ones such as the operations of an entire hospital. The review did not
cover Bank Group involvement in health insurance, production of pharmaceutics, or the
provision or production of medical technologies. The portfolio analysis identified and
categorized the characteristics, objectives, and components of the activities covered by this
review and analyzed their results. Table 1.2 summarizes the Bank Group-wide portfolio of
interventions with a focus or component of health PPPs.


 Table 1.2 Health PPP Projects Approved FY04–15
                                                      Closed/Op
                                      Health PPP                                            Percent
     Institutions                                       Mature    Evaluated Projects
                                       Portfolio                                       Evaluated by IEG
                                                       Projects
     World Bank lending (IBRD/IDA)        25              12               9                 75
     IFC investments                       4               1               1                 25
     IFC Advisory Services                49              26              16                 62
     Total Number of Projects             78              39              26                 66
 Source: IEG.



The evaluation questions were answered from a desk-based portfolio review of Bank Group
projects. This review relied entirely on existing evaluative evidence, primarily project
evaluation data. Accordingly, IEG analyzed the results achieved at project closure for IFC
Advisory Services and World Bank lending projects, and at the point of operational maturity
for IFC investments. For World Bank projects, Implementation Completion and Results (ICRs)
and their IEG reviews are the primary source of information on results. For IFC AS and
Investment Services, this review will rely on Project Completion Reports and on one
Expanded Project Supervision Report (XPSR),15 conducted at closure of the advisory mandate
or at operational maturity of the investments, usually about two years after financial closure.
In addition, four IFC-commissioned post-completion reports are available and were used to
derive lessons from the implementation of PPP arrangements, with the understanding that
these reports have not been independently validated by IEG.
The portfolio review was both quantitative and qualitative. The quantitative review involved
the analysis of potential trends and patterns in the occurrence of PPPs in Bank Group member
states. The qualitative analysis aimed at identifying drivers of success and failure—what
works and what does not work in the structuring of PPPs—and embedding them in the
country health sector context.




14 Note that no health-related Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility projects were identified
by IEG.
15 Only one of the four IFC investments has reached operational maturity and been evaluated.




                                                                                                          5
CHAPTER 1
BACKGROUND
This approach has its limitations. Project Completion Reports and Expanded Project
Supervision Reports are project-level evaluation reports with the purpose of capturing
outcomes in a structured manner along certain defined dimensions and at a quite early stage,
rather than at the end of PPP contracts, which often range from 5–25 years after commercial
closure. Accordingly, PCRs tend to shed light mostly on the structuring process and the
interaction of IFC AS teams with client governments, and to report on outcomes up to closure
of the PPP. Success for AS projects is defined as a PPP project reaching commercial closure.
The case is similar for ICRs, where outcomes are reported at the project closure stage, after a
World Bank loan has been disbursed. Success is defined by the project development objective,
often associated with the PPP reaching closure as well. However, little is known about the
implementation of PPPs beyond contract closure, and even less is known about their effects
on the twin goals. This was already identified as a major deficiency of Bank Group-wide
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems in the 2013 PPP macro evaluation (see
recommendation to improve monitoring of PPP performance). Moreover, evidence from
outside the Bank Group on the success or failure of PPPs and their impacts on the poor is
rather weak. The findings in this review have to be seen in this context, that is, as an
assessment with a narrowly defined concept of success and without the ambition to pass a
judgment on the success or failure of PPP’s or their effects on shared prosperity or reducing
poverty.
This approach does not easily lend itself to assessing performance in leveraging synergies and
enabling coordination across the Bank Group. The cited project evaluation reports contain
little information on Bank Group-wide coordination and collaboration; field visits would be
needed to assess these two aspects properly. To circumvent—at least partially—this
limitation, this review analyzed the extent to which Bank Group interventions were
adequately sequenced. Adequate sequencing of interventions would allow the country to
acquire the necessary skills, for example through World Bank technical assistance, or to take
strategic decisions as to whether, and under what contractual arrangements, to allow the
private sector to deliver health services. Subsequently, opportunities for private sector
participation would be identified, for example, by World Bank–supported sector reform and
strategy work. Eventually, PPPs would have to be structured, with assistance from IFC AS.
Once structuring reaches commercial closure, PPPs require finance, for example from IFC
Investment Services (IS). Sequencing of Bank Group interventions was assessed based on
project design features, and by analyzing project components and the extent to which they
supported the development of a PPP market in a country.




6
2. World Bank Group Portfolio
Bank Group support covers a diverse range of activities ranging from upstream policy and
strategy advice to downstream support for individual PPP transactions. More projects (58
percent) work on downstream issues than on upstream issues (42 percent), largely reflecting
the relatively high numbers of IFC advisory projects. Note, however, that not all PPP-like
arrangements may be captured for the World Bank because contracting arrangement and
performance-based contracts may not be coded as PPPs (Table 2.1).


     Table 2.1. World Bank Group – Components of Assistance to Client Countries




     Source: IEG.
     Note: AS = Advisory Services; IS =Investment Services; PSP = private sector participation. Figures do not necessarily
     add up because these statistics rely on components within projects rather than projects.



A snapshot of the Bank Group portfolio of health PPPs confirms the typical division of labor
between the World Bank and IFC. Upstream support for health PPPs is mainly provided by
the World Bank. All three institutions provide downstream support. While IFC AS tends of
focus on structuring PPPs, that is, on downstream support, they also engage to a limited
extent in upstream work: of the 49 IFC AS mandates, six provided market studies, two
provided capacity building, and 42 provided advice on structuring.16
The majority of Bank Group health PPPs supported the combined health service provision (48
percent). Of this group, the large majority (60 percent) supported the provision of selective
services (such as diagnostic, imaging, dialysis or radiotherapy) followed by the provision of
general hospital services (30 percent). The second-largest share are health-services-only PPPs
(42 percent) supported a large variety of health services including packages of essential health
services (such as maternal and child health or HIV/AIDS services). The lowest share of

16Note that projects can have multiple components, providing, for example, both structuring advice
and capacity building.



                                                                                                                         7
CHAPTER 2
WORLD BANK GROUP PORTFOLIO
projects (10 percent) focused on facility finance, supporting only the construction and the
operation of non-clinical services (Table 2.2).


Table 2.2. Types of PPP Models Supported

                 PPP model                                     Type of health services provided

                                           Type of facility:
    Facility finance, accommodation only
                                                General hospitals: 41
    (10 percent)
                                                Primary care clinics: 1
                                           Services provided:
                                                 General hospital services: 5
    Health services only (selective)
                                                 Diagnostic, imaging, dialysis or radiotherapy: 52
    (42 percent)
                                                 Package of Essential Health Care Services (maternal and child
                                                     health, HIV): 7

                                           Type of facility and services:
                                                General hospital:7
    Combined health services provision
                                                Diagnostic, imaging, dialysis or radiotherapy: 14
    (48 percent)
                                                Maternal and child health care and diagnostic and imaging: 1
                                                Hospital-based and primary care services: 1

Source: IEG.
1 One PPP supported both the maternity wing and diagnostics of a general regional hospital.
2 One PPP also provided day-care services in addition to diagnostic, imaging, dialysis or radiotherapy.




The World Bank’s upstream support focused on capacity building. About 60 percent of the
World Bank’s upstream work focused on capacity-building efforts. Strategy and legal and
regulatory frameworks for PPPs were the second most frequently addressed enabling factors
by World Bank. The focus on capacity building has been increasingly pronounced in the past
four years. Between FY11 and FY15, there were 13 instances of capacity building; by contrast,
FY08-11 and FY04-07 had only five instances each. This increase represents a much-needed
effort to strengthen countries’ ability to assess the appropriateness of deploying PPPs in the
health sector or how to structure such engagements. The 2013 macro evaluation of PPPs had
identified the lack of local skills and resources for the preparation of a PPP pipeline as a
serious limitation across most Bank Group–supported countries.
The Bank Group supported downstream work in increasing numbers through advising on
transactions and, to a much lesser extent, through investment projects. IFC Advisory Services
took the lion’s share, providing about 78 percent of all downstream support, bringing health
PPP transactions to commercial and financial closure. The World Bank provided 15 percent
of downstream support while IFC IS provided a mere 7 percent of it, bringing financing only
to a few projects.
Over time, Bank Group support exhibited significant variability. As indicated in Figure 2.1,
the number of Bank Group interventions related to health PPPs ranges from two to 15 per


8
                                                                                    CHAPTER 2
                                                                   WORLD BANK GROUP PORTFOLIO

year. Clearly, the global economic crisis and the resulting credit crunch left its trace in a
downturn around 2009. The subsequent increase in the Bank Group’s portfolio may be
interpreted as a recovery from the crisis, but also as a sign that the 2008 World Bank Group
Health Development Strategy, which called for an increased role for the private sector, was being
implemented. Yet, we see an abrupt drop in 2014 and 2015. The evaluative evidence does not
provide an explanation for this sudden drop.

  Figure 2.1. Bank Group Health PPP Portfolio over Time




  Source: IEG.
  Notes: AS = Advisory Services; IS = Investment Services.




                                                                                               9
3. Relevance of World Bank Group Support
Bank Group support for health PPPs was relevant to countries in so far as it supported clear
development priorities. PPPs addressed issues that were high on the agenda or the country
development strategy as expressed by the CAS or other related strategy documents. In all of
the 78 countries reviewed in detail, the Bank Group’s support for Health PPPs has been
relevant to the countries’ respective developmental priorities, either directly or indirectly. In
more than two-thirds of these cases (71 percent), the Bank Group’s PPP intervention directly
addressed a development priority and the priority of the intervention in the country was
considered highly relevant. These are cases where the intervention’s logic allowed for a direct
link between the PPP and the country-specific deficiency. This is not surprising given that
most developing countries regard improving the provision of health services a high priority.

PPPs may be deployed to address specific health services as one of a country’s policy options.
PPPs often address health needs that—given the deficiencies in a country’s health system—
appear peripheral. On the assumption that PPPs deliver a better service than public provision
of the same services,17 a government may resort to PPPs for the delivery of specific health
services: for example, dialysis, or imaging, or laboratory technology services. As long as these
assumptions hold—that is, fiscal space is created for the government or service delivery
quality is increased—having the private sector provide these services, including through
PPPs, is one of the government’s available policy options. Therefore, it may be unrealistic to
expect that all PPPs address the most urgent health needs in a country. Two examples where
IEG could assess the extent to which PPPs address health needs within countries’ specific
health development agendas are explained in Box 3.1.

Another way of assessing the strategic relevance of resource deployment is to see whether the
Bank Group provides appropriate support to specific country needs. The Bank Group
supports health PPP projects in 76 countries. Each of these countries has reached a specific
level of maturity18 with regard to managing PPPs. Countries with less developed enabling
environments will need fundamentally different support than would be needed by countries
that already have a track record of implementing PPP projects. Nascent countries will
appreciate advice on strategic issues: whether and how to use PPPs in the context of their
national public investment planning and ongoing sector reform programs. The group of

17 Either because it delivers the same services at a lower cost, creating fiscal space for the government
or because the services, at the same cost level, are of better quality.
18 The Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) classifies countries with regard to PPP maturity according to

a standardized procedure: “Nascent” countries are those with the least developed enabling
environment; “emerging” are those where the enabling environment is under construction and less
tested; and “mature” PPP countries are those that already have a quite well-established enabling
environment.


10
                                                                                              CHAPTER 3
                                                                  RELEVANCE OF WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT

”emerging” or “mature” countries will appreciate assistance in creating and deepening the
PPP market, which IFC AS and investments can assist with.

 Box 3.1. Examples of Addressing Health Needs through PPPs
 In Burundi (P109964), one of the poorest countries in Africa, the World Bank and the government began a
 policy dialogue in 2000 on how to control the spread of the HIV/AIDS epidemic and reduce its impact. This
 dialogue resulted in the National HIV/AIDS Control Strategy (2002–06), which became the basis for the Second
 Multi-sectoral HIV/AIDS project of 2008. Thus, this project addressed the alarming increase in incidence rates
 of HIV in the country, at a time when these had stabilized in most other countries in Africa, and therefore it was
 highly relevant. It financed performance-based service contracts and agreements with public and private health
 facilities at the local level to provide clinical care for HIV/AIDS patients. The Country Partnership and Country
 Assistance Strategies embedded public-private partnerships (PPPs) in this program.

 In Turkey (IFC IS 33677), as part of the PPP developed by the Turkish Ministry of Health. This project is
 addressing the government’s need to renovate and enhance the quality and efficiency of healthcare services in
 state-owned hospitals by consolidating small state-owned hospitals under larger campuses; therefore it is of
 relevance to the country’s need. As a result, the IFC is assisting in the financing of the construction, operation,
 and maintenance of an integrated health campus in Etlik, Ankara. Etlik Health Campus will comprise 11 different
 buildings with a total capacity of 3,566 beds. In parallel, the World Bank is providing support through its lending
 program of downstream policy support in terms of capacity building of the PPP unit, and contract monitoring.
 There is also cross-collaboration with other international financial institutions, among them the European Bank
 for Reconstruction and Development, on this aspect.
 Source: IEG.


As expected, the World Bank engages mostly nascent countries, whereas IFC supports
countries in more emerging and mature environments. Forty-four percent of World Bank
projects engage in nascent countries, typically helping them to create the enabling
environment for PPPs. In contrast, IFC Investments and AS flow more to countries with
emerging and mature frameworks: 36 percent of Investments and 40 percent of AS to
emerging countries, and 40 percent to mature countries, whereas 23 percent goes to nascent
countries. The difference is understandable: World Bank projects mostly support upstream
activities such as capacity building, sector reform, and legal and regulatory frameworks; PPP
transactions are typically supported in countries where the enabling environment is ready for
their implementation (Figure 3.1).




                                                                                                                  11
CHAPTER 3
RELEVANCE OF WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT



  Figure 3.1. Distribution of Health PPP Interventions by Level of Maturity of Client Countries




  Source: IEG and EIU Infrascope data.

Interestingly, when Bank Group support for health PPPs is compared with its support of
infrastructure PPPs, a higher share of health PPP projects goes to nascent countries than is the
case in the infrastructure portfolio of projects; that is, to countries with less developed PPP
frameworks and a very limited record of using PPPs. Twenty-three percent of IFC AS projects
are in nascent countries, which is a relatively high share, given that only 5 percent of its
infrastructure PPPs are located in nascent countries. Similarly, 44 percent of World Bank
health PPP support is in nascent countries, compared to 19 percent for infrastructure PPPs
(Figure 3.2).




12
                                                                                               CHAPTER 3
                                                                   RELEVANCE OF WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT



  Figure 3.2. Comparison of PPP Support to Health vs. Infrastructure by Country Maturity
                             by EIU country classification
  A. Percentage Distribution of IFC AS PPP projects          B. Percentage Distribution of WB PPP projects
     by EIU country classification




  Source: IEG and EIU Infrascope data.



Overall, the analysis indicates that the type of health PPPs supported by the Bank Group tend
to be more short-term arrangements, compared to infrastructure PPPs in the transport,
energy, or water sectors. IFC AS supports governments typically with combined health
service provision which includes construction, operation and provision of clinical services.
While this type of PPP seems the most complex, there is significant variation within the
category. On the lower risk (left side) it can involve a 10-year concession for the construction
and provision of a narrowly defined health service unit (i.e. diagnostic and imaging unit). On
the higher end (right side) of the risk spectrum could include a 20-year concession for the
construction and operation of a hospital and clinics and include a broad range of health
services provision. The review found that this latter type of combined service provision
through Bank Group–supported PPPs—such as in Lesotho—are rare.
IFC AS also support governments typically with health service and facility finance PPPs.
These two types are on the lower-risk (left) side of the risk-sharing spectrum than combined
service delivery models. Examples of such lower risk health PPPs are short-term contracts
and performance-based contracts without investment of much private capital. Slightly to the
right of these on the risk spectrum are the facility finance or Private Finance Initiative
arrangements—these include typically the design, building, financing, and operation of a
health facility (Figure 3.3A). World Bank lending provides mostly upstream support to PPP
but is engaged also in supporting governments with health service PPPs through
performance based contracts. (Figure 3.3B).




                                                                                                             13
CHAPTER 3
RELEVANCE OF WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT




 Figure 3.3 Type of PPP Models Used across Country Maturity Levels (Percent of Number of Projects)


 A. IFC AS                                       B. WB Lending




 Sources: IEG and EIU Infrascope data.




14
4. Coordination across the World Bank Group
As the previous sections indicate, the World Bank’s upstream support and the IFC’s
downstream support to health PPPs are potentially complementary. Table 4.1 suggests a
complementarity at the aggregate level; it would be necessary to verify that such coordination
and complementarity are deployed effectively at the country level. This section aims at
examining the degree of complementarity of the support provided by World Bank Health,
Nutrition, and Population (HNP) global practice with IFC-supported health PPPs. However,
this review cannot assess actual collaboration or coordination across the Bank Group
institutions because this would require field missions and would exceed the scope of the
review: assessing the adequacy of sequencing of interventions. To this end IEG reviewed all
World Bank lending projects19 that preceded or followed support for an actual PPP
transaction. The type of support was ranked in six levels, ranging from general health sector
reform to a more specific PPP type of support.
To examine adequacy of sequencing, IEG identified all HNP lending operations in the 26
countries where IFC-supported health PPPs were undertaken. These lending operations were
then classified into four groups: (i) projects with a component or subcomponent that explicitly
supported PPPs; (ii) projects with a component or subcomponent aimed at private sector
development or private sector participation in health; (iii) general health sector reform; and
(iv) “other” types of HNP support.20

A total of 82 HNP operations were identified in the 26 countries during the 2003–15 period.
The largest category was represented by other type of HNP support, which are projects
addressing specific diseases and conditions (for example, HIV/AIDS, maternal and child
health), followed by general health sector reform projects. Only seven projects included
explicit components or sub-components providing support to PPPs and only one project, in
Bangladesh, supported private sector development (Table 4.1).21




19 The review excludes analytical work provided by the World Bank such as analytic and advisory
activities, and Economic and Sector Work.
20 The review excludes Advisory Services and Analytics support provided by the HNP and support

provided by other development partners.
21 This review excludes some countries with decentralize health service delivery models such as

India.


                                                                                                  15
CHAPTER 4
COORDINATION ACROSS THE WORLD BANK GROUP



Table 4.1. HNP Lending in Countries where IFC Supported Health PPPs

                        Type of HNP support                      Number of projects
                        HSR/PPP support                                 7
                        HSR/PSD support                                 1
                        General HSR                                     36
                        Other type of HNP support                       38
                        Countries without HNP lending                   2
Source: IEG.
Notes: HSR = health sector reform; PSD = private sector development.



The analysis of World Bank HNP support in countries with downstream IFC-supported
health PPP engagements shows that adequate sequencing is rare (Figure 4.2). Detailed results
are presented in Appendix 1: they show that in most of the countries, there is some type of
general health sector reform (HSR) and “other” HNP support. Only two countries, South
Africa and the United Arab Emirates, did not benefit from any HNP lending during the period
examined. However, when it comes to preparing the country for private sector development
or specific PPP support, in only a few cases do countries appear to have received timely
support (see Appendix for more details on timing of support). Naturally, support for
preparation is even more important for nascent and emerging countries. Of the nascent
countries only Moldova and Lesotho are good examples of sequencing. Among the emerging
countries specific World Bank support to health PPPs is found only in Ghana and Bangladesh.
Finally, Turkey is the country were World Bank HNP has been supporting PPP capacity as
part of the HSR program for several years before IFC investments took place.
These results are in line with the call for a more coherent approach to realizing Bank Group
synergies at the institutional level. In the 2014 health technical briefing, management
recognized the need to have a more cohesive approach and pointed out each institution’s lack
of familiarity with the other’s approaches to health, the lack of communication, and the need
for clarity of roles and incentives. If these issues are addressed the Bank Group will be in a
better position to ensure alignment and benefit from each institution’s comparative
advantages.
This analysis cannot take into account that other agencies may have supported one or more
of these countries with adequate PSP support, or that the capacity to arrange PPPs was
already present at the time of the Bank Group’s downstream engagement. This review focuses
on Bank Group support. Although the Bank Group is one of the few players offering services
and products along the entire value chain of deploying PPPs, as stressed in the 2013 IEG PPP




16
                                                                                       CHAPTER 4
                                                        COORDINATION ACROSS THE WORLD BANK GROUP

evaluation,22 it is not the only multilateral agency offering support. To complete the above
analysis, fieldwork would be needed to assess whether and to what extent other agencies
have supported countries in developing an adequate strategy for private sector participation
in health that may have benefited subsequent Bank Group interventions.



     Figure 4.2. Sequencing of World Bank Group Health PPP Interventions in Countries with Downstream
     Support




     Sources: IEG and EIU Infrascope data.




22IEG evaluation, World Bank Group Support to PPPs: Lessons from Experience in Client Countries
FY2012.



                                                                                                    17
5. IFC Advisory Services: Drivers of Success
and Failure            23




As with any other PPP, the focus of IFC AS in health is to bring PPP transactions to
commercial and financial closure. In practice, this means a two-phase process: In the first
phase an options report and recommendations on transaction structure is carried out. In the
second phase IFC typically helps organize a transparent, competitive bidding process that
ends in a successful bid and award of concession (“contract closure”). It is desirable, though
not always easy, to guarantee that the winning bidder will be able to secure financing
(“financial closure”). IEG reviewed all closed projects and assessed the success of IFC AS up
to the point of bringing the PPP transaction to contract closure. However, with the exception
of four post-completion IFC commissioned reports,24 there is little evidence with which to
measure the success of the actual PPP itself.

LESSONS FROM THE STRUCTURING PROCESS
Sixty three percent of all IFC AS mandates reached contract closure. Looking at the health
PPP project cycle (Figure 5.1), Phase 1 was completed in 96 percent of all mandates, 83 percent
of all mandates proceeded to tender with support from IFC AS, bids were received in 67
percent of all mandates, and 63 percent of all mandates proceeded to commercial closure.
These data, however, are not directly comparable to data for infrastructure PPPs because a
different methodology was used compared to the 2013 PPP evaluation.25
Among projects that led to contract closure, the largest success factor are project design and
government commitment. Project design factors were cited in 76 percent of the successful
cases, followed by government commitment, found to be a success factor in 72 percent of the
projects. An important aspect of success is the willingness or the capacity of governments to
undertake PPPs. Similarly, government capacity or commitment is the main reason PPPs do
not pass from the options report stage to the bidding assistance stage.
Three projects exemplify the importance of government decision-making and commitment
for the success of PPPs. In the first example, the government decided not to proceed with the
PPP models presented by the IFC AS. The Project Completion Report for the project indicates
that "the problem lay in the inability of the decision maker to fully grasp and implement the

23 The number of PPP projects having evaluative evidence for IFC Investment Services and the World
Bank is very limited, so patterns and lessons to be learned can only be distilled for IFC Advisory
Services (AS) projects, where a larger sample of evaluated PPP projects is available for study.
24 IFC began to conduct post-completion evaluations in 2012.
25 For Health PPPs, to be in line with IFC AS’ own calculation methods, IEG calculations for this

study now include active projects that reached commercial closure but still showed as active in the
system, and terminated projects; both of these categories had previously been excluded.


18
                                                                                               CHAPTER 5
                                                    IFC ADVISORY SERVICES: DRIVERS OF SUCCESS AND FAILURE

core PPP Principle, which is the financial interaction between the private operation and the
state budget….” In the second example, the government stopped the project even before
reading the PSP plan because there was insufficient support in the country for the proposed
reform. In the last example, the bidding process was cancelled not by the ministry of health,
but by the ministry of finance. A meeting set up with the minister of health to try to resolve
the problem was cancelled by the government. IFC tried, but was never able to confirm
interest in pursuing the project from the new ministries of health and finance, and after having
the project on hold for five semesters, IFC decided to terminate it, following a change in
government.

 Figure 5.1. IFC Advisory Success along the Health PPP Delivery Chain




 Sources: IEG, Project Completion Reports.
 Note: n = 24. IEG identified 49 PPP- targeted transactions by IFC Advisory Services, approved during FY 04–15, of which
 41 are transaction advice with the objective of commercial/contract closure (or commercial closure in another term). Of
 these, 24 have reached contract closure or have been terminated. The remainder are active, or are studies that do not
 aim at contract closure of a specific transaction.

A 63 percent share of PPP advisory mandates reaching commercial closure should not be
interpreted as low. First, success depends, as shown, to an overwhelming extent on external
factors, mainly government commitment or the availability of a champion. Second, a
relatively lower share of PPP mandates reaching commercial closure compared to those
initiated can also be interpreted as IFC AS “pushing the envelope;” that is, IFC is trying to
bring PPP structures to countries with a relatively low PPP track record—a potential
indication of the pioneering nature of IFC’s support. However, this needs to be viewed in
context, because governments in nascent countries are likely to lack the capacity and skills to
structure and manage PPP contracts in a way that safeguards the public interest. Because
evidence is slim on the effects of PPPs beyond closure, particularly on their contribution to


                                                                                                                       19
CHAPTER 5
IFC ADVISORY SERVICES: DRIVERS OF SUCCESS AND FAILURE

the Twin Goals and serving the poor, the verdict on their role in bringing services to poor
countries is still out.

Bank Group advice has not been strategic enough with respect to laying out all options for
the provision of health services in a given country. IEG reviewed the extent to which IFC AS,
in its phase 1 analysis, presented public procurement as an option; of 12 Strategic Options
Reports reviewed by IEG, public procurement was presented in one case. The demand-driven
nature of IFC AS may explain this finding: Governments contract with IFC once they have
decided to proceed with a PPP. In light of the above analysis indicating that the Bank Group
is not adequately sequencing its interventions and that support for PSD in client countries is
not provided in a timely manner, the question arises: On what basis have these governments
decided to go for the PPP model? The extent to which it should be IFC’s responsibility to
include the public service option as part of its assessment is open to debate; nonetheless, it
should become Bank Group practice to ensure that the public option is at least considered and
systematically assessed (or that it has been assessed with support of other agencies). The
efficiency and desirability from a social perspective of the PPP cannot be established without
a comparison with the alternatives, the main one being the public option. This needs to be
done ex-ante, during and ex-post the PPP transaction. The Bank Group may consider how to
engage with governments in a more strategic manner and provide advice on whether and
how to best use PPPs in a health context—a recommendation already issued by the 2013 IEG
evaluation.
PPPs may have fiscal implications for the public—an important aspect to consider when they
are being structured. Fiscal implications may result from investments of the public sector in
the preparation of the PPP, that is, in providing the infrastructure in the form of buildings
and other needed assets; they may also originate from payments that are due once the contract
is concluded. Such payments may take the form of availability payments; for example, for the
provision of a minimum standard of service, or payments that are a function of the units of
service provided. For substantial investments, assessing fiscal implications is good practice;
however, the 2013 PPP evaluation found that fiscal implications, in particular contingent
liabilities, are rarely assessed. This may jeopardize the fiscal sustainability of client countries.

Focusing on those PPP arrangements with substantial fiscal implications, this review found
little evidence that fiscal implications are assessed in a systematic fashion (Figure 5.2). Of the
18 closed PPPs, 5 had potentially no or very limited fiscal implications because they were
contracts for the provision of specific health service (see Figure 5.2). For the sake of this
review, it was assumed that these pose limited risk to client countries’ fiscal space; hence, the
analysis focused on the remaining 13 PPPs that were facility finance or combined service
delivery arrangements. Because of the complexity and magnitude of these PPPs, it appears
advisable to assess fiscal implications.




20
                                                                                      CHAPTER 5
                                           IFC ADVISORY SERVICES: DRIVERS OF SUCCESS AND FAILURE

     Figure 5.2. PPPs and their Fiscal Implications (Projects with IFC AS advice on structuring
     PPPs)




     Source: IEG.



Of the 13 PPPs with potentially significant fiscal implications, about eight there was evidence
enough to make a detailed assessment of these implications (Figure 5.3). The vast majority of
these PPPs relied on the government for payment of services: Fully eight of 13 PPPs relied
entirely on the government for service payments; six on governments and patients’ payments;
two on government and insurance schemes; and one on government, insurance, and patients
(Figure 5.3). In summary, it can be concluded that almost of all these 13 PPPs substantially
depended on the government. IEG could obtain evidence of structured and detailed
assessment of fiscal implications for about 62 percent of the closed projects (eight of these
projects). This corroborates the findings of the 2013 PPP evaluation.

Following the 2013 PPP evaluation, the Bank Group, together with the IMF, developed a PPP
Fiscal Risk Assessment Model (PFRAM).26 This tool, however, is yet to be implemented.
Hence, only about 60 percent of the relevant PPPs had a structured assessment. It will be


26PFRAM is available at
https://www.imf.org/external/np/fad/publicinvestment/pdf/PFRAM.pdf



                                                                                             21
CHAPTER 5
IFC ADVISORY SERVICES: DRIVERS OF SUCCESS AND FAILURE

essential to apply this tool systematically to all those PPP projects that have the potential to
threaten the fiscal space of a client country.

     Figure 5.3. Fiscal Assessment in PPPs with Expected Substantial Fiscal Implications




     Source: IEG.



PPPS AND THE POOR
The underlying rationale for PPP interventions is that PPPs can help improve service delivery
and the provision of basic infrastructure, including for the poor. To understand the extent to
which PPP structures have taken into account the needs of the poor and their—usually
limited— access to health insurance, IEG reviewed all projects for which a focus on the poor
was stated in the project approval documents. For those projects that did not explicitly
mention access for the poor in approval documents, the geographic location has been
analyzed. From an understanding of how many of the supported PPPs are located in areas
where poor people live it could safely be assumed that these poor would also be the
beneficiaries.
A third of IFC AS projects are explicit about their poverty focus in project documents; when
the geographic location27 of the supported health PPPs is also considered, it could be
concluded that up to two-thirds of supported PPPs have a pro-poor dimension. Results show
that in 36 percent of IFC AS projects (16 out of 44) the respective PPP arrangements are
explicitly designed to take the poor into account. However, when project locations are


27   A project located in a low-income state was used as a proxy for poverty focus.



22
                                                                                    CHAPTER 5
                                         IFC ADVISORY SERVICES: DRIVERS OF SUCCESS AND FAILURE

analyzed, the percentage increases to 68 percent. This means that the vast majority of Health
PPPs supported by IFC AS had a poverty focus and followed that logic. IFC Investments had
only four projects during the same time period; though these did not specifically mention
targeting the poor, they provided health services to the general public, including the poor,
under a universal health care regime.

The vast majority of World Bank–supported PPP interventions have an explicit emphasis on
the poor or underserved populations in their design. Between FY04 and FY15, 84 percent (21
out of 25) of World Bank projects specifically targeted the poor. When the geographic
dimension is added, the percentage of pro-poor World Bank PPPs increases to 92 percent. For
example, in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the World Bank targeted districts that are
among the poorest and most isolated in the country, financing performance-based contracts
for the improvement of health services.
However, although the design of the majority of Bank Group interventions has a pro-poor
focus, M&E indicators are lacking to track results and to assess whether the poor were able to
access the health services. IEG reviewed the indicators established at the design stage. For IFC
advisory services, only four projects (out of 16 IFC AS interventions that have a pro-poor
focus) have specifically pro-poor indicators that can be tracked at project completion.
Examples of pro-poor indicators are related to access to service for the poor or underserved
segments (that is, the number of people below the poverty line receiving the service, the
percentage of people below the poverty line out of all admissions receiving the service). For
the World Bank, while most of the nine closed projects had indicators related to the poor or
underserved population at the design stage, the majority of indicators lacked adequate
baselines or targets or were inadequate to be assessed.

LESSONS FROM OPERATING PPPS
From the four Project Completion Reports available on IFC AS–supported PPPs, a few lessons
can be drawn as to what contributes to operating PPPs in a successful manner after
commercial closure. The following paragraphs summarize those lessons, though it should be
noted that these are drawn from IFC-commission evaluation reports that have not been
independently validated by IEG.
Establishing formal mechanisms that allow regular interactions between government and the
concessionaire was key in at least one project reviewed by IEG: The concession agreement for
the project required the government and the concessionaire to form a liaison committee
comprising representatives from the government and the concessionaire. This committee
could look at the issues relating to the day-to-day operation of the contract. Our findings
suggest that this committee was very helpful in ensuring the smooth functioning of the
centers at the initial stages.
Robust M&E, with adequate baselines and key performance indicators are essential: In the
case of a radiology project, performance specifications in the concession agreement did not


                                                                                             23
CHAPTER 5
IFC ADVISORY SERVICES: DRIVERS OF SUCCESS AND FAILURE

define the key performance indicators based on specific, measurable, and achievable
principles. The long list of performance specifications mentioned in the concession agreement
is merely a reporting requirement and does not have benchmarks to measure the performance
of activities. In a dialysis project, though there were some indications of improved health
outcomes in privately managed clinics, the data were insufficient to determine whether the
improvements in privately managed clinics were translating into improved mortality rates
for patients.
Payment security reduces financial risk and enhances private sector confidence: many health
projects require payment from governments to private operators. In some countries, PPP laws
require that concessionaires be provided with a payment guarantee. Hence, project structures
can require the government to route a part of the expenditure budget, equivalent to the
maximum monthly payment, to an escrow agent. The payment due to the concessionaire
(which in the example reviewed by IEG was calculated based on the Independent Verifier’s
Report) was automatically transferred to the concessionaire. In another project, an escrow
account or letter of credit provided payment security and ensured timely availability of funds
from the government. According to the terms of the concession agreement for that project, the
government was required to provide a revolving letter of credit to the concessionaire;
however, after the agreement was signed, the government did not provide the letter of credit
as stipulated. This exposed the concessionaire to payment delays from the government.
Contractual flexibility is a good tool for midway corrections: The concession agreement for a
project reviewed by IEG had the flexibility to allow reviews and revisions at regular intervals
during the concession period, along with provision of extraordinary adjustments on
performance targets as and when needed.
Post-completion reports also indicate some positive effects of PPPs, for example on access and
quality, but evidence is limited. The following paragraphs summarize the effects of PPPs
along the dimensions of access, quality, efficiency, financial soundness, and access for the
poor. Along several of these dimensions, data indicate progress, while in others progress has
been uneven. Data were extracted from four PPPs which were supported by IFC AS until
financial closure. Results have not been independently verified by IEG.

The projects indicate good results with regard to access and quality of services. Three out of
the four projects show evidence that access has increased compared to the baselines. In one
case, the PPP project delivered significantly more services and higher quality in the first year
of operation than at baseline. The number of admissions increased 51 percent, outpatient
visits more than doubled, and the hospital and filter clinics assisted 45 percent more deliveries
than the baseline. The second project provided services for 170,000 compared to a target of
74,000. The third project caters to 11 percent of the total number of hospitalizations versus a
baseline of 8.5 percent. In addition, prior to the establishment of the hospital, the people in
the area used to travel 22 km for treatment of more complex health complaints. Project quality
and performance targets were generally achieved.


24
                                                                                       CHAPTER 5
                                            IFC ADVISORY SERVICES: DRIVERS OF SUCCESS AND FAILURE

Reports show positive effects on indicators measuring access for the poor, but more detailed
assessments are needed. All four projects targeted poor areas. In one case, in a country with
the largest population of extremely poor, hospital services were free for the population. In the
second example, there has been a reduction in the out-of-pocket burden for public patients,
and services are provided free of cost to the poor. In the third example, according to the
reports, more detailed assessments are needed to determine whether the poor people in the
areas of influence are choosing not to seek care at the hospital because of inability to pay costs
including any fees, transport, or other expenses associated with seeking care, including
waiting time. The indicators for efficiency were mixed. Some projects exceeded benchmarks
and targets, while others performed less well. Indicators were also diverse, making direct
comparisons more difficult. In one case, the report points to the difficulty of demonstrating
direct quantitative evidence of improved clinical efficiency as a result of providing advanced
radiology services in the teaching hospitals; therefore, the measure of impact on clinical
efficiency was based on qualitative information only, collected from the doctors at the
hospital. In a second project, measures of efficiency and performance were mostly achieved.
Most of these results show the inadequacy of the current M&E system for health PPPs—they
also pose a possible reputational risk for the Bank Group. That only four studies are available
on the effects of PPP beyond closure, coupled with the emerging findings in these reports that
in most cases more research would be needed, indicates that the M&E system used to monitor
the effectiveness of health PPPs is insufficient. The 2013 IEG PPP evaluation also identified
major shortcomings in the way the Bank Group assesses the long-term effectiveness of PPPs.
The corresponding recommendation, issued in 2013, is currently under implementation.
Frequently, PPPs encounter issues only after a few years of operation, requiring
renegotiations or adjustments to the underlying contracts. The literature indicates a high
incidence rate of renegotiations of PPP contracts. According to a 2014 study by the
Organization for Economic-Cooperation and Development (OECD),28 68 percent of
infrastructure29 concessions in Latin America were renegotiated; typically, such
renegotiations occurred within two years of the contract award. The report adds that these
renegotiations can undermine the benefits of the initial competitive bidding process, because
renegotiations are often bilateral, between the winning operator and the government, with
limited or no transparency.




28 Guasch, J. L. et al. (2014), “The Renegotiation of PPP Contracts: An Overview of its Recent
Evolution in Latin America”, International Transport Forum Discussion Papers, 2014/18, OECD
Publishing, Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jrw2xxlks8v-en.
29 The most common sectors continue to be transport, water, and sanitation; yet social sector PPPs

such as health are picking up.


                                                                                                     25
CHAPTER 5
IFC ADVISORY SERVICES: DRIVERS OF SUCCESS AND FAILURE

The main reasons for renegotiations are weak contract management and weak government
institutions. The 2014 OECD report30 indicates that while post-contract award management of
PPP projects is indeed critical for securing the expected benefits, it has generally not been an
important priority for governments. This is indeed surprising given that most PPP contracts
have durations of 5–30 years with considerable contract complexity. Moreover, monitoring of
service delivery poses a big challenge for governments. Despite the need, the Bank Group
rarely provides “aftercare” for contract management. Providing aftercare would also give the
Bank Group an opportunity know ‘first hand’ from post-financial closure results. Though IEG
is aware that IFC AS and the World Bank offer aftercare type of support, this study notes that
uptake has been very limited so far.




30Guasch, J. L. et al. (2014), “The Renegotiation of PPP Contracts: An Overview of its Recent
Evolution in Latin America”, International Transport Forum Discussion Papers, 2014/18, OECD
Publishing, Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jrw2xxlks8v-en.



26
6. Lessons Learned
As the development community and the World Bank Group increasingly partner with the
private sector to enhance the delivery of health services, this review stresses five lessons:
   (1) When advising governments on the various models for providing health services,
       both the IFC and the World Bank should act as one Bank Group and discuss the whole
       range of options, from the public and mixed options to the other possible types of
       PPPs, in the context of the country’s state of reform, overall maturity, and track record
       in using PPPs.
   (2) To be better positioned to deliver such strategic advice, the Bank Group should better
       integrate its sector reform and policy work with its structuring and financing of PPPs.
   (3) Access for the poor and affordability need not only be systematically considered at
       the design stage, but also tracked to ensure that the poor actually benefit from PPPs.
   (4) The recently developed Bank Group–IMF PFRAM tool for assessing fiscal
       implications should be systematically applied to structuring PPPs that have
       substantial fiscal implications.
   (5) The new practice of preparing post-completion reports after the PPPs have gone into
       operations should be mainstreamed so that post-completion reports are conducted
       after sufficient time, given the long contractual life of PPPs.




                                                                                             27
Appendix. Analysis of World Bank HNP Support in Countries with Downstream IFC-Supported
Health PPPs

Table A.1. World Bank HNP support in nascent countries

  Country      Maturity   2003   2004      2005       2006        2007       2008       2009        2010        2011       2012       2013        2014       2015
                                                                                    HSR - P082814                                                        HSR - P144688
Albania        Nascent
                                                                                                                                                            IFC-AS
                                                                             HNP-P096482                                                     HNP-P143652
                                 HNP-P073118                                             HNP-P096056
Benin          Nascent
                                                                                                                              HSR-P074841
                                                                                                                           IFC-AS
                                        HNP-P071433                                                                                 HNP- P119917
Burkina Faso   Nascent                                                                         HNP-P093987
                                                                                                                                               IFC-AS
                                                  HNP- P076715
Grenada        Nascent
                                                                                                                           IFC-AS
                                  HSR-P051372                                                                                                HSR-P126278
Kyrgyz
               Nascent                                                                          HSR-P084977
Republic
                                                      IFC-AS
                                                                                                                         HNP-P107375
                                                  HNP- P087843                                                                               HNP-P114859
Lesotho        Nascent
                                                          HSR/PPP-P076658                                    PPP-P104403
                                                      IFC-AS                                                                    IFC-AS
FYR                                                            HSR-P086670
               Nascent
Macedonia                                                                                                      IFC-AS
                                                                             HNP-P099841
                                            HNP-P074122
Moldova        Nascent                                                                                                                              HSR-P144892
                                                                                               PPP-P095250 P125719
                                                                                                               IFC-AS
                                                                                                                                    HSR-P133187
                                                               HSR-P051370                                                                   HSR-P113349
Uzbekistan     Nascent
                                                                                                                        PPP-P125004
                                                                                                    IFC-AS




28
Table A.2. World Bank HNP support in emerging countries
  Country        Maturity    2003      2004       2005      2006       2007      2008        2009        2010        2011       2012        2013       2014         2015
                                                                                          HNP-P096056
Bosnia and                                                                                HSR-P088663 P120285
                 Emerging
Herzegovina                                   HSR-P071004
                                                                                                                                                       IFC-AS
                                                                                                                                 HNP-P080228
Egypt            Emerging                                HSR-P045175
                                                                                 IFC-AS
                                                                              HNP- P088797
                                    HNP-P071617                                                     HNP-P105092                                         HNP-P145792
                                                                                                          HSR-P101852
Ghana            Emerging
                                              HSR-P073649
                                                                                                                                             PPP-P125595
                                                                                                                                            IFC-AS
                                                                                          HNP-P082242
Honduras         Emerging                                       HSR-P053575
                                                                                                                    IFC-AS
                                                                                                                             HNP-P102119
                                                                        HNP-P080295                                                                             HNP- P146583
                                                                HNP-P070291                                                              HNP- P120798 P130865
Nigeria          Emerging
                                                                                                                  HSR-P104405
                                                                         HSR-P070290
                                                                                                                                IFC-AS      IFC-AS
                                                                                   HSR-P078971                                                          HSR-P145174
Romania          Emerging     HSR-P008797
                                                       IFC-AS
United Arab
                 Emerging                                   IFC-AS
Emirates
                                                                                                                                         HNP-P102305
                                                                                   HSR-P074841
Bangladesh       Emerging
                                                                                                                                    HSR/PSD- P118708
                                                                                                                                           IFC-AS 2



Table A.3. World Bank HNP support in developed countries
  Country        Maturity    2003      2004       2005      2006       2007      2008        2009        2010        2011       2012        2013       2014        2015
                                                                                                                                 HNP-P095171
Brazil - Bahia   Developed                               HSR-P054119
                                                                                                        IFC-AS      IFC-AS      IFC-AS
                                        HSR- P051273                                                      HSR-P086669                                   HSR-P144871
Croatia          Developed
                                                                                                                                                                   IFC-AS
                                                                                                                      HNP- P116226
Mexico           Developed                               HSR-P066321
                                                                                 IFC-AS
                                        HSR- P062932                                                                         HSR-P095563
Peru             Developed
                                                                                                                                                                   IFC-AS
South Africa     Developed                                                                              IFC-LEN
                                                                                  HNP-P096262
                                                                HSR-P074053
Turkey           Developed
                                                                                                                    HSR/PPP-P102172                              HSR/PPP-P152799
                                                                                                                                                                  3 IFC-LEN




                                                                                                                                                                        29
