IFC Corporate Governance
Knowledge Publication




         FOCUS 14
         Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership
         after the Panama Papers




         Mark Fenwick
         Erik P.M. Vermeulen
         Foreword by Joseph A. McCahery
Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the
Panama Papers
Mark Fenwick and Erik P.M. Vermeulen




IFC Corporate Governance Group Focus 14


	                                         FOCUS 14
©Copyright 2016. All rights reserved.
International Finance Corporation
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW,
Washington, DC 20433
This paper is one in a series commissioned by the IFC
Corporate Governance Group and intended as a thought
piece to encourage debate on important corporate
governance topics.
The conclusions and judgments contained in this report
represent the views of the authors and should not be
attributed to, and do not necessarily represent the views
of the IFC or its Board of Directors or the World Bank or
its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. IFC
and the World Bank do not guarantee the accuracy of the
data in this publication and accept no responsibility for any
consequences of their use.
The material in this work is protected by copyright. Copying
and/or transmitting portions or all of this work may be
a violation of applicable law. The International Finance
Corporation encourages dissemination of works such as
these and hereby grants permission to users of this work
to copy portions for their personal, noncommercial use,
without any right to resell, redistribute, or create derivative
works there from. Any other copying or use of this work
requires the express written permission of the International
Finance Corporation.


About IFC Corporate Governance Group
The Group brings together staff from investment support
and advisory operations into a single, global team. This
unified team advises on all aspects of corporate governance
and offers targeted client services in areas such as increasing
board effectiveness, improving the control environment, and
family businesses governance. The Group also helps support
corporate governance improvements and reform efforts in
emerging markets and developing countries, while leveraging
and integrating knowledge tools, expertise, and networks at
the global and regional levels.
Contents
Abstract.............................................................................................................................................iv

About the Authors...........................................................................................................................iv

Foreword............................................................................................................................................v

1. The Lesson of the Panama Papers...............................................................................................1

2. Why Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership Matters.....................................................................7

	     A) The (Agency) Risks of Inside and Outside Ownership.................................................................8

	     B) The Rationale for Disclosure and Reporting Requirements.........................................................9

	     C) The Current Legal Framework................................................................................................. 10

	     D) Who Must Disclose?................................................................................................................ 12

3. Multiple Strategies for Concealing Beneficial Ownership......................................................15

	     A) Concealment Strategies........................................................................................................... 15

	     B) Stricter Disclosure Rules?......................................................................................................... 18

4. Mapping Disclosure and Transparency.....................................................................................21

	     A) A Note on Methodology......................................................................................................... 21

	     B) Five Different Approaches to the Disclosure of Ownership.......................................................26

	     C) From “Mandatory Disclosure” to Open Communication..........................................................32

5. Open Communication and the “New Firm”..............................................................................35

	     A) What is a “New Firm”?...........................................................................................................35

	     B) The Three Principles.................................................................................................................37

	     C) Embracing Open Communication............................................................................................ 41

6. The Open Communication of Ownership and Control Structures..........................................43

7. The Key Takeaway: “Nudging” Firms to Embrace Open Communication..............................49

References........................................................................................................................................54




Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	                                                                           FOCUS 14       iii
Abstract
Publication of the so-called “Panama Papers”1 focused public interest on how certain
politicians, celebrities, and other elites may have used elaborate corporate structures and
offshore tax havens to conceal their beneficial ownership of companies and obscure their
personal assets. Rather than taking the Panama Papers as an indication of the need for more
and stricter disclosure and reporting rules, this paper advocates an alternative approach. We
need to start by acknowledging that many companies are currently experiencing “disclosure
and reporting fatigue,” in which the constant demand for “more” and “better” transparency
and reporting is having the unintended effect of promoting indifference or evasiveness. The
practice of disclosure and reporting is widely perceived as an obligation to be fulfilled and not
as an opportunity to add value to a firm.

This is confirmed by the findings of an empirical study conducted by the authors of this paper
that examines how disclosure rules operate in practice across various jurisdictions. The key
takeaway of the study is that — even in jurisdictions that have a robust disclosure regime —
the majority of firms engage in “grudging” or “boilerplate” compliance, in which ownership
and control structures are not adequately revealed in an accessible way and, perhaps more
importantly, the impact of these ownership and control structures on the governance of a
company is obscured.

In this paper the authors advocate an approach based on the current communication strategy
of a minority of firms in their sample — firms that engage in what the authors characterize
as “open communication.” These firms present information on control structures — and
their effect on governance — in a direct, accessible, and highly personalized manner. Such
firms seem to recognize the commercial and other strategic benefits to be gained from open
communication. The paper explores the implications of such an approach for both business
and regulators.



About the Authors
Mark Fenwick (Professor at Kyushu University in Japan) and Erik P.M. Vermeulen
(Professor of Business and Financial Law at Tilburg University and Head of Governance at
Philips Lighting in the Netherlands) are currently researching trends in how high growth
companies organize themselves and communicate with the market in order to build and
maintain relevancy. The goal for such firms is to identify and adopt governance structures
that maximize opportunities for delivering innovative and meaningful products and services
for consumers. This means putting in place a mission-driven culture that can attract the best
talent and the right kind of investors.



1 Offshore tax havens can be, and frequently are, used for legitimate purposes. Also, the “Panama Papers” mention intermediate
  entities in very many jurisdictions other than Panama.



iv    FOCUS 14	                                                              Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
Foreword
Nearly 15 years ago, the Enron scandal revealed that extensive use of subsidiaries in tax-haven
countries enabled the firm to avoid paying $2 billion in federal taxes. The Enron case triggered
widespread debate about the real reasons multinational corporations establish subsidiaries in
tax havens. On the one hand, do they use tax havens primarily to shield the firms from
high tax regimes by shifting revenues to the subsidiaries? Do they use it for other legitimate
purposes? Or on the other hand, do managers and controlling owners use tax havens for their
own personal interests, such as illicit related-party transactions?

The tax-saving motive has featured prominently in economic thinking to justify the use
of tax-haven subsidiaries. Earlier studies found that large, international corporations with
significant intra-firm trade and high R&D intensity account for a substantial portion of firms
that use tax havens to earn higher returns. But despite those substantial tax-shielding benefits,
recent work indicates that tax havens play a key role in enabling private parties to extract firm
resources for their own personal benefit. However, the widespread implementation of TIEAs
(tax information and exchange agreements)—bilateral agreements between countries and tax
havens to exchange information—seems to make it more difficult and costly for individuals
and firms to pursue illicit activities at the expense of shareholders.

Yet questions persist about how much offshore wealth is attributable to tax evasion by firms
and wealthy individuals. In April 2009, the G20 countries announced “an end to bank
secrecy,” and more recently they endorsed a new global tax transparency standard. The
disclosure of beneficial-ownership information has also been high on the political agenda.
For example, G8 leaders have pursued reforms that seek to address the problem of corporate
opacity. Notably, the United Kingdom is the first mover in this area, requiring companies
there to publish the names of their owners on company registers. While there have been
major complaints about sharing information on beneficial ownership, the justification for it
is fairly straightforward. Beneficial-ownership rules allow shareholders to monitor related-
party transactions and manage other conflicts of interests. Besides mitigating agency costs and
improving market efficiency, ownership disclosure is an effective tool for issuers in identifying
and communicating effectively with their investors.

In April 2016, the public as well as media commentators were taken by surprise by the leak of
over 11.5 million confidential documents from Mossack Fonseca, a Panamanian law firm. The
so-called “Panama Papers” scandal serves as an example of how the rich and powerful in some
cases may have used complex legal structures to conceal their beneficial ownership in offshore
subsidiaries. The Panama Papers scandal has provided an opportunity for policymakers to call
for stricter rules to promote the disclosure of ultimate beneficial ownership.

Mark Fenwick and Erik Vermeulen offer a comprehensive analysis of the strategies for
concealing beneficial ownership as well as of the conventional arguments in favor of disclosure
and reporting requirements. It turns out that there are multiple legal strategies to circumvent any
regime that requires beneficial-ownership disclosure. Moreover, it seems likely that firms with
complicated ownerships structures will not disclose. To the extent that open and substantive


Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	                             FOCUS 14   v
beneficial-ownership disclosure is not feasible, requiring more and stricter information is
unlikely to facilitate more meaningful disclosure among the vast majority of companies.
Accordingly, it is not surprising, as Fenwick and Vermeulen show empirically, that the majority
of firms analyzed in various jurisdictions engage in “grudging” compliance, making sure the
regulator does not have a comprehensive picture of the complicated ownership structures. Talk
of imposing stricter rules has the effect of undermining the current information-disclosure
regime, and given the distortion and unreliability of existing information disclosure, it may
no longer be desirable to pursue this mode of ownership regulation.

Alternatively, Fenwick and Vermeulen point to a cultural shift in attitudes toward disclosure,
in which a few firms are choosing to disclose information on control structures in an accessible
and highly personalized manner. Once the authors have made the case for this “open
communication,” they turn to a number of implications it has for the economics of the firm.
First, open communication provides a simple mechanism to coordinate different relationships
among the firms’ stakeholders. Second, open communication has the potential to encourage
firms to engage in more effective and personal disclosure with the market. Third, it is likely
that clear principles will evolve regarding how firms communicate with regulators. Thus the
open-communication approach to beneficial disclosure may hold out an exemplar for dealing
with many company misuse issues.

                                                                        Joseph A. McCahery
                                                     Professor of International Economic Law
                                                                Tilburg University and ECGI




vi   FOCUS 14	                                            Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
1.               The Lesson of the Panama Papers
The April 2016 leak of over 11.5 million confidential documents
from a Panamanian law firm, Mossack Fonseca, placed the issue
of beneficial ownership at the center of global media attention.2
The Panama Papers exposed how the rich, powerful, and famous
in some cases may have used elaborate corporate ownership and
control structures to ring-fence3 their personal assets. The choice
of offshore companies in lightly regulated tax havens was made
on the — ultimately mistaken — belief that such activities would
remain beyond the reach of regulatory and public scrutiny.

Not surprisingly, the public response to the disclosure of this
information has been anger, and — at least for some of those
implicated — the consequences were swift and dramatic. Within
days, the prime minister of Iceland was forced to resign over a
                                                                                           Within days, the
failure to disclose his interest in his family’s offshore account.                         prime minister
There was no suggestion that he had violated any Icelandic law,                            of Iceland was
but a lack of transparency and a perceived conflict of interest                            forced to resign
were enough to irreparably damage him. Elsewhere, a number of                              over a failure
other political leaders faced similar unwelcome questions about                            to disclose his
their own personal and family finances. Against a background
                                                                                           interest in his
of deep cuts in public services, the revelation that political elites
and their families were avoiding the consequences of “austerity”
                                                                                           family’s offshore
met with widespread indignation.                                                           account.
More generally, release of the Panama Papers has contributed
to the mood of public skepticism that currently surrounds the
financial-services industry and corporate capitalism. Out of
the 2008 financial crisis a new political discourse emerged as
issues that were previously confined to the margins of economic
debate — derivative contracts, credit default swaps, collateralized
debt obligations — entered the mainstream political and media
debate. Public confidence in the integrity of the corporate world
is at an all-time low as scandals involving household brands have
become an almost routine feature of everyday life. Previously
respected companies such as Enron, Olympus, or Volkswagen

 A beneficial owner is the ultimate natural person or state that benefits from the
2
 ownership of a company, even though formal legal ownership is in the name of
 another person (the “nominee” or “registered owner”). A more detailed discussion
 can be found in Section I.C, below.
 Ring-fencing is when a portion of a company’s assets or profits are financially
3
 separated without necessarily being operated as a separate entity. A ring fence is to
 protect the assets from inclusion in an investor’s calculable net worth or to lower tax
 consequences.



Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	                                  FOCUS 14   1
                       have become synonymous with arrogance, greed, and at times a
                       breathtaking disregard for the law. Even global celebrities such
                       as Leonard Di Caprio, George Clooney, and Angelina Jolie
                       have joined the chorus of critics, using the platform afforded by
The standard           fame to berate corporations for the harm (social, financial, and
response of            environmental) that they are now perceived to be causing.
policymakers           The standard response of policymakers looking to appease the
looking to             public in the wake of such scandals has been the introduction of
appease the            more regulation. Earlier incidents involving large publicly listed
public in              firms, for instance, resulted in ever-stricter rules in the areas
the wake of            of corporate governance, tax, finance, and sustainability. In a
such scandals          U.S. context, “Sarbanes-Oxley” and “Dodd-Frank” function
                       as shorthand for these new legal rules, but a similar trend can
has been the           be found in most countries (McCahery and Vermeulen 2005).
introduction of        The inevitable result has been the emergence of a fragmented
more regulation.       regulatory landscape that requires large modern corporations to
                       make a much more significant investment in compliance and
                       the management of legal risk (Fenwick 2015).

                       Much of the commentary in the immediate aftermath of the
                       release of the Panama Papers was characterized by similar
                       calls for stricter and more stringent rules that attempt to force
                       more information into the public domain. Unsurprisingly, the
                       regulatory strategies particularly focus on the disclosure of
We suggest that        “ultimate beneficial ownership” as a prerequisite in preventing
a demand for           tax evasion, tax avoidance, money laundering, and corruption
more and stricter      (for example, see Economist 2016). The leak has been interpreted
mandatory              as an opportunity for regulators, including the regulators of
disclosure rules       tax havens, to work together to develop a coordinated global
is not necessarily     solution that ensures greater transparency in the ownership of
                       firms (Piketty 2014).
the right lesson.
                       However, we suggest that a demand for more and stricter
                       mandatory disclosure rules is not necessarily the right lesson —
                       and perhaps even the wrong lesson — to be taken from this
                       kind of scandal. In a globally connected society in which
                       open communication represents the “new normal,” concealing
                       information becomes increasingly difficult. In part, this is the
                       result of digitalization, modern communication technologies,
                       and social media, which make the instant reproduction and rapid
                       global dissemination of information easier than ever before. And
                       it is not feasible to expect to keep negative information secret, at
                       least in the medium to long term.



       2   FOCUS 14	                                Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
In addition to this technological change, an important cultural
shift has taken place in attitudes toward information disclosure.
All stakeholders within and outside firms — investors,
executives, managers, employees, professional service providers,
business partners, consumers, and the general public — now
expect and demand more open and honest communication
practices. We need to understand that the recent proliferation of
corporate scandals, as well as the Panama Papers, signals a new
social order in which the nondisclosure of negative information
is no longer tolerated (recall the prime minister of Iceland).
Thus a lack of transparency in communication strategies has
become a source of enormous risk for companies — as well as for
individuals who have a reputation to lose.

Moreover, strategies of more open communication have become
a source of tremendous opportunity for companies that can
leverage such openness to their advantage. This cultural shift in
the meaning of information management and communication
strategy is the real lesson to be taken from the Panama Papers,
and unpacking the implications of this technological and
                                                                    A lack of
social transformation is the key challenge in formulating any       transparency in
regulatory response to scandals of this kind.                       communication
                                                                    strategies has
This paper expands on this idea by first introducing conventional
debates on why beneficial ownership matters (Section II), with
                                                                    become a source
a focus on beneficial ownership in listed companies. We then        of enormous risk
introduce some of the strategies often used to conceal beneficial   for companies.
ownership (Section III) — it appears that, even in jurisdictions
that have a robust disclosure regime, anyone wishing to conceal
his or her beneficial ownership of a company has ample legal
means to do so. We confirmed this assumption via an empirical
study that examined how some of the largest and most successful
companies currently comply with disclosure and reporting
requirements for beneficial ownership (Section IV).

A key finding of the study is that the vast majority of companies
currently engage in what we term “grudging” or “boilerplate”
disclosure, in which formal requirements are met but the
ultimate owner is often difficult or, in many cases, impossible
to identify with any degree of certainty. This is true not only
for companies that are controlled by multinationals and
institutional investors but also for government-controlled and
family/founder-controlled companies. Such firms signal to the
market the greater risk that attaches to an investment. In the
medium to long term, such companies seem likely to struggle;


Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	           FOCUS 14   3
                       at least, there are doubts about their capacity to attract the
                       sustained rounds of new investment necessary to fund growth
                       and long-term success (Vermeulen 2016).

                       By contrast, a small number of companies with concentrated
                       ownership structures go far beyond what the current disclosure
                       rules oblige them to reveal. Such companies present additional
                       information; but more than that, they present this additional
                       information in a more accessible and sometimes engaging and
                       highly personalized way. We suggest that this approach, which
                       we characterize as “open communication,” is an effective means
                       of generating investor confidence and affords such companies
                       the best opportunity of attracting new — and long-term —
                       investment and, perhaps more importantly, new and productive
                       relationships with other stakeholders that can add value to a
                       business (Verhezen 2015).
A small                Therefore, it would seem that, over time, the market itself might
number of              resolve the problem, because companies that communicate
companies with         openly about corporate information, including ownership
concentrated           structures, seem better placed to flourish. But the problem is
ownership              whether the market mechanism alone does enough ex ante to
structures go far      protect investors from investing in — and other stakeholders
                       from engaging with — errant companies, or whether it ensures
beyond what
                       the most efficient allocation of capital. Some regulation is
the current            required (McCahery and Vermeulen 2014b).
disclosure rules
oblige them            Advocates of transparency and information-disclosure regimes
                       suggest that more rules and regulations that compel and enforce
to reveal.
                       transparency and mandatory disclosure unavoidably represent
                       the most reliable means of ensuring the effective operation
                       of the market mechanism. If potential investors have more
                       information, then they can make better decisions, which in turn
                       enhances the efficiency of the market.

                       Although some disclosure rules are clearly necessary, we
                       claim that a regulatory approach that focuses exclusively on
                       more transparency, disclosure, and reporting rules will not
                       succeed and merely produces “reporting fatigue” and the kind
                       of grudging compliance that currently seems to be the norm.
                       The act of disclosure and reporting is framed and perceived
                       as an obligation to be fulfilled and not an opportunity to add
                       value. Therefore, efforts to compel more transparency via more
                       rules may not have the intended, or hoped for, effects. Rather
                       than promoting greater transparency, adding more layers of


       4   FOCUS 14	                              Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
transparency rules seems likely to induce even more evasiveness
and formalistic compliance.

If the right kind of information is not forthcoming, then
the market mechanism cannot function effectively. And                If the right kind
if the wrong kind of information is being disclosed or if the
information is presented — as it often is — in an impenetrable
                                                                     of information is
technical or legalistic style that renders disclosure meaningless,   not forthcoming,
it may actually make the situation worse, as it has the potential    then the market
to obscure the reality or create a misplaced sense of confidence     mechanism
in a particular firm or firms.                                       cannot function
Instead, we argue that regulators need to focus on “nudging” —
                                                                     effectively.
encouraging, persuading, and empowering — companies to
recognize and embrace the commercial and other strategic
benefits of more open communication (Section V). This would
involve reframing the debate (from mandatory disclosure to open
communication) and focusing on nudging firms to acknowledge
the business case for open communication.

Crucially, the small minority of firms in our sample that are
currently engaged in some form of open communication already
seem to understand the multiple benefits of a more open and
personalized approach to transparency. But for many firms —          We argue that
and particularly firms in emerging markets — some nudging            regulators need
may be required. We suggest that open communication about            to focus on
ownership and control structures not only will bring multiple
benefits for individual firms but also will highlight the “gap”
                                                                     “nudging”.
in approach between the different types of companies and alert
stakeholders to the possible risks associated with engaging with
companies that do not embrace such openness (Section VI).
Doing so can enhance the efficiency of the market mechanism,
further reinforcing the pressure on more recalcitrant firms to
engage in meaningful communication.

The paper concludes by asking how regulators might achieve
this “nudging” effect (Section VII). We suggest an approach in
which regulators work together in partnership with companies,
investors, and business practitioners to identify best practices
and practical strategies for other firms seeking to take advantage
of the multiple benefits of open communication.




Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	            FOCUS 14   5
6   FOCUS 14	   Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
2.               Why Disclosure of Beneficial
                 Ownership Matters
Conventional thinking suggests that public trust in corporations
and markets largely depends on the existence of an accurate
disclosure regime that provides transparency in the beneficial
ownership and control structures of companies. Beneficial-
ownership information is necessary to detect and prevent tax
evasion, corruption, money laundering, terrorist financing,
and other illicit behavior involving one or more companies.
This is again confirmed after the Panama Papers leak. More
importantly, the Panama Papers discussion shows that the
general public increasingly finds the misuse of corporate
structures unacceptable.

Moreover, investor confidence in financial markets is dependent
on the accurate disclosure of the ownership and control
structures as well as the ultimate beneficial owner (who could be
an individual, group of individuals, or the state) of publicly listed
companies. This is especially important in corporate governance         Investor
systems characterized by concentrated ownership, such as Asia           confidence in
or parts of Europe (Bratton and McCahery 2001). In such                 financial markets
systems, large investors with significant voting and cash-flow          is dependent
rights may facilitate long-term growth and firm performance             on the accurate
(Mayer 2013). However, there is a risk that controlling beneficial
                                                                        disclosure of
owners, with large voting blocks, may also have an incentive to
divert corporate assets and exploit opportunities for personal
                                                                        the ownership
gain at the expense of minority investors and to the detriment of       and control
the company. Protecting such minority investors and ensuring            structures.
the most efficient allocation of capital is seen as an important
issue in the regulation of capital markets (Pacces 2013).

In addressing this issue, most jurisdictions have passed legislation
mandating shareholders to disclose and report the accumulation
of a substantial ownership of shares (Vermeulen 2013). The
rationale behind disclosure requirements seems clear: by alerting
minority investors or potential investors to material changes
in control and ownership structures, we allow them to make
a more informed assessment about the company’s prospects.
However, devising an effective legal framework that facilitates
the disclosure of the ultimate beneficial owner has not proven
easy. Even with a system of disclosure rules and regulations, the
true ownership of a company can remain opaque or, in many
cases, impossible to establish.


Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	               FOCUS 14   7
                      The rest of this section provides more context for the issues and
                      argument presented here. It describes the agency problems that
                      have been identified in different types of securities markets,
                      focusing in particular on markets associated with investor-
                      controlled companies (Subsection A); describes the underlying
                      rationale for the conventional measures (rules requiring
                      disclosure of control structures) to address this problem
                      (Subsection B); summarizes some of the main features of the
                      current legal framework for ensuring disclosure (Subsection C);
                      and explains which institution or person is responsible for the
                      disclosure of the beneficial ownership positions (Subsection D).

                      A. The (Agency) Risks of Inside and Outside
                      Ownership
                      In markets characterized by small and widely dispersed
                      shareholdings — liquid trading markets — the corporate
                      governance discussion has centered on creating mechanisms
The “separation       intended to curtail agency problems, notably those that arise
of ownership and      between self-interested management and passive investors (Stout
control” provides     2012). These problems are usually explained by the “vertical
an opportunity        agency relationship,” in which the managers are the agents and
                      the shareholders are the principals. This type of agency problem
for those in          stems from shareholders being disengaged from the task of
management            monitoring and, if necessary, disciplining management. The
to exploit their      “separation of ownership and control” provides an opportunity
informational         for those in management to exploit their informational advantage
advantage.            regarding a company’s strategies, policies, and prospects without
                      the risk of being detected (Jensen and Meckling 1976).

                      In the concentrated ownership — or “blockholder” systems —
                      found in different forms in Europe, Asia, and other capitalist
                      economies, the scale of the “vertical agency problem” is mitigated,
                      because some investors tend to hold a disproportionately larger
                      stake in listed companies and have both the incentive and the
                      capacity to monitor and discipline management. In blockholder
                      systems, we can distinguish two types of listed firms.

                      First, there are listed companies, such as those “controlled” by
                      institutional investors, in which the substantial voting rights
                      and cash-flow rights are identical and based on the proportion
                      of total shares held. These investors, generally referred to as
                      “outside blockholders,” make listed companies susceptible to a
                      three-way conflict between controlling shareholders, managers,
                      and minority shareholders. Since outside blockholders usually


      8   FOCUS 14	                               Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
mitigate the problems related to managerial opportunism, it
is not surprising that policymakers and regulators focus on
possible conflicts that may occur in the “horizontal agency
relationship” between outside blockholders (and the managers,
who have an incentive to respond to their demands) and passive
minority investors (Bebchuk and Jackson 2011).

Note that in the current financial world, which is typically
characterized by high-frequency trading and rapid and
continuous changes in share ownership, institutional investors
are inclined to focus on short-term returns. The short-term
stance of the outside blockholders’ investment strategy exposes
the minority shareholders to opportunistic behavior. Outside
blockholders have increasingly used derivative instruments
and short-selling techniques to make profits, which merely
compounds the “horizontal agency problem” between outside
blockholders and minority investors (Strine 2013).
                                                                      There is a wide
Second, there are listed companies, such as the many family-          range of legal
owned — and sometimes even state-owned — companies, with
“inside blockholders” who actually hold management positions
                                                                      mechanisms
or serve on the board of directors of the companies in which they     designed
invest. “Vertical agency problems” are irrelevant in this context,    to prevent
but “horizontal agency problems” are a major concern in listed        corporate actions
companies with sizable inside blockholders (Holderness 2003).         that may lead
In this context, the controlling shareholders may use several
                                                                      to opportunistic
strategies to extract resources and assets from firms they control,   behavior by
thereby significantly increasing horizontal agency costs. Obvious     blockholders.
risks include 1) dilutive share issues, 2) insider trading, 3)
withholding important information from prospective investors,
4) allocation of corporate opportunities and business activities,
and 5) related-party transactions. The aim of this section
is twofold: first, to critically review the existing regulatory
framework for mitigating these risks in the context of listed
companies; and second, in light of various inadequacies with
this framework, to propose an alternative framework that offers
more satisfactory results.

B. The Rationale for Disclosure and Reporting
Requirements
There is a wide range of legal mechanisms designed to prevent
corporate actions that may lead to opportunistic behavior by
blockholders. For instance, preemption rights in company-
law statutes give all shareholders in a company the right to be


Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	             FOCUS 14   9
                        offered proportionally any newly issued shares before the shares
                        are offered to either nonshareholders or one or more of the
                        existing shareholders. Because the offer of new shares to existing
                        shareholders usually must be made on a pro rata basis, this legal
Minority                provision prevents blockholders from expropriating the interests
investors must          of minority investors by initiating dilutive share issues.
have the means          A second example of legal provisions that regulate potentially
of monitoring           self-dealing transactions can be found in the listing rules of
and observing           several Asian countries. The listing rules of the Hong Kong
blockholders’           SAR and Singapore stock exchanges, for instance, insist that
behavior.               material related-party transactions be put to a vote by the
                        minority shareholders of listed companies, providing them with
                        information and control over expropriation attempts.

                        Nevertheless, no matter how effective these mechanisms are,
                        they do not provide a sufficient remedy for the challenge raised
                        by blockholders. Indeed, minority investors must have the
                        means of monitoring and observing blockholders’ behavior to
                        detect possible opportunism and expropriation at an early stage.
                        Therefore, an accurate disclosure and reporting regime that
                        provides transparency in the ownership and control structures
Countries have          of publicly listed companies is generally considered an essential
implemented             element of an effective corporate governance infrastructure
an array of legal       (Easterbrook and Fischer 1991). If an investor or potential
and regulatory          investor has more information regarding the ownership structure,
instruments             particularly relating to the ultimate beneficial ownership, then
                        that investor can make better decisions, which in turn enhances
aimed at                the efficiency of capital flows within the market (Jurdant 2013).
information             Information disclosure thus increases market efficiency. Below,
disclosure.             we will question this justification, but for the moment let us
                        examine the type of legal framework that this way of thinking
                        has produced.

                        C. The Current Legal Framework
                        In dealing with beneficial ownership and control issues, countries
                        have implemented an array of legal and regulatory instruments
                        aimed at information disclosure. In most jurisdictions, these
                        instruments are included in their securities laws and regulations
                        (including listing rules). This subsection briefly summarizes
                        some of the main features of the current legal framework for
                        ensuring disclosure. We should note, however, that even though
                        there is a significant degree of convergence, certain jurisdictions
                        offer lax and flexible company laws that make it relatively simple


       10   FOCUS 14	                               Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
to conceal beneficial-ownership positions. We discuss these
strategies in Subsection D.

At the core of most disclosure laws is a definition of the
beneficial owner. In general, a beneficial owner can be defined        At the core of
as the legal or natural person entitled to the benefits accruing
from the beneficial ownership of securities and/or having
                                                                       most disclosure
power to exercise controlling influence over the voting rights         laws is a
attached to the shares. Different jurisdictions fill out this bare-    definition of the
bones concept in different ways. At one end of the spectrum, we        beneficial owner.
find jurisdictions where the definition of beneficial ownership
is restricted to certain benefits, most obviously the pecuniary
benefits attached to the shares. A more detailed definition can be
found at the other end of the spectrum, where a beneficial owner
is defined as the ultimate owner of the deposited securities and is
entitled to all rights, benefits, powers, and privileges and subject
to all liabilities, duties, and obligations attached to, or arising
from, the deposited securities.

Generally speaking, there are three groups of natural persons/
legal entities for which the disclosure of beneficial ownership
information is required. In the first group are directors and chief
executives/senior officers, who are required to make disclosure        Most
of their interests in the company, regardless of their actual          jurisdictions
shareholding percentage. The second group includes substantial         distinguish
shareholders, which are classified by a minimum shareholding           between de
percentage (usually fixed at 3 percent, 5 percent, or 10 percent)      jure and de
and are required to report their beneficial ownership.
                                                                       facto beneficial
Most jurisdictions distinguish between de jure and de facto            ownership.
beneficial ownership. The third group consists of de facto
owners. Because it is the rule rather than the exception to look
at de facto beneficial ownership in addition to de jure beneficial
ownership, a pertinent issue is the content of such de facto
ownership. In very general language, applying such a concept
will result in shares held under the name of third parties also
being counted as under the control of the beneficial owner.

The first and most straightforward category of ownership
is when the shareholders are natural persons. Applying the
concept of de facto beneficial ownership results in the securities
held by a person’s spouse and/or minor children being counted
as securities held by that person. To be sure, this is a common
practice adopted in most jurisdictions around the world.



Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	              FOCUS 14   11
                        The second category is when another company holds the shares
                        of a listed company. The de facto approach would certainly
                        require that disclosure be made beyond the level of the signatory
                        of the “institutional” shareholder, but the key issue here is how
To attain more          far the disclosure could reach. Is a beneficial owner recognized
voting/control          at the first, second, or the ultimate layer of beneficial ownership
rights in excess        of shares in listed companies? Although most jurisdictions
                        do mandate that disclosure be made to the level of ultimate
of the cash-
                        beneficial owner(s), their answers to this question still vary a
flow rights, a          great deal regarding the technical particularities about how
shareholder             to reach the ultimate beneficial owners. One example is the
may use a set           threshold of shareholding that would constitute “control” in
of control-             a company, which could vary from 20 percent to 33 percent
enhancing               among the responding jurisdictions in a recent OECD study on
mechanisms.             beneficial ownership in Asia (OECD 2016).

                        De facto beneficial ownership also covers the situations where
                        two or more people jointly hold shares. Most jurisdictions also
                        impose a disclosure obligation on beneficial owners “acting in
                        concert.” A special kind of shareholder is a trust. Consistent
                        with the above, if a jurisdiction requires disclosure of beneficial
                        ownership up to the ultimate level, this requirement usually
                        already covers the obligation of disclosing trust arrangements.

                        To attain more voting/control rights in excess of the cash-
                        flow rights, a shareholder may use a set of control-enhancing
                        mechanisms. Typically, such mechanisms (discussed in more
                        detail below) include pyramid structures, cross-shareholdings,
                        dual-class shares and nonvoting shares, derivative products
                        of shares (depository receipts), and shareholder coalitions and
                        agreements. Certainly, while using mechanisms to enhance
                        control in general is not uncommon, one jurisdiction can differ
                        from another in the extent of regulatory acceptance of these
                        mechanisms, resulting in one or more of them being illegal or at
                        least somehow conditioned in certain countries.

                        D. Who Must Disclose?
                        In general, disclosure of beneficial ownership is mandated
                        first from the (potential) beneficial owners themselves. These
                        typically include directors and chief executives (to whom no
                        minimum shareholding applies) and substantial shareholders,
                        defined as holding at least 3 percent, 5 percent, or 10 percent
                        of the company’s (voting) securities. These individuals or other
                        entities (including their authorized nominees) are obligated to


       12   FOCUS 14	                               Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
report relevant information about their beneficial ownership in
the company, which in turn should record such information in
its register of shareholders, prospectus, and/or periodic reports
(if and where applicable). Thus both beneficial owners and the
listed company have the obligation to disclose, in an accurate         Bearer shares
and timely manner, information about beneficial ownership in           normally are
the company to the national securities regulator and/or the stock      not registered in
exchange where the company is listed. Finally, listed companies
                                                                       a shareholders’
must include information about their major shareholders (and
usually also the beneficial owners) in their annual reports.
                                                                       register.

Consistent with the de facto approach, however, third parties
other than the beneficial owners and the listed companies may
also be subject to certain obligations, with the aim of enhancing
beneficial-ownership disclosure. One important group of
“other third parties” consists of firms involved in the service
and consulting industry. These firms often have obligations to
identify the ultimate beneficial owners of the client companies
under “customer due diligence” rules and regulations based on
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) standards (FATF 2012).

Reporting requirements also include the ownership of bearer
shares, which are still considered legal in certain jurisdictions.
Bearer shares normally are not registered in a shareholders’
register, making it almost impossible to determine the identity
of the shareholders. To be sure, registration with the company is
often necessary, at least if holders of bearer shares intend to vote
or want to receive dividends. Without effective disclosure and
reporting requirements, however, bearer shares might enable
shareholders to secretly acquire potential control over a listed
company, thereby facilitating market manipulation and abuse.




Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	              FOCUS 14   13
14   FOCUS 14	   Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
3.               Multiple Strategies for Concealing
                 Beneficial Ownership
Even with a robust disclosure regime in place, however, a number
of lawful mechanisms make it possible to conceal the true
identity of the ultimate beneficial owner of a company’s shares.
This section briefly examines various strategies of those seeking
to conceal beneficial ownership (Subsection A) and suggests that
the ready availability of such concealment strategies undermines
the effectiveness of any approach that aims to compel disclosure
(Subsection B).

A. Concealment Strategies
The aim of this subsection is not to provide a comprehensive
discussion of concealment strategies but rather to indicate the
range of options available to anyone determined to conceal his
or her ultimate beneficial ownership of a company. We offer
the following brief descriptions of some of the more popular
options.                                                             A number
                                                                     of lawful
1. Nominee shareholders. In practice, a nominee shareholder
                                                                     mechanisms
is typically a company created for the purpose of holding shares
and other securities on behalf of investors. Nominee shareholders
                                                                     make it possible
hold the shares on trust for one or more beneficial owners, and      to conceal the
often only they are identified on the register of shareholders.      true identity
Usually, foreign investors have to open single-client nominee        of the ultimate
accounts, because their global account provider is not permitted     beneficial owner
to participate directly in a local central securities depository.    of a company’s
The concern for regulators is clear: the appointment of nominee
                                                                     shares.
shareholders would, in effect, provide beneficial owners the
opportunity to shield their true identity from investors and other
stakeholders, making it more difficult to detect expropriation by
controlling beneficial owners.

2. Omnibus accounts. An omnibus account is a securities
account that involves many investors. Although the account is
opened in the name of the account provider, it can be viewed
as an umbrella covering a large number of individual accounts.
Omnibus accounts seriously reduce transaction costs that are due
to clearing and settlement fees and procedures. There are often
legitimate reasons to use omnibus accounts, particularly in less
developed markets. However, because the breakdown behind the
omnibus accounts is often hidden for the listed companies and



Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	            FOCUS 14   15
                        their investors, they could also serve as an instrument to conceal
                        the identity of beneficial owners.

                        3. Derivatives. Recently, investors have used cash-settled equity
                        derivatives and related techniques to obtain effective control of
                        the underlying shares without the need for disclosure under the
                        transparency and disclosure regimes. Consider the following
                        transaction: An investor (also called holder of the long position)
                        purchases and acquires from a derivatives dealer or bank (the
                        holder of the short position) a long cash-settled swap covering
                        the underlying shares in a listed company. Under the agreement
                        between the holder of the long position and the holder of the
                        short position, the investor benefits from price increases in
                        the underlying shares and incurs losses if the price decreases.
                        The derivatives dealer usually assumes a neutral risk position
                        by physically acquiring the underlying shares at the strike
In most                 price of the derivative. The swap arrangement thus results in a
countries,              decoupling of the voting rights from the beneficial ownership
ownership               of the shares. The decoupling leads to “hidden ownership” and
pyramids or             could also result in “empty voting” issues, where a shareholder
cascades are the        only retains the voting rights of the shares (Hu and Black 2006).
most widely             4. Pyramid structures. There are complex control and
used mechanism          ownership arrangements designed to give investors voting/
to accumulate           control rights in excess of their cash-flow rights. These
control power           arrangements are commonly used by inside blockholders,
with a relatively       who usually have voting control even if they ostensibly have
                        no majority stake in the company. Voting rights, for instance,
limited                 can be separated from cash-flow rights by setting up pyramid
investment.             or cross-shareholding structures, issuing multiple voting-rights
                        shares, and participating in shareholder coalitions. In most
                        countries, ownership pyramids or cascades are the most widely
                        used mechanism to accumulate control power with a relatively
                        limited investment. They enable a shareholder to maintain
                        control through multiple layers of ownership and, at the same
                        time, share the investment with other (minority) shareholders at
                        each intermediate ownership tier. Pyramid structures reduce the
                        liquidity constraints of large shareholders while allowing those
                        shareholders to retain substantial voting power.

                        5. Multiple voting-rights shares. Such shares provide
                        shareholders with control in excess of their share ownership.
                        The separation of beneficial ownership from control rights
                        (or voting rights) results in significant private benefits beyond
                        the usual financial return on the shares. The negative effect of


       16   FOCUS 14	                               Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
concentrated ownership is reflected in the size of the control
premium — the difference between the market value of shares
and how much someone is willing to pay for those shares if they
confer (or maintain) control over a company.

The existence of a control premium enables “controlling”
shareholders to make gains at the expense of minority
shareholders. The size of the control premium depends on a
number of factors, including the competition in the market for
corporate control, the size of the block sold, the distribution
of shares in the target firm, the inequality of voting power,
the nationality of the buyer, and the financial condition of the
firm involved. The existence of large private benefits of control
suggests that blockholders may be able to obtain a large share
of the rents. For instance, the holder of multiple voting-rights
shares is usually allowed a seat on the board of directors and
will thus receive nonpublic information on the company’s cost
structure and performance. Multiple voting rights or dual-class
                                                                      The existence
shares are prone to severe agency problems (McCahery and
Vermeulen 2014c).
                                                                      of a control
                                                                      premium enables
6. Chains of corporate vehicles. Controlling beneficial owners        “controlling”
can use chains of corporate vehicles to conceal their true identity   shareholders
and set up complex ownership structures and arrangements
in listed companies. Companies may have legitimate or clear
                                                                      to make gains
economic motives to use chains of corporate vehicles. However,        at the expense
the use of a chain of local and offshore corporate vehicles or        of minority
international holding structures is sometimes an indication           shareholders.
that controlling beneficial owners are engaging in abusive and
opportunistic behavior, particularly when offshore company laws
do not require ownership disclosure.

While misuse of corporate entities is often difficult to discover,
it is possible to limit the potential for misuse of corporate
vehicles by having companies maintain and share information
on beneficial ownership and control in the corporate vehicle.
This requirement may come through a number of legal and
regulatory measures, including 1) requiring upfront beneficial
ownership disclosure to the public authorities and official
intermediaries, 2) mandating private corporate service providers
to maintain beneficial ownership information, and 3) primary
reliance on an investigative system.

The crucial takeaway from this brief review of selected
concealment strategies is that devising an effective legal


Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	            FOCUS 14   17
                       framework that facilitates the disclosure of the “ultimate”
                       beneficial owner is not easy. Yet the central question is whether
                       the introduction of more stringent disclosure and reporting
                       rules will in fact improve the ownership and control information
                       available to regulators, investors, and other stakeholders.

                       B. Stricter Disclosure Rules?
                       The availability of multiple strategies for concealing beneficial
                       ownership creates a perception that the regulatory framework —
                       and particularly the transparency regime — is failing to
                       adequately address the issue of agency risks. As the leaking of the
                       Panama Papers also shows, the perception of regulatory failure
                       has led to calls for more and stricter disclosure requirements.

We suggest that        For instance, the G20 considers the transparency of beneficial
                       ownership of legal persons and arrangements, as well as the
it might be time       implementation of the FATF standards on this issue, a matter of
to acknowledge         high priority. In November 2014, the G20 Summit in Brisbane
the limitations        adopted new “High-Level Principles on Beneficial Ownership
of the existing        and Transparency.” The principles, which build on existing
disclosure-            international instruments and standards, encourage countries
oriented               1) to have a definition of “beneficial owner” that captures the
approach to            natural person(s) who ultimately owns or controls the legal
                       person or legal arrangement, 2) to ensure that beneficial-
this issue and         ownership and control information is adequate, accurate,
contemplate            current, and accessible, and 3) to have a legal framework that
an alternative         enables national authorities (including law enforcement and
to ever-stricter       prosecutorial authorities, supervisory authorities, tax authorities,
reporting              and financial-intelligence units) to participate in information
requirements.          exchange on beneficial ownership both domestically and
                       internationally. The importance of beneficial ownership and
                       control disclosure was again emphasized in the G20/OECD
                       Principles of Corporate Governance.

                       In what follows, we suggest that it might be time to acknowledge
                       the limitations of the existing disclosure-oriented approach to
                       this issue and contemplate an alternative to ever-stricter reporting
                       requirements. After all, as the discussion above brought out,
                       if people are determined to conceal, or at least obscure, their
                       beneficial ownership of a company, then they are going to be
                       able to find the techniques to do so. There are enough lawful
                       strategies available to make this possible without having to resort
                       to misrepresentation. From this perspective, simply ratcheting
                       up the disclosure requirements to force the information into


      18   FOCUS 14	                                Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
the public domain seems unlikely to be effective and merely
encourages new and more imaginative means of circumvention.

The reality that multiple strategies for circumvention are so
readily available undermines the prospects of any regulatory
regime predicated on compelled information disclosure. If the
right kind of information is not forthcoming, then investors
are going to make suboptimal investment choices and the
market is not going to function at full efficiency. In particular,
companies with the most problematic control structures will not
be revealed. If the wrong kind of information is being disclosed,
market efficiencies may actually be worse, as false information
has the potential to create a misplaced sense of confidence
in a particular firm. And companies with the better control
structures will not enjoy the benefits.

Of even greater significance is the impact that more and stricter
disclosure requirements might have on the vast majority of            Our hypothesis,
firms that do not wish to conceal their ownership structures          therefore,
and — at least initially — seek to be open and sincere in their
disclosure efforts. What is the likely effect of more rules on this
                                                                      was that an
type of firm? Will more and stricter disclosure rules contribute      unintended and
to a positive change of their behavior? Or might such rules have      counterproductive
other, unintended and unexpected, effects?                            effect of more
                                                                      transparency rules
Our starting point in seeking to answer these questions was
the suspicion that more rules may actually create confusion
                                                                      may be disclosure
among such firms and contribute to “reporting fatigue,” with          that is actually
firms growing increasingly tired, indifferent, or evasive when        less meaningful.
confronted by the demand for more transparency. Our hypothesis,
therefore, was that an unintended and counterproductive effect
of more transparency rules may be disclosure that is actually less
meaningful — across the vast majority of companies, not just
those where beneficial owners seek to obscure their ownership
interests.

There are good reasons for this kind of skepticism. Although
some of the existing regulations certainly have proven to be
more effective than others (for example, rules regarding the
disclosure of related-party transactions), this is not always the
case. Law reforms — and particularly the ones hastily enacted in
the shadow of high-profile corporate scandals — have spawned
many cumbersome and costly rules that are unproductive
(unable to change corporate behavior and prevent more failures)
and occasionally destructive.


Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	             FOCUS 14   19
                 In this context, we refer not only to the direct compliance
                 costs but also to the adoption of a risk-averse “depersonalized
                 corporate culture” based on box-ticking and an overemphasis on
                 formalistic compliance. For a better sense of the emergence of
                 this type of depersonalized corporate culture, consider the role
                 of consultants and intermediaries, such as corporate lawyers,
                 accountants, auditors, and other advisers. These intermediaries
                 are generally considered to be conservative, risk averse, and
                 reluctant to think creatively. They tend to recommend boilerplate
                 standardized arrangements and compliance with one-size-fits-
                 all best practices rather than offering their clients customized
                 and optimal solutions.

                 To examine more closely this skeptical perception of the likely
                 effects of more transparency rules, we conducted an empirical
                 review of how disclosure rules currently operate in multiple
                 jurisdictions, and we focused in particular on how firms respond
                 to such rules. If we assume that previous behavior is the best
                 predictor of likely future behavior, the results of such a study
                 can provide important evidence for understanding the probable
                 effect of even more transparency rules.




20   FOCUS 14	                              Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
4.               Mapping Disclosure and Trans-
                 parency
Our first step in seeking to better understand the past — and
likely future — impact of disclosure and reporting rules was to
                                                                        The majority
learn how some of the largest and most successful companies in          of firms engage
various jurisdictions have actually complied with the existing          in “grudging”
transparency requirements. In this section, we describe the             or “boilerplate”
methodology adopted in this empirical study (Subsection A)              compliance in
and identify the various different approaches to complying              which control
with disclosure requirements, ranging from “no disclosure” to
                                                                        and ownership
“open communication” (Subsection B). The key takeaway is
that — even in those jurisdictions that have (or are known for)
                                                                        structures are not
a robust disclosure regime — the majority of firms engage in            revealed in an
“grudging” or “boilerplate” compliance in which control and             accessible way.
ownership structures are not revealed in an accessible way and,
perhaps more importantly, the impact of these structures on the
governance of a company are obscured. The study results suggest
that the majority of firms are failing to engage in meaningful
disclosure and that the transparency rules are not having the
intended or hoped for effects (Subsection C).
                                                                        To explore
A. A Note on Methodology                                                these issues,
How do disclosure rules work in practice? How do firms actually         we conducted
disclose information about beneficial ownership, and how easily         an empirical
can potential investors find information about the beneficial
                                                                        review of
owner of a company? For potential investors unfamiliar with
the local situation, how quickly, reliably, and accurately can such     current practice,
information be established, if at all? Finally, might broadly similar   focusing in
disclosure rules have different results in different jurisdictions?     particular on
                                                                        disclosure in
To explore these issues, we conducted an empirical review
of current practice, focusing in particular on disclosure in
                                                                        annual reports.
annual reports. Although information regarding beneficial and
ultimate owners is available from a range of sources (such as
corporate websites and other publicity materials), we assumed
that a firm’s annual report can be legitimately taken as a proxy
for the disclosure and reporting of ownership more generally.

We were particularly interested in answering the following
questions: 1) Can the natural persons (or, for state-owned
enterprises, the particular state) that ultimately owns and/or
controls the company be found based solely on information
contained in the annual report? 2) How is information regarding


Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	               FOCUS 14   21
                                    substantial shareholders and beneficial owners actually presented
                                    in the annual report, and what patterns can we see in approaches
                                    to information disclosure? 3) To what extent is the impact of
                                    ownership on the actual governance of that company disclosed?
Many of these                       4) How does the presence of widely dispersed ownership affect
companies are                       the dynamics of information disclosure?
household names                     To answer these questions, four of us — two corporate governance
and recipients                      experts and two people who had no affiliation with corporate
of awards for                       law — examined the 2014 annual reports of 280 listed firms
best corporate                      from 14 jurisdictions. With the exception of China, we focused
governance.                         on the English-language version of the reports. This section
                                    contains their consolidated view. The sample consisted of the top
                                    20 firms, according to their market capitalization on May 29,
                                    2015, in the stock market index of each of the 14 jurisdictions.
                                    Many of these companies are household names and recipients of
                                    awards for best corporate governance (something that we noticed
                                    is often prominently displayed in their annual reports).

                                    A number of considerations influenced the choice of
                                    jurisdictions. In particular, we wanted to select countries with
                                    diverse legal origins and diverse ownership structures. Broadly
                                    speaking, the 14 selected jurisdictions can be split into three
                                    legal traditions (see Figure 1), namely English common law
                                    (Hong Kong SAR, Malaysia, Pakistan, Singapore, South Africa,
                                    the United Kingdom, and the United States), French civil law
                                    (Brazil, Mexico, the Netherlands, the Philippines, Thailand,
                                    and Turkey), and German civil law (China).

                                    Figure 1: The Jurisdictions




               English Common Law

               French Civil Law

               German Civil Law




      22   FOCUS 14	                                              Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
There are also significant differences in the prevailing ownership
structures (see Figure 2). The Netherlands regime lies between
the Anglo-America systems of diffuse or widely dispersed
stockholders (as can be found in the United Kingdom and the
United States) and the concentrated ownership characteristics
of the other countries in the sample. Moreover, countries can
also be characterized by the type of controlling shareholder (in
China, for example, state-owned enterprises play a pivotal role,
whereas the Philippines is clearly dominated by family-owned
companies). We wanted to choose jurisdictions from different
continents and to select the more developed securities markets
within each region. In this way, we could ensure that the firms
we examined are representative of the current reality regarding
disclosure of beneficial ownership. An interesting observation is
also that the Panama Papers had a disproportionate impact on
most of the countries we investigated.

Figure 2: Ownership Structures


         China
     Malaysia
     Thailand
      Pakistan
        Turkey
   Philippines
   Singapore
         Brazil
       Mexico
  Hong Kong
South Africa
 Netherlands
             US
            UK
                  0                            5                         10                      15                       20
                  0                             5                        10                       15                        20

       Widely Dispersed                             Controlled – by multinationals, institutional investors or other investors
       Family/Founder Controlled                    Government Controlled (State-owned)




By selecting the top 20 firms of jurisdictions with more developed
stock markets, we ensured that companies not in compliance
with the rules were weeded out and excluded from the study.


Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	                                                              FOCUS 14   23
                       Thus the focus of this survey is on the disclosure practices of
                       companies that do comply with the rules, rather than with the
                       issue of noncompliance.

                       To map how firms actually comply with disclosure rules, we
                       conducted a preliminary study in which we examined the
                       disclosure practices of a random sample of well-known companies
                       that appear on the list of Financial Times Global 500 companies
                       (which provides a snapshot of the world’s largest companies
                       according to their market capitalizations). This preliminary study
                       of annual reports yielded seven variables, which we designed to
                       measure the full range of disclosure options, from minimal to
                       full, or optimal, disclosure (See Figure 3).

                       Figure 3: The Variables

                                                                     Preferred
                                                                               Disc
Thus the focus                                                       Necessa
                                                                              ry D
                                                                                     losu
                                                                                         re
                                                                                   iscl
of this survey is                                                    Minimum
                                                                                       osu
                                                                                           re
                                                                               Dis
on the disclosure      Optimal Disclosure                                         clo
                                                                                      su
                                                                                        re
practices of
                                                                1.
companies                                                   A Table of
that do comply                            6.
                                                            Substantial
                                                           Shareholders
with the rules,                        Precision:
                                          Technical
                                                                                        2.
                                                                                  Disclosure of
rather than                            description of
                                    Ultimate Owners &
                                         Impact on
                                                                                   Beneficial
                                                                                     Owners
with the issue of                        Corporate
                                        Governance
                                                                7.
                                                           Personalized
noncompliance.                                            Communication
                                         5.                                             3.
                                     Accessibility:                               Disclosure of
                                    Figures & Charts of                           the Ultimate
                                        Ownership
                                                                 4.              Benficial Owner
                                                               Speed:
                                                               Ownership
                                                          Information in Table
                                                              of Contents




                       In the preliminary study, we found that a table of substantial
                       shareholders (Variable 1) and disclosure of beneficial owners
                       (Variable 2) were present in all of the reports. This seemed to
                       constitute the absolute minimum level of disclosure but need not



      24   FOCUS 14	                                        Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
necessarily identify the ultimate beneficial owners, particularly
the natural persons or state, that control the company.

Disclosure of the ultimate beneficial owner (Variable 3) was the
next step along the disclosure trail. Such disclosure meets the
G20 requirement of identifying the natural persons, or the
particular state, that control the company. Information about
the ultimate beneficial owners sometimes could be determined
indirectly by going through the annual report. At times it was
possible to guess who the ultimate beneficial owners were,
particularly when they also held management positions or
directorships. Here we mainly focused on explicit, direct, and
detailed disclosure of ultimate beneficial owners, but we also took
“indirect” disclosure into consideration. However, establishing
this information was not always easy. Trawling through 200-
plus pages of an annual report to identify the ultimate beneficial
owner could be time-consuming, as the information was not
always readily accessible and there was a risk that it was not 100
percent accurate.                                                      But more
To measure for speed, accessibility, and precision in the disclosure
                                                                       is needed
of ultimate beneficial ownership, we identified two additional         if investors
variables, namely speed: ownership information in table of contents    really want to
of the annual report (Variable 4) and accessibility: figures and       understand
charts of ownership (Variable 5). If these additional variables        the role of
were present, the report was immediately more accessible. More         the ultimate
importantly, it became possible to determine the identity of the       beneficial owner.
ultimate beneficial owners with a greater degree of accuracy.

But more is needed if investors really want to understand the
role of the ultimate beneficial owner. A sixth variable was
precision: technical description of ultimate owners and impact on
corporate governance (Variable 6). Firms that included this point
move beyond the mere facts of ownership to what really matters,
namely how ownership structures affect the actual governance
structure of that company (preferred ownership).

Finally, we wanted to adopt a variable that could function as an
index of how some firms adopt or could adopt a radical approach
(optimal disclosure) in which the facts of ownership and actual
governance are explicitly connected and made transparent. For
this, we chose personalized communication (Variable 7) in which
the ultimate owner speaks directly and openly to shareholders
and potential shareholders about the current state of the company.



Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	              FOCUS 14   25
                 B. Five Different Approaches to Disclosure of
                 Ownership
                 We then examined the 280 companies to see which of the
                 seven variables were present in their annual reports. Based on
                 the resulting dataset, we identified five different approaches to
                 disclosure, and we developed a typology of five categories of
                 information disclosure (see Figure 4).

                 Figure 4: Disclosure Approaches in 280 Annual Reports (Beneficial
                 Ownership)


                           1%
                         “Open”
                        Disclosure

                                            7%
                                           No
                                        Disclosure


                            12%                                          25%
                   Substantive Disclosure
                                                               Grudging Disclosure




                                                 55%
                                         Boilerplate Disclosure




                 1. No disclosure (7 percent). None of the seven variables was
                 present in the annual reports. In jurisdictions with a lack of
                 clear rules and practices promoting the disclosure of beneficial
                 ownership and control structures, the information in the annual
                 reports typically does not identify the natural persons, states,
                 multinationals, or institutional investors that ultimately own or
                 control the company. That is not to say that these companies
                 completely ignore the disclosure of ownership and control


26   FOCUS 14	                                Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
structures. Their websites, for instance, usually contain an
overview of the ownership structure. Unfortunately, however,
the information in these overviews is not very detailed. It
is noteworthy that Brazilian and Mexican companies that
are deemed “foreign private issuers” under the Securities and
Exchange Commission rules and regulations in the United States
(because they have listed equity shares on U.S. exchanges and
so have to file an annual report in the form of a 20-F) are more
open. “Item 7” of their SEC Form 20-F annual reports requires
them to list major shareholders and related-party transactions.

2. Grudging disclosure (25 percent). The first two variables
(table of substantial shareholders and disclosure of beneficial
owners, but not necessarily the ultimate owners) were present
in the annual reports. This group comprises those companies
that engage in what we would characterize as a grudging style of
disclosure, in which the formal reporting requirements are met         If you do
but the ultimate beneficial owner is often difficult, and in many
                                                                       not find the
cases impossible, to identify. Of particular interest is a certain
amount of herd behavior: if you do not find the information
                                                                       information in
in one company in a particular jurisdiction, then you are not          one company
likely to find it in other companies in the same jurisdiction. For     in a particular
instance, the disclosed information does not show the percentage       jurisdiction, then
ownership or fails to explain the relationship between the             you are not likely
controlling shareholder, the ultimate beneficial owner, and the        to find it in
company — particularly when companies assume that certain
                                                                       other companies
information about shareholders and beneficial owners can be
regarded as “local” or “public” knowledge.
                                                                       in the same
                                                                       jurisdiction.
3. Boilerplate disclosure (55 percent). In addition to Variables
1 and 2, Variable 3 (disclosure of the ultimate beneficial owner)
was present in the annual reports. This group comprises the
majority of companies that formalistically reveal the ultimate
beneficial ownership structure. However, they often do so in
a dry and literal manner that does not reveal much beyond
the bare bones of ownership structures. Moreover, such firms
often adopt a legalistic style of presentation — technical and
footnote-heavy rather than reader-friendly — that often requires
a certain degree of expertise or local knowledge to decode the
information, and that provides little indication of how control
affects the governance and direction of that firm.

In this group we also find companies with widely dispersed
shareholders, when they listed in their annual reports the
institutional investor or investors that beneficially hold a certain


Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	              FOCUS 14   27
                        substantial percentage (more than 35 percent or 50 percent) of
                        the outstanding shares of the company. It isn’t surprising that
                        boilerplate disclosure has become the norm for widely dispersed
                        companies in an increasingly regulated environment.

                        Finally, it is often impossible for these companies to provide
                        more information about the institutional investors that hold a
                        significant number of their shares. Yet if institutional investors
                        pursue a more active role in the operation of the company (or at
                        least give this impression by owning, for instance, approximately
                        10 percent of the outstanding shares), these “activist investors”
                        and the company could behave similarly to companies with a
                        controlling shareholder and go beyond what is accepted as
                        boilerplate disclosure and embrace a more substantive disclosure
                        approach.

                        4. Substantive disclosure (12 percent). Variables 1, 2, and
It isn’t surprising     3 were present as well as two of the three variables, 4, 5, and
that boilerplate        6. This group comprises companies that include additional
                        information beyond boilerplate disclosure. In particular, they
disclosure              present the information in a speedy (table of contents), accessible
has become              (figures and charts), and precise (technical description) style
the norm for            and reveal how ownership structures and governance of the
widely dispersed        company are interconnected. After all, identifying the ultimate
companies in            beneficial owner does not reveal anything about how control
an increasingly         structures affect the actual governance of the firm, and this is
regulated               what potential investors are most concerned with.
environment.            An example of a clear statement about the relationship between
                        the controlling owner, the company, and its stakeholders can
                        be found in the annual report of Luxottica, the Italian eyewear
                        company. The company is not in the sample but appeared in the
                        2014 Financial Times Global 500 list used in the preliminary
                        study. The annual report makes it clear that, if there is a problem
                        or disagreement regarding the direction of the business between
                        other shareholders and controlling owner Leonardo Del Vecchio,
                        he would exert his authority. Investors may not like this, but at
                        least they are made aware of the reality of how the governance
                        of the company is actually organized.

                        Interestingly, companies that are listed in China generally adopt
                        a more substantive and accessible disclosure practice than their
                        counterparts/peers in other jurisdictions. China Securities
                        Regulatory Commission rules and regulations are undoubtedly
                        the main drivers of the disclosure practice of Chinese listed


       28   FOCUS 14	                               Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
companies. The Standards for the Contents and Formats of
Information Disclosure by Companies Offering Securities to the
Public No. 2 — Contents and Formats of Annual Reports (2014
Revision) contains detailed and stringent rules about the format
for disclosing beneficial-ownership information (Article 40).
As a result, most annual reports include information about
the actual controlling owners and their relationship with the
companies (suggesting that “law matters”). We should note,
however, that in most cases these statements were standardized
and meaningless, in that they failed to provide clear information.
Moreover, most are available only in the Chinese language, so
their efficacy for foreign investors is limited.

5. Open communication (1 percent). All seven variables
were present in the annual reports. This final group comprises
a very small number of companies that go far beyond what             Interestingly,
the disclosure rules oblige them to reveal. Not only do these        companies that
companies present additional information, but they also present
                                                                     are listed in
it in a detailed, easily accessible, and highly personalized
way. That is to say that the controlling and ultimate owners
                                                                     China generally
(or their representatives, in family firms or state-owned            adopt a more
enterprises) address their “fellow shareholders” in the annual       substantive
reports (or separate shareholder letters) with a mix of business     and accessible
facts, ownership issues (such as succession and transition),         disclosure
innovations, and long-term expectations. They go beyond strict       practice
compliance with corporate governance rules and regulations
                                                                     than their
and adopt a more integrated approach to their communication
and presentation of information.
                                                                     counterparts/
                                                                     peers in other
The companies in our sample (and in the Financial Times              jurisdictions.
Global 500 list) that have embraced the “personalized and
open communication” approach are usually characterized
by visionary and often charismatic owners or founders who
position themselves as managing partners or dominant leaders
of their “corporate partnership.” They explain in detail how
they are going to propel “their” company toward value creation
in the short, medium, and long terms. As a real partner, they
also admit operational mistakes and challenges. It is therefore
no surprise that the family-controlled or founder-controlled
companies in our sample are among the first movers that pursue
the open-communication model.

A well-documented example of a company that has adopted
this type of partnership attitude is Warren Buffet’s Berkshire
Hathaway. His annual letters to shareholders are considered


Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	            FOCUS 14   29
                        a “must read” for anyone with an interest in the corporate
                        world (Cunningham 2014). The same goes for the letter to the
                        shareholders that Jeff Bezos, the founder, chief executive officer,
                        and substantial shareholder of Amazon, has written every year
                        since the company’s initial public offering (IPO) in 1997. What
                        is perhaps most interesting is that these letters not only provide
                        investors and other stakeholders with last year’s financial
                        information and future developments and growth prospects
                        but also include business advice and insights. It is therefore not
It is therefore not     surprising that these letters from Warren Buffet and Jeff Bezos
surprising that         attract enormous attention on social media. They have created
                        significant hype, which makes the communication even more
these letters from
                        personalized, open, and effective.
Warren Buffet
and Jeff Bezos          Consider also Google (or business conglomerate Alphabet).
attract enormous        On April 8, 2013, the Google founders owned more than 80
                        percent of the outstanding Class B shares, giving them about
attention on
                        56 percent of the firm’s total voting power. Since their IPO
social media.           in 2004, the founders have made very clear to investors and
                        other stakeholders that the ownership structure is designed to
                        give the founders long-term control over the company’s destiny
                        (McCahery, Vermeulen, and Hisatake 2012).

                        Having reviewed the five models, we can now consider the
                        prevalence of each approach in each jurisdiction and each type
                        of company, according to ownership structure (see Figures 5
                        and 6).




       30   FOCUS 14	                               Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
Figure 5: Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership Practices (Countries)

               Formal and standardized                SEC Forms 10-K &       Annual Report and/or        Annual Reports & SEC Forms 17-A
           statements (often only available           proxy statements         SEC Forms 20-F             (filed pursuant to Section 17 of
               in the Chinese language)                                                                   the Securities Regulation Code)



             China
     Hong Kong
      Philippines
         Malaysia
       Singapore
         Thailand
         Pakistan
             Brazil
                 US
                 UK
    Netherlands
            Turkey
    South Africa
           Mexico
                      0                         20                     40                  60                    80                   100
                     0%                               25%                      50%                         75%                    100%

                              No Disclosure             Grudging Disclosure            Boilerplate Disclosure

                              Substantive Disclosure              Open Disclosure




Figure 6: Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership Practices (Ownership
Structures)



                     Government
                      Controlled

                 Family/Founder
                     Controlled

 Controlled by other Investors
        (Multinationals, Institutional
          Investors, Other Investors)

                            Widely
                         Dispersed
                                         0                20                40                  60                    80              100

                                         0%                    25%                     50%                      75%                   100%

                                              No Disclosure      Grudging Disclosure        Boilerplate Disclosure

                                              Substantive Disclosure     Open Disclosure




Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	                                                                        FOCUS 14   31
                       The prevalence of grudging and boilerplate disclosure among
                       the supposedly best-run examples of the controlled companies
                       exposes the false reality that currently surrounds the disclosure
                       of beneficial ownership. For the vast majority of firms, we do not
                       really know what is going on. This is true not only for companies
                       that are controlled by multinationals and institutional investors
                       but also for those controlled by government or families/
                       founders. We have found a few exceptions in the Philippines,
                       which is dominated by family-owned conglomerates. These
                       conglomerates, specifically the Ayala Group and Aboitiz Group,
                       understand the importance of personalized communication.
                       They understand that their investors and other stakeholders not
                       only are interested in the dry and formal financial statements
The prevalence         but also look for more personalized expressions and authenticity.
of grudging            Unfortunately, however, formal compliance has triumphed over
and boilerplate        substantive compliance. Most companies may believe that they
disclosure             are actively engaged in disclosure (and from a compliance point
among the              of view they are certainly meeting the legal requirements), but
supposedly best-       we can see from the data that in many cases this is mere legal
run examples of        and financial theatre. Nevertheless, we have also find some best-
                       in-class examples in our dataset. In the remainder of this paper,
the controlled
                       we argue that the behavior of these examples will become more
companies              and more common practice in the future.
exposes the
false reality          C. From “Mandatory Disclosure” to “Open
that currently         Communication”
surrounds              Corporate scandals and events such as the leaking of the
the disclosure         Panama Papers have resulted in lots of initiatives advocating
of beneficial          stricter transparency rules and regulations. However, based
                       on how such rules are currently functioning, we suspect that
ownership.
                       further rules are unlikely to improve the situation by actually
                       contributing to a positive change in firms. The above data seem
                       to confirm this view and suggest that maybe we don’t need
                       more and stricter rules. The current effect of disclosure rules
                       has been to promote among most firms a defensiveness that has
                       resulted in formalistic compliance. The crucial takeaway from
                       our study is that an increase in the number of rules only seems
                       likely to promote even more defensiveness, depersonalization,
                       and boilerplate compliance — and to feed reporting fatigue, in
                       which key stakeholders within firms become indifferent, tired,
                       or hostile in the face of additional rules.




      32   FOCUS 14	                               Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
Furthermore, adding such rules seems likely to make a confusing
situation even worse. Every jurisdiction already has different
rules, and navigating the resulting mosaic of transparency
requirements imposes high transaction costs on any firm that
conducts operations across multiple jurisdictions.                     Our experience
A further point concerns the question of why firms react to
                                                                       suggests that
transparency rules in the way they do. Further research, of            many companies
a more qualitative nature, would be needed to explain this             “hide” because of
phenomenon of reporting fatigue and firms’ preference for              a deep mistrust
more defensive forms of disclosure. But we can make several            of government
preliminary observations as to why the rules have the effect           and the likely
that they do. Certainly, ultimate beneficial owners often have         negative effect
a legitimate interest in concealing their identity — for example,
if this information would disproportionately expose them and
                                                                       of more open
their families to violent crimes, such as kidnapping, extortion,       disclosure.
and robbery. However, this argument often rings hollow when
the beneficial owner’s identity is clearly available on Wikipedia
and other online sources.

Yet there is another reason for the defensive attitude of beneficial
owners toward transparency rules. Our experience suggests that
many companies “hide” because of a deep mistrust of government
and the likely negative effect of more open disclosure, fearing
that government will take any information that is revealed and
use it against a firm, and that the effect will be further layers of   The final
rules that impose additional costs. Resistance to transparency
                                                                       section of the
does not necessarily mean that key decision makers within firms
are acting dishonestly, but rather that they may be responding         paper explores
to concerns about the uncertain and potentially negative effects       the regulatory
of more openness.                                                      implications of
                                                                       this argument
However, the above data suggest that some firms do go further
and embrace genuinely open forms of disclosure. We believe
                                                                       about the
that this is a significant development and — for reasons that          value of open
we submit in Section V — represents a likely future trend. In          communication.
what follows, we present a framework that can help foster an
understanding of why more firms will — and should — embrace
more open forms of disclosure, and why doing so makes
commercial sense.

The final section of the paper explores the regulatory implications
of this argument about the value of open communication. In
particular, it allows us to develop a regulatory framework that



Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	              FOCUS 14   33
                 moves away from a demand for more disclosure and reporting
                 rules and toward an approach that places more emphasis on
                 understanding the commercial advantages to be gained from
                 more open forms of communication.




34   FOCUS 14	                           Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
5.               Open Communication and the
                 “New Firm”
To survive and grow, corporations must operate with a new set
of assumptions that help them remain relevant, competitive,
and successful. With the rise of digital technologies, every
corporation must now become agile and innovative and, more
importantly, act as if it were a technology company (Vermeulen
2015). Ignoring the challenge of the networked age and the digital
revolution is no longer an option and will merely accelerate a
process of decline and failure. Based on our practical experience
as well as research conducted elsewhere, we have identified a
number of principles and practices recently adopted by the most
successful and innovative firms (Fenwick and Vermeulen 2016a).
We believe that these principles are relevant in the context of a
discussion of beneficial ownership, in that substantive disclosure   We have
and open communication tend to be found in those firms that          identified a
are already implementing these principles. Moreover, as other
                                                                     number of
firms recognize that embracing these principles represents the
best commercial strategy for adapting in an innovation-driven
                                                                     principles
economy, we believe that they too will embrace more open forms       and practices
of disclosure and communication. To that end, it is helpful to       recently adopted
offer a brief review of the new-generation firm (Subsection A) and   by the most
these governance principles and related practices (Subsection B).    successful and
                                                                     innovative firms.
A. What is a “New Firm”?
In our view, the distinctiveness of the most innovative firms
today — what we term the new firm or 21st century firm — is
that they implement practices and processes that better equip
them to constantly reinvent themselves and adapt to rapid
commercial, technological, and social change. In particular,
the new firm deals with the need to remain relevant in
hypercompetitive global markets by implementing what we
characterize as governance principles: inclusive partnering,
open communication, and flat-hierarchy/visionary leadership
(see Figure 7).




Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	            FOCUS 14   35
                                  Figure 7: The 21st Century Firm versus the 20th Century Firm




                        20th Century Company                    21st Century Company

                                                            Flat Hierarchy                    Open
                                                               Visionary                   Communication
                                                             Leadership
                                                                              Meaningful,
                                                                               Relevant
                                                                             Experience for
                                                                             Stakeholders


                                                                               Inclusive
                                                                              Partnering




                                  These governance principles give the new firm a number of
                                  tangible benefits that allow it to engage in a constant process
                                  of critical self-examination and agile reinvention, at least when
                                  compared with firms that persist with more traditional — static,
                                  hierarchical, bureaucratic, and overcrowded — 20th century
                                  governance structures. In particular, these governance principles
                                  afford the new firm the best opportunity of delivering innovative
                                  products or services that provide a personally meaningful
                                  experience for consumers.
If a firm provides
                                  A number of features of this model are worth noting. First,
a meaningful                      the three governance principles (which we will discuss more
experience,                       fully below) combine to deliver a meaningful experience for
people will                       stakeholders inside the firm (investors, members of the board
remain                            of directors, executives, managers, and employees). Such
motivated and                     stakeholders are increasingly entrepreneurial in the sense that
committed.                        they demand a meaningful experience and will move on if
                                  such an experience is not forthcoming. Much of the appeal of
                                  being involved, directly or indirectly, in a dynamic, innovative
                                  business is in large part about participating in a project to build
                                  something new and exciting that is personally meaningful and
                                  relevant. Smarter firms recognize and leverage this valuable
                                  resource to the benefit of all participants as well as the company
                                  itself. If a firm provides a meaningful experience, people will
                                  remain motivated and committed. In the absence of such
                                  fulfillment, the most talented stakeholders will opt for exit.


       36   FOCUS 14	                                          Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
Second, in the context of a contemporary economy, a firm
organized according to the three principles — inclusive
partnering, open communication, and flat-hierarchy/visionary
leadership — gives itself the best opportunity to deliver products
or services that are meaningful for consumers. After all, the
primary focus of any business, large or small, needs to be on
delivering great products or services. Contemporary consumers
expect products to deliver constant innovation in functionality,
to have networked connectivity, and to facilitate personal self-
expression (Fenwick and Vermeulen 2016b).

These two goals — delivering a meaningful experience for
stakeholders involved with a firm and for consumers — are
interconnected in that a firm that remains meaningful for
stakeholders is better positioned to attract the capital and talent
necessary to deliver innovative products that have meaning
to consumers. At the very least, a firm that attracts the best
talent and the most capital maximizes its chances of delivering       It will be
innovative products.                                                  crucial for a
                                                                      firm to have the
B. The Three Principles
                                                                      capacity to build
Now let’s take a closer look at the main organizing principles        and maintain
mentioned above.                                                      inclusive
1. Inclusive partnering. The delivery of innovative products          relationships
over the long term requires a greater degree of cooperation           in which the
between multiple actors. Product development requires gathering       partners work
disparate elements (of hardware and software) and integrating         collaboratively.
them into a coherent product with a value proposition that has
relevancy for consumers. This task of gathering — identifying,
coordinating, and then combining — diverse elements into
a coherent package will require unprecedented levels of
cooperation both within the firm (between different divisions)
and outside the firm, with external participants such as start-
ups and other strategic partners. It will be crucial for a firm to
have the capacity to build and maintain inclusive relationships
in which the partners work collaboratively. According to
this approach, the existence of hierarchies or “silos” becomes
enormously counterproductive, and firms that fail to embrace
the possibilities of more inclusive partnering will struggle to
innovate.

Inclusive partnering also helps maintain relevancy for both
internal and external actors. People become more invested
when they feel included. Moreover, stakeholders’ capacities

Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	             FOCUS 14   37
                        will be developed along with their sense of involvement and
                        belonging. Thus a firm can ensure the sustained commitment
                        of stakeholders to stay focused on the core task of innovating.
                        Clearly, a personalized and open approach to communication is
As the                  critical to inclusive partnering and engagement.
relationship            2. Open communication. With more fluid and inclusive
between                 relationships, we can no longer rely on traditional forms of
employees and           coordination based on hierarchical and command-and-control
firm becomes            models. Stakeholders in companies are not comfortable being
looser, a               told what to do, and they will opt to leave if the working
different form          environment fails to meet their needs. In the past, such fixed
of coordination         organizational forms provided a source of comfort, but now
                        they are more likely to frustrate or irritate. As the relationship
becomes                 between employees and firm becomes looser, a different form of
necessary.              coordination becomes necessary. How then do we ensure a more
                        personalized environment designed to facilitate open innovation?
                        How do we build these more fluid and inclusive relationships?

                        Open communication between the various participants is
                        particularly important in this context, because it provides a
                        mechanism for coordinating the actions of different stakeholders.
                        Its distinctive style of information dissemination and exchange
                        redefines the character of the relationships between all actors
Open                    in the firm. Adopting such a personalized approach involves
communication           acknowledging the potential benefits that accrue from a much
is about building       freer flow of information, not only within an organization but
                        also between the organization and those outside the organization.
an ongoing and
constructive            But open communication is not just about sharing information
dialogue within         (the one-way dissemination from one part of the company to
the firm and            another or from the company to external stakeholders, most
with the market,        notably investors). Open communication is about building an
                        ongoing and constructive dialogue within the firm and with the
which can then          market, which can then have a significant impact on the future
have a significant      performance of that company. It involves “Ego” disclosing all
impact on               relevant information to “Alter,” with “Alter” being in a position
the future              to question “Ego” about “Ego’s” decisions. “Ego” must then be
performance of          willing to respond to such questioning, and the cycle begins again.
that company.           Open communication is about respect (building trust and
                        loyalty), but it is also about recognizing the material benefits
                        that accrue from sharing (Bowles 2016). By embracing open
                        communication, a firm can forge more inclusive and meaningful
                        relationships among and between its stakeholders. Open


       38   FOCUS 14	                               Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
communication fosters a sense of belonging and expands the pool
and diversity of actors who have significant involvement in key
decision-making processes. Open communication is also linked
to various aspects of participation in, and responsibility for,
decision making within an organization. The most innovative
companies have acknowledged that they stand to benefit from
a more open attitude toward all insiders, which greatly expands
the class of individuals responsible for guiding the direction of
the company. In this way, open communication can create a
powerful sense of participation and belonging that makes the
corporate project more meaningful — from the perspective of
the insiders as well as the firm.

Potentially, multiple additional benefits exist for a company that
adopts this kind of open and engaged communication strategy.
In particular, the firm will be better placed to make smarter
decisions, enhance firm know-how, deal with problems more
effectively, develop a more extensive and deeper network, retain     Open
more performance-related information necessary for planning,         communication
and offer a more collaborative and meaningful environment for        is also linked to
all stakeholders. These are just a few of the tangible benefits a    various aspects
firm can enjoy if it embraces open communication and the more
                                                                     of participation
personal and inclusive relationships it can encourage.
                                                                     in, and
3. Flat-hierarchy and visionary leadership. Tech moguls              responsibility
such as Larry Page, Sergey Brin, and Mark Zuckerberg run             for, decision
ostensibly public companies that in fact are essentially private     making within
fiefdoms. These charismatic leaders have so structured corporate
control that there is no way for investors or board members to
                                                                     an organization.
unseat them. It is not uncommon for charismatic leaders to
implement dual-class share structures to ensure that regulatory
requirements — for example, the short-term quarterly results
and the demand for dividends and share buybacks — do not
take over and kill the relevancy of the company (McCahery and
Vermeulen 2014c). Of course, from the regulatory perspective,
such a structure can make these firms appear to be governance
renegades, something that might have a chilling effect on
prospective investors.

But it would be a mistake to regard these firms as absolute
monarchies, like the fiefdoms of history (Thiel 2014). Quite
the contrary; these so-called renegade firms are often associated
with a “best idea wins” corporate culture, which fosters open
debate and collective decision making, and the seniority of
the person making a proposal does not matter. Elon Musk has


Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	            FOCUS 14   39
                       described this sort of working environment as a flat hierarchy
                       (Schectman 2010). The most effective charismatic and visionary
                       business leaders recognize that the pace of innovation tends to
                       be quickest in companies that embrace looser organizational
To succeed,            forms, and they use personal control over “their” company to
however, a             ensure that such a flat organization is allowed to flourish. Thus
flat hierarchy         this type of best-idea-wins or flat-hierarchy culture comes from
                       the top down and represents a considered choice on the part
depends on the
                       of a company’s leadership to break with more traditional and
active bottom-         hierarchical corporate operating procedures.
up participation
of everyone            To succeed, however, a flat hierarchy depends on the active
inside the firm.       bottom-up participation of everyone inside the firm. The
                       basic principle is to push responsibility downward — to
                       decentralize — to ensure that those people most familiar with
                       an issue are empowered to make that decision. Without the
                       cooperation and input of talented employees, this approach will
                       not succeed.

                       An additional advantage of such an open working culture is
                       that it provides those inside the company greater opportunities
                       for personal expression and ensures that the company remains
                       relevant to them. The most talented employees in search of a
                       meaningful career experience are not willing to passively accept
                       the view of out-of-touch managers and will be inclined to move
                       somewhere else if the firm does not afford opportunities for
Multiple tangible      personal growth. In this way, a flat hierarchy works to retain the
benefits accrue        relevancy of the firm for the best employees and other company
from flatter and       insiders as well as for the consumers who benefit from the higher
looser forms of        quality products or services that such a flat corporate culture
organization.          produces (Hoffman, Casnocha, and Yeh 2014).

                       Again, multiple tangible benefits accrue from flatter and looser
                       forms of organization. Flat hierarchies can encourage self-
                       reliance, which liberates key players by minimizing the effects
                       of external influence, such as the distortion of incentives arising
                       as a consequence of the regulatory framework. Better decisions
                       result from pushing autonomy down as far as possible within
                       an organization — by radically decentralizing power — and
                       empowering people who are closest to a problem and more likely
                       to have a better understanding of how to address it. Another
                       advantage of an open and inclusive working culture is that it
                       provides greater opportunities for personal expression, as people
                       who know the most about a problem are involved in the solution
                       and then “own” the decisions they make. In this way, a flat


      40   FOCUS 14	                               Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
hierarchy helps keep the firm relevant for the employees and
other stakeholders, and consumers benefit from better and more
innovative products or services that such a flat corporate culture
can deliver.

Adopting a flat-hierarchy governance structure can lead a
company to develop a trust-oriented organizational culture
rather than a control-oriented culture. In a contemporary
context, trust is more likely to be effective than is control. It is
based on empowerment and respect, qualities that foster dignity,
a sense of inclusion, and loyalty — and can make people more
willing to invest in the firm. By contrast, a control-oriented firm
can undermine respect, dignity, and a sense of belonging. An
expectation of control can be demotivating and destructive.
Moreover, in a contemporary context, people are increasingly
likely (and willing) to push back against control, further
undermining the integrity and efficiency of an organization. In        Adopting a
a 21st century environment, companies that communicate best
                                                                       flat-hierarchy
will be better placed to establish a corporate culture built on
trust and respect.
                                                                       governance
                                                                       structure can
C. Embracing Open Communication                                        lead a company
These three organizational principles help the new firm institute      to develop a
decision-making processes that are smarter, quicker, and               trust-oriented
more responsive to the challenge of doing business today. The          organizational
products or services developed by the new-generation firm are          culture rather
evidence of these flat, open, and inclusive processes. This is not     than a control-
to claim that this approach is perfect or without difficulties, but
rather that these processes offer the best opportunity to deliver
                                                                       oriented culture.
consumer-relevant products or services in a highly uncertain and
competitive business environment characterized by constant
disruption. Moreover, these practices increase the likelihood
that the new-generation firm will build more effective working
relationships with other actors in the environment or ecosystem,
as they provide the means and opportunity to engage more
effectively with investors, employees, and other firms.

The takeaway is that open communication is increasingly
vital to commercial success. It builds trust and facilitates the
type of inclusive relationships that provide firms with the best
opportunity to succeed in hypercompetitive global markets.
Our contention is that the approach to regulation also needs to
shift away from the current focus on rules that oblige ever more
disclosure. Instead, regulation should focus on encouraging and


Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	              FOCUS 14   41
                        empowering companies — particularly those currently adopting
                        a grudging or boilerplate approach — to better communicate
                        with the market by adopting more imaginative and personalized
                        disclosure and communication policies. By adopting some form
Regulation              of substantive or, ideally, open communication, companies may
should focus            distinguish themselves, making clear the “gap” in approach to
on encouraging          stakeholders and alerting investors to the relative benefits and
                        risks associated with investing in different types of companies,
and empowering
                        thus improving the efficiency of the market mechanism.
companies
to better               The regulatory challenge associated with this new approach is
communicate             twofold: 1) to develop clear principles that can provide guidance
with the                to firms looking to communicate more openly with the market,
                        and 2) to adopt regulatory strategies that convince companies of
market by               the value created by such open communication, particularly in
adopting more           communicating information on ultimate beneficial ownership
imaginative and         and its relationship to company governance. To persuade
personalized            companies of the benefits of adopting more open forms of
disclosure and          communication, regulators need to base their argument on the
communication           business case for meaningful disclosure.
policies.               To recap: By adopting more open forms of communication, a
                        firm will be in a better position to engage more effectively with
                        the market. Openness will bring its own reward by highlighting
                        the differences between firms. Firms that do not engage in
                        open communication will find themselves marginalized, and
                        the market mechanism will be allowed to take effect; openness
                        will improve investors’ ability to distinguish between the
                        different types of firms. Such an approach offers the best way
Openness will           of minimizing risk to investors and ensuring a better allocation
                        of resources within capital markets. At the very least, we believe
bring its own
                        it offers a better approach than that of ever-stricter disclosure
reward by               rules and the seemingly futile efforts to force information into
highlighting            the public domain.
the differences
between firms.




       42   FOCUS 14	                               Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
6.               The Open Communication of
                 Ownership and Control Structures
Having outlined the rationale behind open disclosure, we
focus in this section on identifying clear principles for the open
                                                                        Principles and
communication of beneficial ownership and control structures.           practices for
The next and final section will identify some possible strategies       effective open
that regulators might adopt to persuade or “nudge” the business         communication
community to embrace more open forms of communication                   can be based on
regarding beneficial ownership.                                         and developed
From the perspective of regulatory design, an empirical review          from actions
of different disclosure strategies can provide useful insights.         that innovative
For instance, the activities of companies currently engaged in          companies are
substantive and (especially) open disclosure can provide some           already taking.
hints for identifying best practice. Thus principles and practices
for effective open communication can be based on and developed
from actions that innovative companies are already taking.

Significantly, best practice involves the style and format of
information disclosure as well as the actual content of the
information disclosed. As a starting point for discussion, we
suggest the following elements of an effective strategy for open
communication.

1. Aim for transparency and relevancy. Most important is
the need for detail and clarity of the information on ultimate
ownership and its relationship with control and governance
within the company. This might seem obvious, but even a brief           Firms should not
perusal of the grudging and boilerplate disclosure approaches           fear openness,
to compliance reveals that most firms do not even meet this             but rather
minimal threshold.                                                      they should
Knowing exactly how much information to share is never                  recognize the
going to be easy (partly due to competition considerations),            potential gains
but regulators need to encourage firms to be more aggressive            to be made.
in pursuing openness. Moreover, firms need to package the
information in a form that is as accessible as possible. For
instance, the use of engaging visuals in the presentation of
information is absolutely vital, as is a clear style of writing. This
ensures that information is available to all relevant stakeholders
as well as potential stakeholders. Firms should not fear openness,
but rather they should recognize the potential gains to be made
through disclosure. The most significant gain is the increased



Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	               FOCUS 14   43
                        possibility of establishing new and more inclusive partnerships
                        that can prove crucial to the long-term prospects of a firm.

                        2. Personalize, humanize, and communicate a distinctive
                        story. The shrinking of attention spans means that the style
                        of disclosure matters enormously. It is important to think
                        about the potential audience, such as current and prospective
                        investors, and to try to speak to all the different constituencies
                        in an engaging and personalized manner. The legalistic forms
                        of writing that currently dominate need to be abandoned in
                        favor of more direct and honest forms of expression. Moreover,
                        information on control structures needs to be embedded in a
                        clear and distinctive narrative about the past, present, and future
                        direction of the firm and the governance of that company. A
                        narrative creates a context that is vital for instilling confidence
                        and encouraging a willingness to engage — as opposed to a
                        more legalistic style that often communicates evasiveness and is
                        unlikely to build or sustain trust.
A narrative
                        3. Address the “hard” issues. Key challenges — such as those
creates a context       surrounding scale-up plans, succession issues, or compliance
that is vital           problems — need to be addressed directly and should not
for instilling          be obscured or hidden. For instance, if a scandal occurs, the
confidence and          firm should be completely open about how it deals with it. The
encouraging             2015 revelation that Volkswagen deliberately installed “defeat
a willingness           devices” on its cars to evade emissions requirements is a good
to engage.              example of how a sophisticated firm can mishandle the fallout
                        from a public disclosure of wrongdoing. Volkswagen should
                        have been forthcoming much sooner about the extent to which
                        top executives were involved in this scheme and — if they
                        were not — how the culture within the company tolerated or
                        encouraged such cheating.

                        In turn, the Porsche-Piëch families control a 100% stake in
                        Porsche Automobile Holding SE. In January 2016, the media
                        (based on inside information) mentioned that the families
                        support Volkswagen’s chief executive officer in the handling
                        of the crisis. However, compare this type of approach to the
                        personalized and open communication strategies of Berkshire
                        Hathaway, Amazon, and even Volkswagen’s competitor, Tesla
                        (Fenwick, Hisatake, and Vermeulen 2016).

                        Of equal importance, operational mistakes or challenges also
                        should be addressed fully. Openly confronting a sensitive
                        issue can actually be a powerful way to generate trust among


       44   FOCUS 14	                               Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
stakeholders, and this trust ensures that investors remain
confident in the firm’s prospects, in spite of any possible
concerns that might otherwise deter them from making or
maintaining an investment. Of course, disclosure of negative
information runs the risk of communicating poor judgment and
may cause damage to firm reputation, but the premium gained
from dealing with difficulties openly can serve to mitigate such
risks over the long term.

4. Demonstrate leadership. Central to any concept of
leadership is the capacity to offer a vision — and the ability to
motivate by inspiring members of an organization to embrace
that vision. Information disclosure can provide an important
opportunity for those in charge of a company to demonstrate
leadership by articulating and disseminating their vision of the
firm and its prospects.

Leadership is also important when things are not going well.
Take the Volkswagen case again. In particular, the silence of the
controlling shareholders, refusing to address the many problems       Of equal
within the company, merely compounded public anger. It                importance,
shows the limits — particularly in a contemporary context —           operational
of a communication strategy that focuses on minimizing legal          mistakes or
liability.
                                                                      challenges
5. Generate buzz. If done properly, a firm’s communication            also should be
strategy can generate a whole ecosystem. Consider the build-          addressed fully.
up of excitement about the annual letters to shareholders by
Warren Buffet of Berkshire Hathaway and Jeff Bezos of Amazon
(Cunningham 2014). Information is a resource that can be
exploited — via open communication — to the commercial
advantage of a company. The hype that a company can build up
in anticipation of the “event” of disclosure can be an effective
means of feeding excitement and interest in the firm. It can
make the company interesting and relevant for potential (and
talented) employees as well as investors.

It is equally important to acknowledge that a certain amount
of skepticism still surrounds this type of open, personalized
approach. There is a lingering suspicion that a cynical and
Machiavellian owner or chief executive officer has concocted a
fictional story and is pushing it as a way to distract, obscure, or
otherwise delude the audience. And of course it is important to
retain a critical perspective when evaluating the communications
of a particular chief executive officer. Nevertheless, we should


Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	             FOCUS 14   45
                        not dismiss the possibility that such openness represents a
                        sincere effort to communicate a substantial narrative, backed
                        by quantitative data, that puts a firm’s situation in a broader
                        strategic context. Over time, this approach can be subjected to
It is equally           sustained scrutiny, allowing for an objective evaluation of the
important to            merits of any “buzz” that is generated.
acknowledge             6. Take advantage of alternative media. Our empirical study
that a certain          focused on annual reports, but there are many alternative ways
amount of               to communicate. As we have seen, an increasing number of
skepticism still        company owners/leaders now communicate with investors
surrounds this          via an annual letter, and in many cases investors consider
type of open,           these letters a more important source of information than the
                        annual report. Again, such letters work best when written in a
personalized            highly personalized and honest style, as one (albeit controlling)
approach.               shareholder communicating openly with other shareholders.
                        Social media and other online media (such as blogs) are
                        becoming more and more important, contributing to multiple
                        new opportunities for more imaginative forms of information
                        dissemination.

                        7. Monitor best practice and constantly review strategies.
                        Our study revealed a certain amount of herd behavior in
                        attitudes toward disclosure; if a number of companies in a
                        particular jurisdiction or industry engaged in more minimal
Our study               approaches toward disclosure, then other firms also tended to
revealed a certain      do so. Instead of falling into a negative cycle of disclosure, firms
amount of herd          should monitor and review current best practice among new-
behavior in             generation firms and engage in a constant reevaluation of their
                        own communication strategies, which can lead to improvement
attitudes toward
                        of their performance over time.
disclosure.
                        8. Build relationships and invite input. The ultimate aim,
                        and benefit, of adopting open communication is the ongoing
                        creation of new inclusive relationships, which can add enormous
                        value to a firm and provide a valuable source of company-
                        relevant information as well as a fresh perspective on growth
                        strategies. To ensure that all stakeholders in the firm are invested
                        in open communication, a firm needs to include disclosure of
                        control structures in its more general communication strategy.
                        This element of the new relationships can help company leaders
                        make better decisions and avoid the type of tunnel vision or
                        silo effects that plague corporate leaders who are not exposed to
                        alternative voices and perspectives.



       46   FOCUS 14	                                Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
This kind of engagement also can offer more tangible
commercial benefits, such as facilitating the identification
of new business opportunities or providing a better sense
of peers and competitors. Proactive engagement also helps
corporate leaders identify “expertise gaps” on their boards of
directors and executive teams. It is in this collaborative context
that investors often have the most impact on their “portfolio
companies” and consumers can influence corporate strategies.
Such collaborative, trust-based relationships are the outgrowth
of effective communication strategies, which make possible
the type of inclusiveness that we have suggested is vital to the
                                                                      Proactive
success of the new-type firm.
                                                                      engagement also
The above elements are merely indicative and need to be developed     helps corporate
further, based on empirical research on current best practice. What   leaders identify
is clear, however, is the overarching concept and direction of an     “expertise gaps”
open-communication strategy: Clear and accessible information
                                                                      on their boards
on ultimate ownership and its relationship with governance needs
to be located within a coherent and meaningful narrative of the       of directors and
firm’s current situation and future direction. Thus information       executive teams.
can become an important resource that firms leverage to build
more inclusive relationships with stakeholders.




Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	             FOCUS 14   47
48   FOCUS 14	   Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
7.               The Key Takeaway: “Nudging”
                 Firms to Embrace Open Commu-
                 nication
In the wake of the Panama Papers leak, what strategies might
regulators adopt to convince companies of the potential value
created by open communication, particularly in the context
of communicating information on beneficial ownership and
control structures? If our argument is sound, then constantly
adding more layers of mandatory disclosure rules seems unlikely
to work. Then is the correct response for regulators not to do
anything? This type of argument can seem legitimate, particularly
to someone who claims — as we do — that more and more firms
will embrace open communication anyway as they realize the
commercial and other benefits that accrue from openness.

Nevertheless, we think there still is a strong argument in favor
of some regulatory intervention. Although the best-in-class            The regulatory
companies — think Berkshire Hathaway or Amazon — have                  challenge is to
embraced and will continue to embrace the opportunities                foster a greater
afforded by open communication, many other companies will              awareness of the
either struggle to “get it” or simply lack the capacity to know what   benefits of open
to do even if they are persuaded of the need for such an approach.     communication
This task of recognizing and embracing the benefits of — and           and to provide
then successfully implementing — an open-communication                 firms with
strategy will be particularly challenging in the context of            practical
emerging markets. The lack of role models or experience, as well       guidance in
as uncertainty about the likelihood of accruing benefits, can
                                                                       implementing
result in pervasive skepticism. Nevertheless, we are convinced
that the opportunities afforded by open communication also
                                                                       such an
exist in emerging markets, and that good companies based in            approach.
such markets may leapfrog the grudging-compliance stage and
leverage open communication to scale their business.

Therefore, the regulatory challenge is to foster a greater awareness
of the benefits of open communication and to provide firms
with practical guidance in implementing such an approach.
That means the regulators’ task is to “nudge” companies toward
open communication rather than to impose thicker layers of
regulation that merely perpetuate grudging disclosure — and
reporting fatigue. In the type of model proposed here, the
regulators’ primary goal is for companies to recognize the
possibilities of adopting open communication, based on a
business case for meaningful disclosure.

Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	              FOCUS 14   49
                       Our empirical study suggests that law does matter, but perhaps
                       not in the ways that policymakers hoped, expected, or anticipated.
                       As we see with the Chinese and U.S. experience in particular
                       (see Figure 5 on page 31), the legal requirement to disclose
Our empirical          information certainly does have an effect. But a rules-based
study suggests         approach that compels disclosure seems to have resulted in an
that law does          unhealthy standardization of how the information is presented,
                       which reveals little about how control actually affects corporate
matter, but
                       strategies and governance and which may actually obscure
perhaps not in         control issues. The current regulatory approach appears to breed
the ways that          a formalistic style of compliance that provides little in the way of
policymakers           genuine guidance for investors and other potential stakeholders.
hoped, expected,
                       An illustration of the pervasiveness of depersonalized modes of
or anticipated.        disclosure is the large number of firms that we might expect to
                       engage in open communication, but instead are found among
                       the grudging-disclosure group. Take LinkedIn, for example. In
                       spite of being a social network company - the business model of
                       which is predicated on promoting open communication - it can
                       be found in the grudging-disclosure category. One factor may be
                       the current regulatory system in the United States, which does
                       not implement any measures aimed at promoting more open
                       disclosure. This arguably explains the irony of a social network
                       company that fails to provide clear, meaningful information
The current
                       about its ownership structure.
regulatory
approach appears       Another argument for a regulatory approach that encourages
to breed a             more open communication is that, as the new-firm model
                       becomes more prevalent, more companies are going to embrace
formalistic style
                       open communication anyway. Firms will need to adopt the
of compliance.         organizational principles associated with the new firm to
                       survive — to build and maintain relevance in increasingly
                       competitive global markets. In particular, firms will need to
                       embrace open communication to attract the best talent and
                       the best investors and to build strong links with customers and
                       other stakeholders. Thus the regulatory challenge becomes one
                       of helping firms recognize that open disclosure matters.

                       Therefore, regulators need to make clear that adopting open-
                       communication strategies will better position a firm to operate
                       more effectively and engage more productively with the market —
                       that more radical forms of open communication will bring
                       multiple benefits, including the possibility of becoming a global
                       player. Such strategies can improve a firm’s ability to provide a
                       meaningful experience to stakeholders, inside and outside the


      50   FOCUS 14	                                Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
firm, which is crucial in delivering products or services that will
be commercially successful. Commercial and other benefits can
be thought of as a byproduct of open communication. Conversely,
firms that do not communicate openly with the market may well
find themselves marginalized — and suffering accordingly.             Conversely,
How then might policymakers and regulators persuade firms to
                                                                      firms that do not
embrace open communication?                                           communicate
                                                                      openly with the
Perhaps the first point is that, as the governance principles of      market may well
the new firm become more widely acknowledged, this change
                                                                      find themselves
will happen anyway. The better firms will adjust their behavior.
Moreover, for regulators and other policymakers, the lesson of
                                                                      marginalized—
our empirical study is that, although we need some disclosure         and suffering
and reporting rules, we should not fetishize such rules. In           accordingly.
particular, we should not regard ever more layers of mandatory
disclosure and reporting rules as part of the solution. Companies
will choose to adopt open communication because they have
to do so to prosper. Adopting an internal and external culture
of open communication and radical transparency will bring its
own rewards.

Insofar as regulators do have a role, it should be to support,
encourage, and persuade firms to recognize the rewards that
come from the open disclosure of beneficial ownership. A              Insofar as
promising option might be regulation in which regulators              regulators do
address a particular issue via ongoing dialogue with those            have a role,
they are responsible for regulating — to develop strategies and       it should be
practices that firms are then encouraged to adopt voluntarily.        to support,
Such a regulatory approach, or “co-regulation,” can offer a more      encourage, and
effective way to overcome difficulties of ensuring substantive
                                                                      persuade firms
compliance — at least when compared to command-and-control
regulation — and has been used effectively to promote ethical
                                                                      to recognize the
conduct and fair trading in other regulatory contexts (Baldwin        rewards that
et al. 2010).                                                         come from the
                                                                      open disclosure
Co-regulation usually involves the state or an international
organization persuading a group of firms in a particular industry
                                                                      of beneficial
or a professional group to help develop — in cooperation with         ownership.
the regulator — some normative standards based on current
industry best practice. Its advantage is that the business
community, in cooperation with the state and international
organizations, is responsible for developing the applicable
standards, monitoring compliance, and ensuring enforcement.
Thus the standards developed are feasible and associated with


Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	             FOCUS 14   51
                        firms that have already enjoyed success and hence provide
                        compelling evidence of the advantages of complying with such
                        standards. Industry-based accreditation schemes might also
                        provide some formal acknowledgment of compliance, which
                        can have a signaling effect for other actors in the market.

                        Crucially, co-regulation frames the whole issue of compliance
                        differently from current dominant practices. It emphasizes the
                        potential benefits of conforming to the agreed on standards (and
                        ideally going beyond them in individualized and imaginative
                        ways) instead of perfunctorily meeting some minimal standard
                        imposed by the state. This need to reframe the issue of
                        compliance in a different context seems particularly pertinent
                        to any discussion of beneficial ownership. Too often the issue of
                        disclosure is framed as protecting investors from opportunistic
Research suggest        managers (agency costs) — a perspective that seems unlikely
that industry-          to persuade managers of the value for them of genuine
                        compliance, making it doubtful that firms would embrace open
initiated schemes
                        communication if so framed.
developed in
partnership with        In the context of beneficial ownership, co-regulation would mean
public agencies         developing the strategies and practices of open communication
are more likely to      introduced above in Section VI and identifying and publishing
                        examples of current best practice (Baldwin et al. 2010). In such
be effective when       a case, an industry acting in its own interests will also be acting
the interests of        in the interests of the community as a whole.
the industry and
the community           A promising start in this context might be the upcoming IFC
                        publication “Beyond the balance sheet: Strategic, governance,
more generally
                        and sustainability reporting,” — which seeks to develop a
coincide.               disclosure and reporting tool that allows firms to monitor their
                        progression on a matrix. A toolkit of this kind has the potential
                        to rate highly in flexibility. Those responsible for developing
                        the matrix would have an intimate knowledge of the most
                        appropriate standards for the industry or profession as well as
                        the objectives of the agreed standards. They are free to consider
                        a range of options to ensure that the objective is met — and if
                        there is an economic benefit for firms to participate, they will
                        have an incentive to ensure that the objective is met as efficiently
                        as possible.

                        In exploring this type of approach, it is important to accept
                        that we are in the realm of imperfect alternatives and that
                        there will always be recalcitrant members of any community.



       52   FOCUS 14	                                Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
Nevertheless, standards of good practice developed by an
industry with a significant number of “rogue” members will
directly benefit the members who sign on to the standards (by
ensuring a greater market share and hence profitability). It will
also benefit consumers (in this context, investors and other
stakeholders), who will have more information available to help
them differentiate between reliable industry members and those
that are recalcitrant or worse.

Of course, giving too much autonomy to a business sector in
determining its own regulatory standards may involve some
risk. The regulatory framework might easily be “captured”
by the industry or professional association and developed in a
way that advances the interests of those doing the developing
and not the interests of the wider community. Nevertheless,
regulatory or other agencies can minimize such risks through
effective monitoring.                                                 The key
Another potential risk is that such standards can become reified      takeaway from
and transformed into just another code that merely adds to the        this paper is that
fatigue associated with reporting and transparency. A toolkit —       companies need
designed in close collaboration with business — needs to address      to be proactive
how open communication adds value to a firm and helps firms           and imaginative
build and maintain relevance in the market.
                                                                      in developing
The key takeaway from this paper is that companies need to            personalized
be proactive and imaginative in developing personalized open-         open-
communication strategies. The task of regulators is to “nudge”        communication
firms and provide some guidance by identifying strategies that
                                                                      strategies.
have already proven successful. But in the end, the responsibility
for effectively implementing an open-communication strategy
rests squarely on key stakeholders within a firm, who must seize
the initiative and develop clear strategies and practices that
will assure that the firm can build and maintain relevancy in
the marketplace. In this way, a firm can ensure that it offers a
meaningful and personalized experience for all stakeholders and
can therefore attract the investors and talent necessary to deliver
the best products and services while providing the firm with the
best opportunity to succeed.




Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	             FOCUS 14   53
References
Baldwin, R., M. Cave, and M. Lodge. 2010. The Oxford Handbook of Regulation. Oxford: Oxford
  University Press.
Bebchuk, L. A., and R. J. Jackson Jr. 2011. “The law and economics of blockholder disclosure.”
  Discussion Paper No. 702 (July). The Harvard John M. Olin Discussion Paper Series.
Bratton, W. W., and J. A. McCahery. 2001. “Incomplete contracts theories of the firm and
  comparative corporate governance.” Theoretical Inquiries in Law Vol. 2: 745–82.
Bowles, N. 2016. “Apple — Losing out on talent and in need of a killer new device.” The Guardian
 (January 28).
Cunningham, L. A. 2014. Berkshire Beyond Buffet: The Enduring Value of Values. New York:
 Columbia Business School Publishing.
Easterbrook, F. H., and D. R. Fischel. 1991. The Economic Structure of Corporate Law. Cambridge,
  MA: Harvard University Press.
Economist. 2016. “Leak of the century: The Lesson of the Panama Papers.” The Economist (April
  9).
FATF. 2012. International Standards on Combating Money Laundering and the Financing of
  Terrorism & Proliferation. Paris: Financial Action Task Force.
Fenwick, M. D. 2015. “The new corporate criminal law and transnational legal risk.” In Flexibility
  in Modern Business Law: A Comparative Assessment. M. Fenwick and S. Wrbka, eds. New York:
  Springer. 149–72.
Fenwick, M. D., and E. P. M. Vermeulen. 2016a. “The new firm: Staying relevant, unique and
  competitive.” European Business Organization Law Review Vol. 17 (forthcoming).
Fenwick, M. D., and E. P. M. Vermeulen. 2016b. “The future of capitalism: “Un-corporating”
  corporate governance.” Unpublished Working Paper.
Hoffman, R., B. Casnocha, and C. Yeh. 2014. The Alliance: Managing Talent in the Networked
 Age. Watertown, MA: Harvard Business Review Press.
Holderness, C. G. 2003. “A survey of blockholders and corporate control.” Economic Policy Review
 (April) 9 (1): 1–14.
Hu, H. T. C., and B. Black. 2006. “Empty voting and hidden (morphable) ownership: Taxonomy,
 implications, and reforms.” Business Lawyer Vol. 61: 1011–70.
Jensen, C., and W. H. Meckling. 1976. “Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs
  and ownership structure.” Journal of Financial Economics Vol. 3: 305–60.
Jurdant, F. 2014. “Disclosure of beneficial ownership and control in Indonesia.” OECD
  Corporate Governance Working Papers No. 9. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
  Development.
Mayer, C. 2013. Firm Commitment: Why the Corporation is Failing Us and How to Restore Trust in
 It. Oxford: Oxford University Press.



54   FOCUS 14	                                             Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers
McCahery, J. A., and E. P. M. Vermeulen. 2005. “Corporate governance crises and related party
 transactions: A post-Parmalat agenda.” In Corporate Governance in Context: Corporations, States,
 and Markets in Europe, Japan and the U.S. K. Hopt, E. Wymeersch, H. Kanda, and H. Baum,
 eds. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 215–45.
McCahery, J. A., E. P. M. Vermeulen, and M. Hisatake. 2012. “The present and future of
 corporate governance: Re-examining the role of the board of directors and investor relations in
 listed companies.” European Company and Financial Law Review 10 (2): 117–63.
McCahery, J. A., and E. P. M. Vermeulen. 2014a. “Understanding the board of directors after the
 financial crisis: Some lessons for Europe.” Journal of Law and Society (March) 41 (1): 121–51.
McCahery, J. A., and E. P. M. Vermeulen. 2014b. “Six components of corporate governance that
 cannot be ignored.” European Company and Financial Law Review 11 (2): 160–95.
McCahery, J. A., and E. P. M. Vermeulen. 2014c. “Business growth and firm value creation: The
 ‘ignored’ third dimension of corporate governance.” Journal of Self-Governance and Management
 Economics 2 (4): 69–76.
OECD. 2016. Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership and Control in Listed Companies in Asia. Paris:
 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Pacces, A. 2013. Rethinking Corporate Governance: The Law and Economics of Control Powers.
  London: Routledge Research in Corporate Law Series.
Puchniak, D. W., and L. L. Lan. 2016. “Independent directors in Singapore: Puzzling compliance
  requiring explanation.” American Journal of Comparative Law (forthcoming).
Schectman, J. 2010. “Elon Musk on his work and the future.” Newsweek (November 19).
Stout, L. 2012. The Shareholder Value Myth: How Putting Shareholders First Harms Investors,
  Corporations, and the Public. Oakland, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
Strine, L. E., Jr. 2013. “Ordinary investors of the U.S. and EU unite: A reflection on sound,
  sustainable wealth creation.” DSF Policy Paper Series No. 34.
Subramanian, G. 2015. “Corporate governance 2.0.” Harvard Business Review (March) 93 (3):
  97–105.
Thiel, P. 2014. Zero to One: Notes on Startups, or How to Build the Future. New York: Crown
  Business.
Verhezen, P. 2015. “Fear and regret — Or trust? From ‘transparency as a way to control’ to ‘radical
  transparency to empower.’” Private Sector Opinion 38. IFC Corporate Governance Knowledge
  Publication.
Vermeulen, E. P. M. 2013. “Beneficial ownership and control: A comparative study — Disclosure,
  information and enforcement.” OECD Corporate Governance Working Papers No. 7.
Vermeulen, E. P. M. 2015. “Corporate governance in a networked age.” Wake Forest Law Review
  (Fall) 50 (3): 711–42.
Vermeulen, E. P. M. 2016. “New metrics for corporate governance: Shifting strategies in an aging
  IPO market.” In The Oxford Handbook of Corporate Law and Governance. J. Gordon and W-G.
  Ringe, eds. Oxford: Oxford University Press (forthcoming).

Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership after the Panama Papers	                             FOCUS 14   55
          For the latest publications on corporate governance and
          development, please visit: www.ifc.org/corporategovernance




IFC Corporate Governance Group Focus 14
IN PARTNERSHIP WITH:




2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
Tel: +1 (202) 458 8097
cgsecretariat@ifc.org
www.ifc.org/corporategovernance
