    THE CORPORATE SECRETARY:
THE GOVERNANCE PROFESSIONAL
About IFC’s Corporate Governance Group

The Group brings together staff from investment support and advisory operations into a
single, global team.

This unified team advises on all aspects of corporate governance and offers targeted
client services in areas such as increasing board effectiveness, improving the
control environment, and family business governance. The Group also helps support
corporate governance improvements and reform efforts in emerging markets and
developing countries, while leveraging and integrating knowledge tools, expertise, and
networks at the global and regional levels. For more information, visit www.ifc.org/
corporategovernance




The material in this work is protected by copyright. Copying and/or transmitting
portions or all of this work may be a violation of applicable law. The International Finance
Corporation encourages dissemination of its work and hereby grants permission to users
of this work to copy portions for their personal, noncommercial use, without any right to
resell, redistribute, or create derivative works therefrom. Any other copying or use of this
work requires the express written permission of the International Finance Corporation. For
permission to photocopy or reprint, please send a request with complete information to:

The International Finance Corporation
c/o the World Bank Permissions Desk
Office of the Publisher
1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433

All queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to:

The International Finance Corporation
c/o the Office of the Publisher
World Bank
1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433
Fax: (202) 522-2422

© Copyright 2016, All rights reserved.
International Finance Corporation
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW,
Washington, DC 20433
CONTENTS


Chapter                                                               Page

Foreword                                                                 v
Acknowledgments                                                         vi
     1       Role as a Governance Professional                           1
     2       Role in Preparing for Meetings                             13
     3       Role During a Board Meeting                                27
     4       Role After a Board Meeting                                39
     5       Role in the Delegation of Authority                       47
     6       Role in Board Composition and Succession Planning          57
     7       Role with Directors                                        67
     8       Role in Board Evaluation                                   73
     9       Role with Shareholders                                     85
    10       Role in Shareholder Meetings                              97
     11      Role in Strategy, Risk, and Good Corporate Citizenship     111
    12       Role in Financial Oversight and Reporting                 125
    13       Role in Building Ethical Cultures                         131
    14       Role in Stakeholder Management                            141
References                                                             148




Table of Contents
                                                                              iii
     List of Figures and Tables
     Figure 1.1: 	 Organizations and Corporate Governance (p. 3)
                  Slide 5 from IFC’s 
     Figure 1.2: 	                  Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 1 Module 1/The Corporate Secretary: The
                  Governance Professionalpresentation. (p. 5)
                                        orporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 1 Module 2/The Corporate Secretary:
     Figure 1.3: 	 Slide 10 from IFC’s C
                   Foundations for the Jobpresentation. (p. 6)
                                        orporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 4/Effective Board Meetings
     Figure 3.1: 	 Slide 18 from IFC’s C
                   presentation. (p. 28)
                  Slide 11 from IFC’s 
     Figure 3.2: 	                   Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 5/Board Dynamics at Meetings
                  presentation. (p. 31)
     Figure 4.1: 	 Sample Action Log (p. 41)
                                      Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 4/Effective Board Meetings
     Figure 4.2:	 Slide 25 from IFC’s 
                  presentation. (p. 42)
                                       orporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 1/Delegationpresentation. (p. 48)
     Figure 5.1: 	 Slide 6 from IFC’s C
                                       Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 1/Delegationpresentation. (p. 50)
     Figure 5.2: 	 Slide 21 from IFC’s 
                                       Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 2/Board Composition and Succession
     Figure 6.1: 	 Slide 22 from IFC’s 
                   Planningpresentation. (p. 60)
                                      Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 7/Board Directorspresentation. (p. 66)
     Figure 6.2: 	 Slide 7 from IFC’s 
     Figure 8.1: 	 Types of Evaluation (p. 73)
                                      Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 8/Shareholderspresentation. (p. 87)
     Figure 9.1: 	 Slide 7 from IFC’s 
                                       orporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 8/Shareholderspresentation. (p. 89)
     Figure 9.2: 	 Slide 9 from IFC’s C
                                        orporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 8/Shareholderspresentation. (p. 92)
     Figure 9.3: 	 Slide 14 from IFC’s C
     Figure 10.1: 	Sample Agenda for Annual General Meeting (pp. 100–101)
                  Slide 13 from IFC’s 
     Figure 10.2:	                   Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 7/ Shareholders’ Meetings
                  presentation. (p. 110)
     Figure 11.1: 	 Slide 6 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 1/Strategy: Development and Analysis
                    presentation. (p. 112)
     Figure 11.2: 	 Risk Management Example (p. 116)
     Figure 11.3: 	 Risk Management Process (p. 119)
                                        orporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 4/Good Corporate Citizenship
     Figure 11.4: 	Slide 10 from IFC’s C
                   presentation. (p. l21)
                                        Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 4/Good Corporate Citizenship
     Figure 11.5: 	 Slide 12 from IFC’s 
                    presentation. (p. 122)
                   Slide 17 from IFC’s C
     Figure 11.6: 	                    orporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 4/Good Corporate Citizenship
                   presentation. (p. 123)
                                       Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 10/Financial Oversight and Analysis
     Figure 12.1: 	 Slide 6 from IFC’s 
                    presentation. (p. 127)
                                       Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 5/Integrated Reporting
     Figure 12.2:	 Slide 22 from IFC,s 
                   presentation. (p. 130)
                                        Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 3/Building Ethical Cultures
     Figure 13.1: 	 Slide 10 from IFC’s 
                    presentation. (p. 133)
     Figure 13.2:	 Developing a Code of Ethics (p. 135)
     Figure 13.3:	 Building an Ethical Culture—Every Step Counts (p. 138)
                                      Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 3/Building Ethical Cultures
     Figure 13.4:	Slide 24 from IFC,s 
                  presentation. (p. 139)
                                        Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 6/The Company Secretary:
     Figure 14.1: 	 Slide 17 from IFC’s 
                    The Board’s Communicatorpresentation. (p. 144)
     Table 3.1: 	   Preferred Behaviors and Board Member Participation at Board Meetings (p. 37)
     Table 5.1: 	   Elements of a Board Charter (p. 56)




iv                                               The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
FOREWORD

Corporate secretaries have an important role to play as governance
professionals in all types of organizations in the private, public, and not-for-
profit sectors. Governance is more than just complying with laws, regulations,
standards, and codes; it is also about creating cultures of good practice. This
means that corporate secretaries need more than the technical skills and
experience to know what corporate governance practices are needed in an
organization and why. They also need the emotional intelligence, skills, and
experience to ensure that they know how the practices typically would be
implemented to work effectively.

The modern corporate secretary is no longer a “mere servant,” as often
implied in earlier job descriptions and early legal text, but is now expected to
provide professional guidance to shareholders, boards, individual directors,
management, and other stakeholders on the governance aspects of strategic
decisions. The corporate secretary typically would act as a bridge for
information, communication, advice, and arbitration between the board
and management and between the organization and its shareholders and
stakeholders. To fulfill this role, the corporate secretary needs to be fully aware
of the powers, rights, duties, and obligations of all of these groups. In addition
to providing advice and communication, the corporate secretary often called
on to create and manage relationships between these different players in the
corporate governance system.

To carry out this role effectively, a corporate secretary needs to act with
the highest integrity and independence in protecting the interests of the
organization, its shareholders, and others with a legitimate interest in the
organization’s affairs. This level of responsibility calls for a thorough knowledge
of the business environment in which the organization operates as well as of the
laws, rules, and regulations that govern its activities.

Corporate secretaries also typically would provide practical support to the
chairman of the organization to ensure that board meetings are managed
effectively. This typically would entail assisting the chairman with agenda
development, ensuring that meetings are conducted in line with good




Foreword
                                                                                      v
     governance and statutory and regulatory requirements, drafting minutes, and
     following up on implementation of decisions made by the board.

     This Handbook offers a concise and practical description of how corporate
     secretaries might carry out their role to improve governance in their
     organizations. It can also serve as a guidance tool for both IFC clients and
     advisory staff to clarify the potentially expansive duties of corporate secretaries
     and to help them assist corporate secretaries in understanding what skills they
     require to fulfill their roles.

     The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional Handbook is based on
     IFC’s publication, Corporate Secretaries Toolkit, which provides a portfolio of
     modules that cover topics of interest and value to those carrying out the role
     of corporate secretary and to the companies and organizations they serve. It
     also provides trainers with materials and instructions for conducting training.
     For more information, visit http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/Topics_Ext_
     Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/IFC+CG



     Acknowledgments
     The development of this Handbook would not have been possible without
     the dedicated commitment and contributions of the core team responsible
     for its design and production: Ghita Alderman, Alison Dillon Kibirige,
     Christopher Mattox, and Christopher Razook. We would also like to
     recognize Brenda Bowman’s contribution to its development.




vi                                     The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
CHAPTER 1:
Role as a Governance Professional




 In today’s world, the role of the Corporate Secretary
“
 has no one meaning and covers a multitude of tasks
 and responsibilities. That said, the role lies at the
 heart of the governance systems of companies and is
 receiving ever great focus.”

               —David Jackson, Corporate Secretary, BP plc

More and more countries are introducing the position of the corporate
secretary, whether in law or through regulations, standards, or codes of
corporate governance. The reason is that the corporate secretary is the person
responsible in an organization for:

   •	 Identifying what and advising why certain corporate governance best
     practices should be adopted by the organization. This may be as a result
     of compliance with laws, regulations, standards and codes or because the
     practices make good operational sense for the organization.

   •	 Implementing within the organization those best practices through the
     creation and maintenance of cultures and relationships. This usually
     requires the corporate secretary to answer the how do we implement
     question, which requires corporate secretaries to have emotional-
     intelligence skills as well as technical skills.

   •	 Facilitating communication between board members, the board and
     management, the chairman and the chief executive officer, the company
     and its shareholders, and the company and its stakeholders.

Listed companies are required to have corporate secretaries. They are also
found more and more in non-listed companies and in organizations in the




Chapter 1: Role as a Governance Professional
                                                                                 1
    public and not-for-profit sectors. This is because these organizations are also
    recognizing the importance of corporate governance and of having someone
    responsible for it within their organization.

    A recent study in the United Kingdom1 determined that for corporate secretaries
    to carry out their role effectively they should be “commercially minded” or
    aware. This they saw as being an important feature of the job, especially as they
    advise the board on governance issues. To be commercially aware, an individual
    must understand the business he or she is in and make good practical decisions
    as a result. For the corporate secretary, this means having the ability to advise
    the board in a way that supports the board in making effective decisions. To be
    commercially aware a corporate secretary should be able to do the following:

           •	 Understand how their organization makes money and creates value.

           •	 Understand what their organization needs, now and in the future, to
                continue to make money and create value.

           •	 Have a thorough understanding of their organization’s competitive
                advantage.

           •	 Keep up to date with the industry/sector that their organization
                operates within.


    Terms and Titles
    The term “company secretary” is commonly used in the United Kingdom and
    other commonwealth countries. In the United States, Canada, Eastern Europe,
    and post-Soviet states, the term “corporate secretary” is more common.
    Another commonly used term is “board secretary.”

    Although the role of the corporate secretary has been around for over 100
    years, it is not well known among the general public. Many corporate secretaries
    tell stories of having been mistaken for an executive administrative assistant
    instead of someone carrying out a senior professional role in the organization.

    The U.K. study mentioned above2 found that many corporate secretaries
    thought that the role is compromised by the term “secretary” in the job title.



    1	
         “Elevating the Role of the Company Secretary: Lessons from the FTSE All Share” (The All Party Parliamentary Corpo-
         rate Governance Group, May 2012).
    2	
         ibid




2                                                   The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
To deal with this confusion, many organizations are coming up with alternative
titles, the most common being the corporate governance officer or director.


Corporate Governance
Corporate governance best practices as we know them today were first
introduced following corporate scandals in the United Kingdom in the early
1990’s.3 They were developed with listed companies in mind. All organizations,
however, practice governance and can learn from the best practices that are
available. Figure 1.1 explains why. All organizations have a purpose and want to
be successful in attaining that purpose. The question is how do they get there?


Figure 1.1: Organizations and Corporate Governance




          ORGANIZATION’S PURPOSE




                                                       COMPLIANCE
     STRUCTURE              POLICIES   PROCEDURES




                            PEOPLE


                                               GOVERNANCE




                            CULTURE




          ORGANIZATIONAL SUCCESS


3	
     Cadbury Report 1992.




Chapter 1: Role as a Governance Professional
                                                                                   3
    Organizations need to put in place structures, policies, and procedures that
    comply with best practice. This on its own is compliance and doesn’t create good
    governance. For good governance to be present, the people who work in the
    organization need to apply/practice these structures, policies, and procedures
    to create a culture within the organization that enables them to work effectively.
    This in turn leads to the organization being successful. For example, compliance is
    putting in place a code of ethics; governance is about creating an ethical culture.
    As we saw from Enron, they do not always go hand in hand.

    A good corporate secretary should be able to assist the organization
    with identifying what should make up the correct infrastructure for each
    organization. In addition, and some would say more importantly, once the correct
    infrastructure has been identified, the good corporate secretary should be able
    to assist the organization with the creation of the culture and the relationships
    required to ensure that the infrastructure is implemented, managed, and
    maintained effectively for the success of the organization.



    Duties of a Corporate Secretary
    The duties of a corporate secretary will vary from organization to organization,
    depending on the type of organization, the sector it operates in, and the
    structures, policies, and procedures it adopts. Figure 1.2 shows some of the
    duties often carried out by the corporate secretary.

    Whatever type of organization the corporate secretary works for, he or she
    usually plays a valuable role as a “bridge” for information, communication,
    advice, and arbitration between the board and management and the
    organization and its stakeholders, including its shareholders. The corporate
    secretary can, among other things, help management understand the
    requirements of the board, help the board understand the challenges faced
    by management in meeting the requirements of the board, and help the
    organization manage stakeholder relations.

    The role of the corporate secretary, therefore, involves, in addition to a
    compliance role, the management of people to create the appropriate cultures
    to enable the corporate governance structures, policies, and procedures to
    work effectively. Unfortunately, as evidenced by corporate governance scandals
    across the globe, many carrying out the role of governance professional within
    organizations do not get this. They believe that just by complying with best




4                                    The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
Figure 1.2: 
            Slide 5 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 1 Module 1/The Corporate
            Secretary: The Governance Professional presentation.




         Role of a Corporate Secretary

                                                  Ensures compliance with
                                                  governance procedures
                 Manages the corporate
                governance framework for                                       Communicates with
                      the company                                                 directors




               Oversees, conducts
                                                                                        Communicates between
               induction trainings
                                                                                        board and management
                for newly elected
                     directors



                                                                                   Shareholder relations &
                Ensures compliance with
                                                                                    manages shareholder
                  laws and regulations
                                                                                         meetings
                                           Officer of the           Conscience of the
                                            company                    company




       CORPORATE SECRETARIES TOOLKIT                                                                           5
       PART 1 MODULE 1 / THE CORPORATE SECRETARY: THE GOVERNANCE PROFESSIONAL




Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




practices they are carrying out good governance. In many countries, this is
mirrored by boards of directors believing that good governance is all about
complying with best practices. As a result, their organizations often fail to reach
their true potential.



Qualifications and Skills of Corporate Secretaries
Some countries have requirements in law, regulations, standards, or codes for
the qualifications of those carrying out the role of corporate secretary. These
include members of professional bodies such as ICSA (Institute of Chartered
Secretaries and Administrators), the global professional body for corporate
secretaries, lawyers, and accountants.




Chapter 1: Role as a Governance Professional
                                                                                                                   5
    Figure 1.3: 
                Slide 10 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 1 Module 2/The Corporate
                Secretary: Foundations for the Job presentation.




             Skills Required

             !  Respectful, diplomatic, and effective communication
             !  Active listening
             !  Bringing issues to the surface, especially those relating
                  to reputational risk
             !    Describing common concerns and interests
             !    Generating alternative solutions
             !    Respecting confidences
             !    Appreciation for all parties
             !    Disagreeing constructively
             !    Emphasizing commercially minded approaches

                                                                                          10




    Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




    Emotional Intelligence Skills
    Whatever the qualifications of the person chosen for the position, it is important
    that, in additional to technical skills, the individual has strong emotional
    intelligence skills. Figure 1.3 provides a list of these types of skills.

    In their book, Emotional Intelligence 2.0 (published in 1999), Travis Bradberry
    and Jean Greaves claim that 90 percent of top performers score highly in EQ,
    and that it is twice as important as IQ in getting to where you want to be. They
    suggest that EQ is the foundation for many critical skills, including decision
    making, change tolerance, communication, anger management, stress tolerance,
    presentation skills, trust, assertiveness, and empathy.




6                                           The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
To carry out their roles effectively corporate secretaries therefore need to have
skills that enable them to understand their own and other people’s emotions
and behaviors, and that assist them with self-management and relationship
management. They should use these skills to guide their behaviors and the
advice they give to the owners, boards, and management of the organizations
within which they work.



Combined Role
Because of the compliance element of the corporate secretaries’ role,
organizations in many countries combine the role with that of head of legal. If
the corporate secretary role is combined with another role, care should be taken
to see that the governance role is not compromised. Both the board and the
corporate secretary should ensure that there is no conflict between the functions
performed in both positions. For example, a general counsel who is also given the
role of the corporate secretary will often have to take sides in his or her legal role
to represent the particular interests of the company. Although he or she may be
complying with the letter of the law and in the interests of management, he or
she may not be acting in the best long-term interests of the company. This would
be inconsistent with the corporate secretary’s governance role, which requires
impartiality when advising on governance issues. It may also prevent a corporate
secretary from speaking out against bad governance or unethical practices.



Appointment/Departure of the Corporate Secretary
It is best practice for the corporate secretary to be appointed and removed by
the board, which should ensure that the person appointed is capable of carrying
out the functions of the role.

The corporate secretary typically is an employee of the company; so on
appointment, a contract of employment will have to be drafted and signed. In
countries where there is directors and officers indemnity insurance, the corporate
secretary should be included. There may also be regulatory filing requirements to
be complied with on appointment and departure of the corporate secretary.

The removal of the corporate secretary by the whole board protects corporate
secretaries in situations where they could face dismissal as a result of acting as
the “conscience of the company” and disagreeing with management or a board




Chapter 1: Role as a Governance Professional
                                                                                         7
    CASE STUDY: STARBUCKS

    Starbucks “chooses” to pay tax
    for first time in five years

    STARBUCKS has made its first payment to HM Revenue and Customs since
    2008. The company said it had “listened to customers” and had paid GBP5m,
    with another GBP5m to be paid later this year and a further GBP10m in 2014,
    The Guardian reports.

    Starbucks paid just GBP8.5m in tax between 1998 and 2008, and nothing since
    then, despite total sales of GBP3bn over the past three years. That’s because
    the company has made use of perfectly legal tax avoidance techniques and
    remains, on paper, unprofitable in the UK. Indeed, the chain is due to close up
    to 30 of its shops around Britain this year because of tough competition from
    rivals like Costa.

    When its various tax-avoidance techniques were revealed last year, the company
    faced a barrage of criticism and a widespread boycott of the brand, with UK
    Uncut organising protests outside a number of branches.

    In January, David Cameron told the World Economic Forum in Davos that
    tax-avoiding companies should “wake up and smell the coffee.” He never
    mentioned Starbucks by name but the comment was widely taken as a dig at
    the coffee chain.

    Despite its continued insistence that it is loss-making in the UK, the company
    decided to pay the GBP20m corporation tax in an attempt to “please”
    customers. In a statement, the company said: “We felt that our customers
    should not have to wait for us to become profitable before we started paying
    UK corporation tax.”


    Source: Extract from ‘The Week’ (www.theweek.co.uk) June 24, 2013.




8                                         The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
member on a particular course of action. When corporate secretaries leave the
position, they usually are asked to attend the board meeting and explain the
reason(s) for leaving. This enables them to alert the board to any governance
issues that may have contributed to the decision. Any governance reasons given
should be recorded in the minutes.




Reporting Lines
An ICSA Guidance Note on “Reporting Lines for the Company Secretary”
states, “If the Board fails to protect the integrity of the Company Secretary’s
position, one of the most effective inbuilt internal controls available to
the company is likely to be seriously undermined. The establishment of
appropriate reporting lines for the Company Secretary will normally be a
crucial factor in establishing that protection.”

The corporate secretary should be responsible to the board and should be
accountable through the chairman on all matters relating to his or her core
duties in relation to the board. In civil law countries, best practice would be for
the corporate secretary to report to and be accountable for board duties to
the supervisory board.

A corporate secretary may have other non-core duties. Depending on the
duties assigned, the corporate secretary may report to a member of the
management team such as the general counsel, the chief executive officer, or
the chief financial officer.

When a corporate secretary reports to the CEO, the board members may think
they are not receiving “independent,” unbiased governance advice and that
the corporate secretary is spending too much time on management issues.
To avoid putting the corporate secretary in this position, some organizations
create a buffer and have the corporate secretary reporting to another member
of the management team and/or ensure that the corporate secretary’s
remuneration and benefits are decided by the board or the remuneration
committee of the board.

When the corporate secretary only reports to the board, he or she can
sometimes feel isolated, especially if the chairman is non-executive or part-time.
There is also the risk, real or perceived, that a second line of communication has
been established in competition to the main board-CEO line.




Chapter 1: Role as a Governance Professional
                                                                                      9
     A recent United Kingdom study4 found that most corporate secretaries in
     listed companies reported to the CEO, but there was often a dual reporting
     responsibility, with the chairman also being identified 50 percent of the time.
     The advantage of reporting to the chairman was stressed by some, who
     felt that such a reporting line assists with the independence of the role. The
     lower down the FTSE the company was, the more likely that the corporate
                                  —from 13 percent of the time in the FTSE 100
     secretary reported to the CFO­
     to 31 percent of the time in the FTSE Small Cap. A number of respondents
     mentioned that, although they reported to a member of management for their
     “pay and rations,” their practical reporting lines were to the chairman and CEO.

     Those reporting to the corporate secretary will differ from organization to
     organization, depending on the duties assigned to the corporate secretary
     and the size of the organization. In larger organizations, a corporate secretary
     may have a department of qualified corporate secretaries and support staff
     reporting to him or her. In this case it is common to find titles such as deputy
     secretary, assistant secretary, and secretarial assistant.

     In addition, corporate secretaries often have a plethora of other departments
     reporting to them, including, for example, the company’s archive department,
     pensions, administration department, and so on.



     Performance Appraisal of the Corporate Secretary
     The performance appraisal of the corporate secretary should be carried out by
     the chairman of the board, with assistance from the Human Resource function.

     A 360-degree appraisal, where feedback comes from members of the
     corporate secretary’s immediate work circle, including the board, is beneficial.
     Most often, 360-degree feedback will include direct feedback from an
     employee’s subordinates, peers, and supervisor(s) as well as a self-evaluation.
     It can also include, in some cases, feedback from external sources, such as
     customers and suppliers or other interested stakeholders.



     Outsourcing the Role of the Corporate Secretary
     Some organizations choose to outsource the role and functions of the corporate
     secretary to an independent practioner or a law or accountancy firm.

     4	
          Elevating the Role of the Company Secretary.




10                                                   The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
REASONS TO/NOT TO OUTSOURCE

Reasons to Outsource
1.	 To ensure that all of the statutory and regulatory requirements are met
   by a specialized firm. These requirements in some countries are changing
   regularly as new laws and regulations are introduced.

2.	 To reduce costs of employing a person with a specific qualification, especially
   in a company start-up.

3.	 To fulfill a requirement that company documents be filed on line, which
   requires a PIN for security reasons. There may also be requirements that
   filings be done by a professional firm. For smaller companies, it may be more
   cost effective or efficient to outsource the role to a professional firm.


Reasons Not to Outsource
An in-house corporate secretary:

1.	 Acquires an in-depth knowledge and understanding of the company and its
   history and also develops relationships with the board and management that
   an external firm lacks.

2.	 Is available at all times to discuss corporate governance issues. An outsource
   firm may be much slower in providing assistance or response to questions.

3.	 Offers a wide range of services and is able to take on other responsibilities
   in a start-up or smaller company. For example, ICSA educates people in
   management, law, and accountancy.

4.	 May provide support that is difficult for an external firm to provide, for
   example, assisting the chairman in preparing for meetings.

5.	 Can truly act as the “conscience of the company” and has no conflict in that
   he or she does not do other work for the company, such as providing legal or
   accountancy services.

6.	 Can be relied on to maintain confidentiality. In-house corporate secretaries
   can in many cases be held liable for any breaches in confidentiality, whereas
   this may be problematic in cases of an outsourced service.




Chapter 1: Role as a Governance Professional
                                                                                      11
     Where the role of the corporate secretary is outsourced, the directors maintain
     responsibility for the duties that should be carried out by the corporate
     secretary if one were employed in-house. Therefore, there needs to be oversight
     of the third party fulfilling the role.




12                                      The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
CHAPTER 2
Role in Preparing for Meetings




In preparing for board meetings, the corporate secretary would typically be
responsible for the actions described below.




1.	 Setting the dates for the board meeting after liaising with the
    chairman and CEO.
   The corporate secretary should maintain an annual calendar so that
   members of the board and those preparing information for the board can
   know when items will be considered by the board. It also enables the board
   to schedule additional items and reallocate items to different meetings as
   circumstances change.

   In compiling the annual calendar, the corporate secretary should ensure
   that it fits the business cycle of the company. Management should not
   be stopping its ordinary business to prepare reports for the board. The
   reports should be part of the business reporting cycle. Many companies
   just say “quarterly board meetings” and pick a date without considering the
   additional pressure they are putting on management to produce reports out
   of the cycle.




2.	 Ensuring that the board is properly constituted and that directors
    have been properly appointed and are operating within their
    terms.
   Failure to do so will invalidate the meeting and any decisions taken.




Chapter 2: Role in Preparing for Meetings
                                                                                 13
     3.	 Notifying the directors of the time, date, and place of the meeting.
       Corporate secretaries can notify directors of meetings through an annual
       calendar of dates, which for larger companies can be in a three-year cycle, or
       through reminders to directors closer to the time. Reminders should note the
       venue, date, and time of the meeting. Some companies are required in their
       constitutions or by statute to send out notices to directors before each board
       meeting. Other companies do not require notice to be sent to directors
       overseas.




     4.	Meeting with management and the chairman to agree on items for
        the agenda, and developing the agenda for the meeting.
       The corporate secretary prepares the first draft of the agenda, drawing from
       items on the annual calendar and discussions with management. This draft
       is then discussed with the chairman, who has the final say on what is on the
       agenda. The corporate secretary may have to manage negotiations between
       a CEO who wants certain items to be on an agenda and a chairman who has
       decided that in the interests of time they can wait to the next meeting.

       When drafting agendas, the corporate secretary should attempt to find the
       right balance between strategic and operational/administrative matters.

       A good corporate secretary will identify the six or seven things that the board
       needs to address each year and, using a board calendar, allocate time for
       discussion of these items across the scheduled meetings. Maintaining flexibility
       in the agenda will allow for the unexpected events requiring board attention that
       occur throughout the year. One board meeting a year should focus on strategy.
       Often boards will take this opportunity to go on a board retreat and visit
       operations, customers, or suppliers. The corporate secretary should be involved
       in identifying locations and making arrangements for the board retreat.

       The order of business on the agenda should deal with procedural,
       compliance, and operational issues first, allowing the rest of the time to be
       spent on strategic issues. During the meeting, the corporate secretary should
       assist the chairman in minimizing the time spent on the first category of
       issues by jotting down on the chairman’s agenda indicative timings for each
       of the items. This allows the chairman to avoid stifling debate while at the




14                                   The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
   same time seeing whether all issues will be dealt with or whether some will
   have to be dropped and dealt with at a future meeting.

   The corporate secretary should keep an eye on the “matters arising” list. If
   it is getting too long it may mean that the board is not operating effectively
   or management is not implementing the board decisions. The corporate
   secretary should draw the attention of both the chairman and the CEO to the
   length of the list and diplomatically help discover the reason it is getting so
   long. A plan should then be put in place to reduce the list.

   Some companies use a “Corporate Secretary’s Report” to deal with matters
   of an administrative nature that need board approval. The chairman can
   assume that board members have read the report and ask them to approve
   the recommendations within it. There should be little if any debate on it.

   The corporate secretary’s role is to help the chairman manage the meeting.
   Best practice is that “any other business” should not be included as an agenda
   item, because that allows items to be presented to the meeting without the
   board being properly prepared. If a board member has items to be presented
   to the meeting that are not on the agenda, he or she should brief the corporate
   secretary, who can then talk with the chairman prior to the meeting to enable
   the chairman to decide whether the issue should be dealt with at this meeting
   or at the next or at an emergency meeting. The chairman should then, under
   “chairman’s comments”, inform the board about the issue and how it will be
   dealt with. This procedure enables the chairman to keep control of the meeting.




5.	 Advising those preparing papers of when they need to submit
    their papers.
   This information should be included in the annual board calendar.




6.	 Making sure that the board receives information—in a format that
    is easily digestible—before a board meeting and that the board
    members are briefed before a discussion takes place or a decision
    is made by the board.




Chapter 2: Role in Preparing for Meetings
                                                                                     15
         Depending on the type of company, the corporate secretary may also check
         to be sure management has carried out all the relevant consultations before
         bringing a proposal to the board. Many corporate secretaries have introduced
         document-execution processes that require managers to get sign-off on a
         proposal from specified functions such as finance or legal before bringing a
         proposal to the board. This prevents ill-informed proposals from coming to
         the board and avoids a situation where the board approves a proposal only to
         find that there is no budget for it. Good corporate secretaries should advise
         managers to consult widely on their projects so that they cover all the angles
         and gain the cooperation required for their proposal.

         The purpose of board papers is to inform or stimulate debate and to
         seek approval. Papers for the board should be clear and concise, be in
         understandable language, answer all of the questions that directors are
         likely to ask, and should not include organizational jargon or acronyms. The
         corporate secretary should ensure that there is a standard format, length,
         and style issued for board papers. Some companies color code the papers:
         yellow for finance, blue for legal, and so on.

         One common format for a two-page board paper or an executive summary
         of a report is a “STPRA” memo.




     S    =   SITUATION      Briefly describe the background of the issue.

     T    =   TARGET         Briefly describe the goal of the proposal.

     P    =   PROPOSAL       Briefly describe how you are going to achieve your
                             goal.

     R =      RISKS          Briefly describe the risks associated with doing and/or
                             not doing the proposal.

     A =      ACTION         Outline what action you want the board to take.



         In addition to papers supporting items on the agenda, the corporate
         secretary may also circulate specialist reports, competitor information, press
         releases, and market-share information that will help assist the board make
         informed decisions.




16                                     The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
7.	 Organizing the attendance of presenters and advisers.
   Boards may also meet with non-board members, consultants, or
   representatives of stakeholders from within and outside the organization. A
   good corporate secretary will identify those stakeholder groups that have
   legitimate interests, monitor their activities, advise the chairman and be
   involved in arranging such attendance at meetings.




8.	 Collecting and distributing the papers for the board meeting.
   The corporate secretary should work with the chairman to determine when
   papers for board meetings should be distributed. Best practice is seven days
   before a meeting. However, papers may need to be distributed earlier if there
   are overseas directors on the board or there is a statutory requirement. With
   the agreement of the board, in smaller companies papers may be distributed
   within a shorter time. A good corporate secretary will know the directors’
   preferences for receiving board papers. Some are happy with electronic
   copies, and others prefer hard copies.

   The corporate secretary should consider the sensitivity of the papers to
   be distributed. It may be in order to send hard copies of the documents
   by post or courier. Where documents are very sensitive, the corporate
   secretary may arrange for the documents to be hand-delivered by one of the
   company’s staff.

   The corporate secretary should advise directors to be careful where they
   leave and read their board packs. Board packs should not be read in public
   places—including airplanes. Sensitive material may need to be encrypted.




9.	 Organizing the room bookings and other housekeeping
    arrangements, such as soundproofing, security, temperature,
    refreshments, table shape, chairs, seating arrangements, and
    board etiquette.
   See page 21 for more information on logistics.




Chapter 2: Role in Preparing for Meetings
                                                                                   17
     10.	Organizing any associated events, such as lunches, dinners, or
         committee meetings.
        Dinners/lunches can boost the team spirit of the board, allowing board
        members to get to know each other and to discuss important issues prior
        to making a formal decision at the board meeting. The corporate secretary
        should ensure that these events do not become an extension of the board
        meeting. Issues can be discussed, but no decisions should be taken. If
        decisions are taken, the corporate secretary should inform the chairman,
        note the decision for the minutes, and ensure that any statutory and
        regulatory requirements are dealt with within the prescribed time frames.

        The corporate secretary when setting the dates for board meetings should
        be aware of the board’s preference regarding the time between board
        committee meetings and board meetings. Many boards like to have time
        between the committee meetings and the board meeting so minutes can be
        prepared and circulated for the board members to review before the board
        meeting. However, if committee members have to travel long distances, it
        may be more appropriate to have the committee meeting the day before
        the board meeting. In this case, the corporate secretary should help the
        committee chairman prepare a report summarizing the business of the
        committee and any recommendations for board approval.

        Best practice requires that non-executive directors meet at least annually
        on their own to discuss issues relating to the performance of the CEO and
        the management team. These meetings are referred to in some jurisdictions
        as “executive meetings” of the board. The corporate secretary should
        coordinate with the chairman to arrange these meetings. As a quorum
        often is not present at these meetings, the corporate secretary should brief the
        chairman to ensure that decisions that have statutory/regulatory implications
        are not taken at these meetings.




     11.	 Briefing the chairman prior to the meeting.
        The corporate secretary should prepare a brief of the meeting for the
        chairman. Written in bullet format, it should include information on
        each item on the agenda—for example, whether the agenda item is for
        information or needs approval. It should outline the matters arising from the




18                                  The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
    previous meeting and give a brief update, to be dealt with on the agenda or
    to be dealt with at a future meeting.




12.	 Suggesting to the chairman or directors a pre-discussion of items
     on the agenda which require expertise that is not widespread on
     the board.
    When items on the agenda require expertise that is not widespread on the
    board, the corporate secretary should suggest to the chairman or to the
    directors concerned that a pre-discussion take place on the issue to bring
    the board’s knowledge to a level that an informed debate can be held and/
    or a decision can be made. Examples of areas where this may be necessary
    are Information Technology (IT), projects, reward packages for the CEO and
    other senior executives, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems.

    A major challenge for chairmen is how far to go in shaping discussions before
    the meeting. Best practice suggests that the more prepared the chairman and
    other members of the board are for the meeting, especially on contentious
    issues, the more effective the debate. However, the corporate secretary needs
    to assist the chairman in ensuring that board members are not pressured in
    any pre-discussions so that the decision is not a foregone conclusion.




13.	 Preparing any formal resolutions that need to be passed at
     the meeting.




14.	 Ensuring availability of any documents that might be referred to,
     such as accounts, memorandum and articles of association, and
     so on.




15.	 Checking that telephone numbers have been obtained and that
     the legal location of the meeting has been established (if this is an
     issue), if the meeting is to be held by telephone/video conference.



Chapter 2: Role in Preparing for Meetings
                                                                                    19
     16.	 Ensuring that there is a quorum for the meeting.




     17.	 Checking to see if any directors have potential conflicts of interest
          in the business to be considered at the meeting, discussing these
          potential conflicts of interest with the director concerned prior to
          the meeting, and then advising the chairman.
        A decision will then be taken as to whether the director should be excluded
        from the meeting and have certain papers extracted from his of her
        board pack.




     18.	 Checking that the board does not require independent
          professional advice on any agenda items.
       Best practice provides that directors are entitled to independent professional
       advice. The corporate secretary should ensure that there is a policy in place
       for how directors obtain independent professional advice. This typically
       states that the corporate secretary would be the person responsible for
       arranging for the independent professional advice to be obtained following a
       request from an individual director or the board as a whole.




     19.	 Organizing payment of allowances for directors to attend the
          meeting.




     20.	Checking 30 minutes before the meeting to see that the projector
         and laptop (if they are to be used) are operating properly.




20                                 The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
The Corporate Secretary and Meeting Logistics



Where should you hold the meeting?
Most companies have a boardroom. For those that don’t, the corporate
secretary should seek out a convenient place for the board to meet. Some
companies prefer to hold at least one meeting a year at an off-site location
selected by the corporate secretary. There are mixed views on the wisdom of
holding board meetings elsewhere than the boardroom. Those in favor cite the
benefits of the board visiting other company locations to learn more about the
company, what it does, and how it operates. Those against see it as a diversion
of effort, costly, and often a logistical challenge.

Many companies spend a couple of days a year on a board retreat. The
corporate secretary is responsible for arranging the venue for the retreat and for
arranging any visits that accompany the board meeting.




Is your boardroom fit for the purpose?
The corporate secretary should ensure that the boardroom promotes effective
decision making. Ideal conditions are a light, airy room with plenty of space,
neither too hot nor too cold, a large enough table, comfortable (but not too
comfortable) chairs, and projectors, screens, and other equipment in the right
place. The directors should be able to see and hear each other. Oval board
tables or horseshoe-shaped arrangements allow every director to see the other
members of the board, but they can make hearing difficult for larger boards.
The objective is for the board members to think only about is the substance of
the meeting.




Where should directors sit?
Best practice:

   •	 The chairman should sit in the center of the table to emphasize the feeling
     of a team. A chairman sitting at the top of a table suggests a hierarchy.




Chapter 2: Role in Preparing for Meetings
                                                                                     21
        •	 The chairman should also face the door to be able to see all comers and
          goers.

        •	 The corporate secretary should sit next to the chairman to provide papers
          and prompts when required.

        •	 The chief executive officer should sit next to the chairman to emphasize
          unity.

        •	 Non-executive directors’ and executive directors’ seating should be mixed up.
          Having non-executive directors on one side of the table and executives on the
          other should be avoided, as it is could reinforce the “them versus us” feeling.

        •	 Directors should be encouraged to change their seats at each meeting.
          This helps build a team and also encourages cross-fertilization of ideas.



     Confidentiality at the board
     When choosing a venue for the board meeting, the corporate secretary may
     have to consider the issue of confidentiality. The venue will have to be checked
     for soundproofing. In extreme cases, the venue may need to be checked for
     listening devices and a Faraday ring may have to be installed. A Faraday ring is
     a mechanism that blocks listening devices. However, it also blocks signals for
     mobile phones, so the corporate secretary should be aware that by turning it on
     the board may be signaling to those in the building that there is a confidential
     meeting taking place, thus starting the spread of rumors. Wherever possible a
     screen for showing presentations should not be placed opposite a window where
     it could be seen from the outside. In extreme cases a special coating can be
     applied on the windows to stop those outside from viewing what is going on inside.



     The corporate secretary and emergency meetings
     By their nature these types of meetings are usually urgent, so timing is critical. A
     corporate secretary has three mechanisms for dealing with these issues:

     Hold a board meeting by telephone or video conference.
     The corporate secretary should find out whether a company is authorized to
     hold board meetings in this way. The authority to hold these meetings is usually
     found in the company’s constitution, not in law. If the company is authorized




22                                    The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
to hold such meetings, the corporate secretary then needs to organize the call,
checking directors’ availability and distributing papers and instructions for the
meeting.

The corporate secretary may also have to check on where the meeting is deemed
to take place when it is held electronically. Again this may be dealt with in the
company’s constitution, which may say that it is where the chairman is or where
the majority of directors are. A common reason for this care is that directors
do not want to be brought under the control of countries that will assess tax
eligibility by whether “the management and control” of the company appears
to be in their jurisdiction based on the number of board meetings held in their
jurisdiction—even if the company is not incorporated there.

Hold an unscheduled board meeting.
The corporate secretary can advise the chairman to hold an unscheduled board
meeting if a matter is material to the organization and requires the whole board
to discuss it. If the matters to be discussed are confidential, then care may have
to be taken to attract the least amount of attention. This may mean holding the
meeting somewhere other than the boardroom. If another venue is chosen, then
the corporate secretary may have to consider the logistical issues mentioned
before. The corporate secretary may also decide whether to hold the meeting in
person or over the phone.

Pass resolutions in writing.
A company may be able, either by law or within its constitution, to pass
resolutions by circulating them in writing and having each director sign a
copy of the written resolution, thereby indicating his or her approval of the
resolution. Once the last director signs, the resolution can be dated and is
deemed effective.




Chapter 2: Role in Preparing for Meetings
                                                                                     23
     BOARD RETREATS
     The corporate secretary plays a role in making sure that the retreats are a
     success by planning them well. Patrick Dunne in his book, Running Board
     Meetings, provides the following tips for successful retreats:


     Tips for board Away Days
     1.	 Be clear on the purpose of the away day and your desired outcomes.

     2.	 Decide whether to use an external facilitator, and if so select one with
        experience relevant to the issues being discussed.

     3.	 The chairman or CEO should brief the facilitator about the team dynamics,
        politics, taboo subjects.

     4.	 External facilitators, if used, need to be credible with executive and non-
        executive directors; they are not there to lecture but to facilitate. They must
        be prepared to challenge the chairman and chief executive in the same
        way they are prepared to challenge other directors. They must be able to
        maintain a neutral approach but also be engaged and have a clearly defined
        process for running the day which combines an element of flexibility. Finally,
        they have to assist the chairman in generating the right atmosphere.

     5.	 Decide whether there will be non-board members present, and if so brief
        them.

     6.	 Hold the away day off-site.

     7.	 Don’t allow interruptions except in an emergency.

     8.	 Don’t start with an operational board meeting.

     9.	 Participants should be prepared to challenge each other, in particular to
        surface differences—a key to success is the quality of the debate.

     10.	No one has a monopoly on wisdom, so no one should dominate the debate.

     11.	 Responsibility for implementing actions arising should be clear.

     12.	Follow up and review the effectiveness of the day in the annual board review.

     13.	Finally, the “socializing” of the board builds a strong board, so ensure that
        there is sufficient time for this.




24                                     The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
Use of Board Portals

A board portal is a Web-based workspace that allows directors to securely access
board documents and collaborate with other board members electronically.
Board portals can allow companies to provide directors sensitive material in a
secure and timely fashion. With all of the necessary information in one central
location, portals can cut down on travel, eliminate mailing and delivery hassles,
increase communication among members, and make board materials easier
to read. But the “always on” aspect of electronic tools also makes it harder for
directors to separate their board lives from their other jobs, and the need to
navigate complex security measures can add frustration to the process.

For corporate secretaries who traditionally compile board books and other
materials, portals reduce the time it takes to gather, edit, organize, and
distribute materials.

Usually through a board portal directors can:

   •	 Access board meeting materials online.

   •	 Connect with other board members online and discuss issues securely.

   •	 Find current policy documents, news items, articles, and more.

   •	 Conduct committee work privately and securely online.

   •	 “Vote” on issues electronically and have their votes counted and recorded.

   •	 Download meeting dates and events to their own personal calendars.

   •	 Share files and post messages during conference-call meetings.




Chapter 2: Role in Preparing for Meetings
                                                                                    25
     STEPS TO ESTABLISH A BOARD PORTAL
      Corporate secretary             XX Identify   the costs and benefits—security issues, time
      lays out the plan                   and cost efficiency to justify the conversion to the
                                          electronic board portal.

                                      XX Set   a deadline for conversion to the new system to
                                          mentally prepare the users.

      Chairman announces              XX Address    concerns from directors. Concerns may
      the decision                        involve the provision of supporting technology, both
                                          hardware and software, for the new system.

      Chairman involves               XX Engage     key directors in the selection of a suitable
      directors                           Web portal provider to allow them to become more
                                          receptive to the new system.

      Corporate secretary             XX Consider    hiring knowledgeable, full time IT personnel
      identifies an IT person             to assist all users with any queries on the use of the
                                          new technology.

      Corporate secretary             XX Provide    board members with necessary equipment
      oversees provision of               such as laptops, printers, and modem.
      equipment                       XX Give   clear instructions to help new users use the
                                          technology efficiently.

      Corporate secretary             XX Send   out all information via the portal to
      communicates through                counter temptation to revert to former means of
      Web portal                          communication and to accustom users to the portal.

                                      XX Disseminate     general information, press releases, and
                                          news feeds through the portal, so users will find more
                                          value in the new system.

      Corporate secretary             XX Employ     an administrative assistant who is educated in
      identifies a computer-              and comfortable with the use and troubleshooting of
      savvy assistant                     the portal.

                                      XX Validate   the content to be published before loading
                                          it onto the portal. Some fundamental concerns may
                                          include font size and type as well as orientation and
                                          formatting of the document.

     Source: In 2012, Gina Merritt-Epps, corporate counsel and secretary of energy services holding
     company South Jersey Industries, presented governance professionals with an outline of the best way
     to establish a board portal.




26                                          The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
CHAPTER 3:
Role During a Board Meeting




One of the most recognized roles of the corporate secretary is the role played
during the board meeting. It mainly involves ensuring that there is an effective
decision-making environment, that decisions are recorded, and that they reflect
good governance.

The corporate secretary typically would be responsible for the items listed
below.




1.	 Ensuring that the proper person is in the chair.
   Failure to do so will render the meeting invalid. Usually the board will appoint
   one of its members as the chairman to chair the meeting. If this individual is
   absent, the corporate secretary should consult the company’s constitution
   to see who should be appointed to the chair. When someone other than the
   presiding chairman chairs a meeting, the corporate secretary should record
   in the minutes of the meeting the name of the individual, how he or she was
   appointed to chair the meeting, and the reason for the presiding chairman’s
   absence. Failure to do so could result in a dispute later.

   If the company’s constitution gives a casting vote to the chairman, the
   corporate secretary should ensure that a chairman is appointed. This avoids
   dispute as to who can exercise the casting vote.

   The corporate secretary should advise the chairman that the use of a casting
   vote may be divisive, because it aligns the chairman with one side of the
   debate and thus with certain members of the board. This may undermine the
   chairman’s position in the future, as he or she may have lost the confidence
   of some members of the board.




Chapter 3: Role During a Board Meeting
                                                                                      27
     2.	 Ensuring that a quorum is present and continues to be present
         throughout the meeting.
        The company’s constitution usually stipulates the number for the quorum
        for board meetings. In some countries such as Malawi, it is sufficient for
        a quorum to be present only at the beginning of the meeting. However,
        most countries require that a quorum be present throughout the meeting,
        especially when decisions are made. For this reason, a corporate secretary
        should record the names of directors present and those attending at the
        beginning of the meeting and those that arrive or depart throughout the
        meeting, even for a short period.




     Figure 3.1: 
                 Slide 18 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 4/Effective
                 Board Meetings presentation.




               During the Board Meeting


                      CS                   CS                    CS             Chairman


                                        Determines           Assists the
                   Registers                                                   Run/directs
                                         quorum            chairman during
                  attendance                                                   the meeting
                                                             the meeting




                                                               Board
                                                              members               CEO
                     CS                      CS

                 Pays fees to                                  Discuss
                    board                 Registers             Decide          Presents issues
                                          decisions
                  members



            CORPORATE SECRETARIES TOOLKIT                                                         18
            PART 2 MODULE 4 / EFFECTIVE BOARD MEETINGS




     Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




28                                              The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
   A director need not attend every meeting of the board. It is customary,
   however, for directors to send their apologies for absence, and the corporate
   secretary should note absent directors in the minutes.

   Only members of the board should attend board meetings. The practice of
   senior management also attending board meetings has become customary
   in some parts of the world, such as in Sub-Saharan Africa. The attendance
   at board meetings as a matter of course by senior management could lead,
   especially in common law countries, to allegations that members of senior
   management are shadow directors—that they are involved in the board’s
   decision making. The corporate secretary should inform the chair and
   management that this could make senior managers liable for board decisions,
   and should monitor the attendance of non-board members to ensure that
   this does not happen.

   Management and other non-board members, such as advisers, may attend
   board meetings to make specific presentations, after which they should leave
   while the decision is made.




3.	 Reminding the chairman if any of the directors has a potential
    conflict of interest.
   If a director leaves the room because of a potential conflict of interest, then the
   corporate secretary should check to be sure a quorum is still present. A good
   corporate secretary will advise the chairman to organize the agenda so that
   the item is discussed first or last, so the director can join the meeting late or
   leave early. This reduces the potential for embarrassment to the individual.




4.	Ensuring that the meeting complies with the company’s
   constitution, policies, and procedures, and with all relevant laws,
   regulations, standards, and codes of best practice.
   A corporate secretary should resist the temptation to speak directly to
   the meeting rather than through the chairman, on anything other than
   governance or procedural matters unless asked to do so by the chairman.




Chapter 3: Role During a Board Meeting
                                                                                         29
       The corporate secretary should not be part of the debate or the decision
       making unless there is a governance or procedural issue to be dealt with.




     5.	 Arranging for the entry of presenters for that part of the meeting
         they are joining.
       If the presentation is coming to the board at the instigation of management,
       then the corporate secretary should establish the purpose of the
       presentation so the chairman can be informed. If the presentation is at
       the request of the board, then the corporate secretary should inform
       management of the purpose of the presentation.

       The corporate secretary should check that PowerPoint (PPT) presentations
       are appropriate for the time allocated on the agenda. Often, overzealous
       managers try to present too many slides for the time allowed. When possible,
       copies of the presentations should be circulated to the board prior to the
       meeting, so the directors can prepare for the discussion.




     6.	 Ensuring that directors do not make defamatory statements during
         a meeting.
       Statements become defamatory when they constitute unreasonable and
       unsupportable attacks on the character or reputation of another. Corporate
       secretaries also need to be careful how these statements are recorded in the
       minutes, as slanderous statements, once they are in writing, become libelous.




     7.	 Assisting the chairman in engendering energy, purpose, and trust
         at board meetings.
       Groups of individuals that trust one another, are not afraid to engage in
       conflict, commit to decisions, and hold one another accountable are very
       likely to set aside their individual needs and agendas and focus almost
       exclusively on what is best for the group. They do not give in to the
       temptation to place their departments, career aspirations, or ego-driven




30                                  The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
Figure 3.2: 
            Slide 11 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 5/Board
            Dynamics at Meetings presentation.




         Corporate Secretary’s ABC for a Productive
         Meeting
         Techniques                              The Corporate Secretary’s Role
         A. Aim for a specific result            Help the chairman keep people focused
                                                 on the decision to be made
         B. Be positive                          Suggest using “and” instead of “but”
         C. See/hear/feel sensory data           Read the temperature and body
                                                 language of board members and advise
                                                 the chairman accordingly

         D. Dovetail desires                     Help the chairman look for common
                                                 ground and build consensus
         E. Entertain short- and long-           Help the chairman identify the quick wins
         term objectives                         and long-term gains


       CORPORATE SECRETARIES TOOLKIT                                                         11
       PART 2 MODULE 5 / BOARD DYNAMICS AT MEETINGS




Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




   status ahead of the collective results that define group success. (See
   Figure 3.2.)




8.	 Assisting the chairman in keeping to the alloted time
    during meetings.
   If during the meeting the chairman is struggling to keep to time limits, the
   corporate secretary may suggest to the chairman that items on the agenda
   be reordered, giving priority to those of strategic importance. Often in
   these cases, management or committee reports can be taken as read. If the
   chairman and corporate secretary have agreed beforehand to indicative




Chapter 3: Role During a Board Meeting
                                                                                                  31
       times for the meeting, it is easier for them to realize that the meeting is
       running over time and thus the agenda needs to be adjusted.




     9.	 Advising the chairman, if a director has not received notice of the
         meeting or of a particular agenda item that may be added to the
         agenda at the start of the meeting or any other business.
       If a director does not receive notice of a particular issue, a decision taken on
       that issue does not become automatically invalid. The director can call for a
       second meeting, within a reasonable time, to be held to further discuss the
       issue before the decision is implemented. The corporate secretary will be
       responsible for organizing and giving notice of this second meeting.

       When a director is absent for part of a meeting, either by arriving late or
       by leaving the meeting to take a call, the chairman, if there is a quorum, will
       decide whether to deal with an item of business. For an item on the agenda,
       the chairman could reopen the discussion when the director joins or returns
       to the meeting, but the chairman probably would not do so unless the
       director has new evidence that would affect the decision. If the item was not
       on the agenda and the director had not received notice, that director could
       request that the issue be reopened either at the meeting or at a second
       meeting. The corporate secretary should advise the chairman accordingly.




     10.	Voting at board meetings.
        Most boards try to come to decisions by way of consensus. Voting can
        be seen as divisive and confrontational. In many countries, however, it is
        the custom to vote on decisions, though this is usually after discussions
        on the issue and after the chairman is satisfied that the majority of the
        board members are in agreement. The chairman will call for someone to
        recommend the resolution and then for another director to second the
        recommendation, in doing so the resolution is passed and the decision taken.

        Directors usually have one vote. The chairman, if stipulated in the company’s
        constitution, may have a casting vote.




32                                  The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
FIVE STEPS TO MANAGING BOARD DYNAMICS


    1      READ THE GROUP                        Pay attention to the changes in the
                                                 group’s energy or focus. When a usually
                                                 enthusiastic group becomes silent or
                                                 everyone is suddenly leaving to go to
                                                 the bathroom, you are being given a
                                                 message!



    2      CHECK WITH YOURSELF                   Check to assess whether this is your
                                                 issue or really a group issue. It is often
                                                 easy in a group situation to project your
                                                 own issues onto those of the group.
                                                 A corporate secretary can act as a
                                                 sounding board for the chairman in
                                                 these instances.


           NAME WHAT YOU ARE                     If necessary, interrupt the discussion
    3      PERCEIVING                            and name in a descriptive, not blaming,
                                                 fashion what you are perceiving.


           CHECK YOUR                            Ask the group if your interpretation of
   4       PERCEPTION                            the behavior is accurate.


           MAKE A                                Depending on the issue at hand, either
    5      RECOMMENDATION                        you should propose a recommendation
                                                 or ask the group for a recommendation.
                                                 Try to come to a consensus as to the
                                                 way forward.




Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2/Module 5: Board Dynamics at Meetings.




Chapter 3: Role During a Board Meeting
                                                                                              33
     BEHAVIORAL PREFERENCES AT MEETINGS
     David Kolb1 has identified four different behavioral preferences.
     Bernice McCarthy2 has applied these to the workplace, specifically meetings.


     Listen and Observe
     People who like to linger in sensing/feeling and watching. Because they sense
     and feel and reflect on their experiences, they are outstanding observers
     of people, highly imaginative, at home with their feelings, believers in their
     experience, listeners par excellence, caring nurturers, and committed to making
     the world a better place.


     Analyze the Facts
     People who like to linger in watching and thinking. Because they reflect on their
     experiences, analyze them, classify them, they are outstanding conceptualizers
     of content, highly organized, at home with details, planners par excellence,
     concerned about structure, and committed to making the world more lucid.


     Strategize and Problem-Solve
     People who like to linger in thinking and doing. Because they think about theory
     and act to apply it, they are outstanding problem solvers, highly productive,
     at home with tasks and deadlines, believers in their ability to get the job done,
     operationalizers par excellence, and committed to making the world work better.


     Push for Action
     People who like to linger in doing and sensing/feeling. Because they embrace
     their experiences and act to enrich them, they are outstanding entrepreneurs,
     highly energetic, at home with ambiguity and change, risk-takers par excellence,
     concerned about growth and renewal, and committed to challenging
     boundaries.


     1
         David Kolb, Experiential Learning (Englewoods Cliff, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1984).
     2
      Bernice McCarthy, About Learning (Wauconda, IL: About Learning Inc., 1996) and Bernice and Dennis
     McCarthy, Teaching Around the 4MAT Cycle (Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press, 2005)




34                                               The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
    In the event of disagreement, usually the majority view will prevail. The
    corporate secretary may be asked to record in the minutes the names of
    those directors who dissented.




11.	 Taking notes of the proceedings, instructions given, decisions
     taken, and what information led the board to make its decisions.
    These notes will be the basis of the minutes drafted by the corporate
    secretary after the meeting.

    Some corporate secretaries, in an attempt to save time, have started to type
    notes immediately on to their laptops during the meeting. If this is done,
    care should be taken that the lid of the laptop does not become a barrier
    between the corporate secretary and the board members, preventing the
    corporate secretary from sensing the mood of the meeting and thus helping
    the chairman achieve effective decision making.




12.	 Using emotional intelligence.
    As mentioned in Chapter 1, the corporate secretary is required to use
    emotional intelligence skills.

    A good corporate secretary should assess the likes and dislikes of the
    directors and should adjust board processes and procedures to ensure
    that the board dynamics lends itself to an effective meeting. A corporate
    secretary can also work with the chairman to encourage directors to
    stretch themselves in their least-developed areas, to become better-
    rounded individuals and more effective members of boards. The behavioral
    preferences outlined in the box on page 34 can assist the corporate
    secretary and chairman with this task.

    Someone’s perception of a board’s governance is influenced not only by
    his or her personality but also by the seat that person holds on the board:
    chairman, CEO, independent director, and so on. It is therefore important for
    a corporate secretary to try to look at board governance through the eyes of
    each of these positions and to provide advice and assistance specific to each.




Chapter 3: Role During a Board Meeting
                                                                                     35
        For example, the combination of governance regulations and rising
        expectations of shareholders, the media, and other stakeholders is making
        the position of independent director much more important and difficult
        to carry out. Independent directors need to be kept more informed about
        the company, and corporate secretaries can help with this. Corporate
        secretaries should keep their “ears to the ground” and ensure that the
        board is kept appropriately informed. In doing so, corporate secretaries
        must use their judgment as to what information should be given to the
        board at what time. Discussions should be held with management on
        this issue, and corporate secretaries will need to use all their powers
        of diplomacy to ensure that the right information is acquired without
        alienating management.

        In addition to providing information, the corporate secretary should also
        work with the board, especially the independent directors, to ensure that
        there is good chemistry between them and that they feel able to contribute
        effectively to the board. This will entail working with the chairman and
        potentially the CEO to ensure that there is plenty of opportunity for
        networking between the board members and also between the board and
        senior management.

        The corporate secretary should know the board’s history, external forces
        at play, membership within the group, hidden agendas, and so on.
        Understanding these dynamics can help a corporate secretary advise the
        chairman on dealing with influences that shape board discussions. (See
        Table 3.1.)




     13.	 Cultivating a sense of belonging on the board.
        A sense of belonging affects dynamics on the board. The corporate
        secretary can develop a sense of belonging by performing items 14–16,
        below.




     14.	 Organizing an induction program for the new board member.




36                                 The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
Table 3.1: Preferred Behaviors and Board Member Participation at Board Meetings



 TYPE            PAINFUL MEETINGS                          SUCCESSFUL MEETINGS
 Observe         1)	   The chairman is insensitive to      1)	 Connections are made
                       feelings                            2)	 Honesty is encouraged
                 2)	   There is a lack of trust among      3)	 Interests are elicited
                       the group                           4)	 Time is allowed for discussion
                 3)	   There are unresolved conflicts          about feelings
                 4)	   Consideration is not given to       5)	 The chairman provides for
                       people who will be affected by          building consensus
                       the group’s decision
                 5)	   The meeting has no personal
                       relevance

 Analyze         1)	 There is no agenda                    1)	   Issues and tasks are clearly
                 2)	 The chairman does not                       defined
                     understand the total picture          2)	   Information is based on facts
                 3)	 There is no time for                  3)	   There is adequate notice for
                     preparation                                 preparation
                 4)	 There is insufficient time spent      4)	   Pros and cons are weighed
                     defining the problem                  5)	   The group stays on task
                 5)	 No clarity is achieved as the         6)	   There is an objective
                     meeting progresses                          perspective
                 6)	 There is insufficient information
                     for problem solving

 Problem-        1)	   There is a lack of focus, forays    1)	   There is a productive problem-
 Solve                 into side issues                          solving climate
                 2)	   Emotions are vented                 2)	   Common sense is elicited
                 3)	   Personalities are dealt with,       3)	   Ideas are used
                       not issues                          4)	   Decisions are aligned with the
                 4)	   There is inattention to practical         realities of existing structures
                       realities                                 and resources
                 5)	   The chairman does not move          5)	   Closure is achieved
                       to closure


 Act             1)	   There is rigid adherence to the     1)	 There is a flexible agenda
                       agenda and/or timetable             2)	 The participants look beyond
                 2)	   People are tentative and                stated objectives
                       cautious                            3)	 Energy is generated
                 3)	   Strong, spirited interactions       4)	 Actions are based on intuition
                       are not welcome                     5)	 Talk of possible creative action
                 4)	   There are long monologues               is encouraged
                 5)	   There is only pretense at
                       discussion, because in reality,
                       decisions have already been
                       made


SOURCE: Bernice McCarthy, About Learning, About Learning, Inc., (1996).




Chapter 3: Role During a Board Meeting
                                                                                                    37
     15.	 Encouraging recognition (beyond their fees) of board members’
          contributions and the value of the board to the organization.




     16.	 Overseeing a transparent process for refreshing the board.
        Board members should know what their tenure is and what they have to do
        to continue into a second term if they so desire.

        The corporate secretary should know whether directors are on the board
        voluntarily or as a result of some mandatory requirement and, if needed,
        provide training for directors who may not have the necessary skills and
        experience. This is sometimes the case with political appointees.

        Longevity on the board may also affect behavior: a director who has been
        on the board for a long time may be less likely to challenge management.

        The role of the chairman of the meeting should be clear to board members:
        the chairman establishes group norms and facilitates debate and decision
        making but does not dominate meetings.

        When considering board dynamics, the corporate secretary should be
        aware of his or her own role in the effective functioning of the board “team”
        and make sure not to impose his or her behavioral preference on the board.
        For example, if the board asks for more information, an “analytic” corporate
        secretary is likely to react by providing more facts and data for board
        members to read. The reality may be that the board members (especially
        if they are “dynamics”) are looking for fewer pages of facts—and data
        presented in a more concise way, such as an executive summary.




38                                  The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
CHAPTER 4:
Role After a Board Meeting




“As the great ones depart, and are eating their dinner,
 the secretary sits, getting thinner and thinner, racking
 his brains as he tries to report what he thinks that
 they think that they ought to have thought.”

                                                             —Anonymous
Once a board meeting has been concluded, the corporate secretary’s role is
not finished. The corporate secretary typically would be responsible for the
tasks listed below.




1.	 Removing any confidential material from the boardroom.
   Once the meeting has concluded, the corporate secretary should remove any
   confidential material from the boardroom. This includes any pads or scrap
   paper the board members may have used. This is especially important if the
   board has been discussing confidential matters.




2.	 Communicating board decisions.
   Best practice is for a corporate secretary to communicate board decisions
   and to have a process for doing so. This avoids miscommunication and helps
   when regulators require communication of decisions in a certain order— for
   example, when a listed company is required to notify the stock exchange
   first or in a certain way, such as through a workers council. The corporate
   secretary should therefore have a process in place for the following:



Chapter 4: Role After a Board Meeting
                                                                                 39
          •	 Notifying regulators of any decisions that require notification, usually
            to be done immediately after the meeting concludes. The corporate
            secretary should inform board members and management when these
            notifications are required, so the decisions are kept confidential until
            the notification has occurred. This can be difficult, especially if staff are
            involved and consultations with them are also required. The corporate
            secretary should coordinate with management to ensure that all of
            these disclosures are completed in the most appropriate manner.

          •	 Notifying the management team of any decisions affecting them or on
            which they need to take action.




     3.	 Updating the annual calendar.
       Note in the annual calendar any items deferred or requested for future meetings.




     4.	Drafting minutes.
       Prepare and circulate draft minutes, then issue the final approved minutes
       (see below for more information on minute taking).




     5.	 Following up on actions.
       Between meetings the corporate secretary should follow up with
       management and ensure that the board’s decisions are converted into
       action. The corporate secretary does this through creating an action log and
       reviewing it with management periodically between meetings to ensure that
       actions are being implemented. (See Figures 4.1 and 4.2.)




     6.	 Organizing independent professional advice, if requested by the
         board or individual directors.




40                                   The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
Figure 4.1: Sample Action Log




NO. MIN.       ACTION                         RESPONSIBLE           TIMING COMMENTS
 1.     3      Updating applicable            Corporate
               statutory registers            Secretary
               and filing appropriate
               documents with
               the Register of
               Companies


 2.     4      Signing of balance             Director
               sheet and Directors’
                                              Corporate
               Report
                                              Secretary


 3.     4      Distributing financial         Corporate
               statements in                  Secretary
               accordance with
               applicable legislation
               and the company’s
               constitution


 4.     5      Including Final                Corporate
               Dividend proposal in           Secretary
               Notice of the Annual
               General Meeting
               (AGM)


 5.     6      Issuing Notice of              Corporate
               AGM and proxy card             Secretary


 6.     6      Making all necessary           Corporate
               arrangement for the            Secretary
               AGM




Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2/Module 4: Effective Meetings.




Chapter 4: Role After a Board Meeting
                                                                                      41
     Figure 4.2: S
                  lide 25 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 4/Effective Board
                 Meetings presentation.




              Role of the Corporate Secretary After a
              Board Meeting
              !  Notify management and relevant personnel of decisions made at
                   the meeting that affect them
              !    Comply with any filings required by regulators resulting from
                   decisions made at the meeting
              !    Update the annual board calendar with any items (deferred or
                   new)
              !    Prepare draft minutes of the meeting
              !    File a copy of the agenda and supporting papers in the company
                   archives
              !    Enter any minutes approved and signed in the minute book
              !    Prepare action log of decisions and action points from the
                   meeting


                                                                                            25



     Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




     The Corporate Secretary’s Role in Minute Taking



     Protecting the Minutes
     Minutes are evidence of the proceedings of the meeting. The corporate
     secretary should take care that they are not tampered with or falsified. One of
     the mechanisms for doing this is to glue the minutes into a book. Minutes should
     also be sequentially numbered, either through including the minute number and
     the date of the meeting or through including the minute number and the year of
     the meeting.




42                                           The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
Content of the Minutes
A common dilemma is what should go into the minutes. In the United States,
it appears that as little as possible is included, to give less for lawyers to pick
over if a lawsuit arises. In the common law countries, the current best practice
is for the minutes to record not just the decision but how the board came to
the decision.

In many civil law countries, there are specific legal requirements for the
contents of board minutes. Usually companies include in minutes obligatory
items and nothing more. At the same time, best practices provide additional
recommendations for board-meetings recording. For example, the Russian Code
of Corporate Conduct declares that every director should be provided with full
information about the meeting. Board secretaries, therefore, are required to
keep a verbatim report of the meeting together with the formal minutes.

Minutes can therefore be drafted as a verbatim (word for word) record of
the meeting or a summary of the proceedings or as a list of action points. A
summary of the proceedings at a meeting is more common in commonwealth
countries. A corporate secretary needs to be aware of the practices in the
company as well as in the country where he or she is taking the minutes.

The corporate secretary must honor the request of a director to specifically
record in the minutes what he or she said. A record may also need to be
made of dissenting directors on particular issues and also of where a director
discloses that he or she has an interest in a particular item on the agenda.




Drafting the Minutes
The corporate secretary circulates the first draft of the minutes to management
for comments. The corporate secretary incorporates these comments in a
second draft to the directors for comment. This should be done no more than
two weeks after the meeting, while the discussions are still fresh in everyone’s
mind. Some companies have a policy that this is done within 48 hours of the
meeting. The corporate secretary then produces the final draft, which will be
presented for approval at the next board meeting. Minutes of meetings are not
final until they have been approved and signed off on, usually at the next board
meeting, by the chairman. Copies of the minutes would normally be circulated
to the board in the board pack, prior to the meeting.




Chapter 4: Role After a Board Meeting
                                                                                      43
     Management may request extracts of the minutes to enable them to implement
     decisions immediately after the board meeting. Extracts of the draft minutes
     can be circulated for this purpose. They should be marked as drafts and signed
     by the chairman and corporate secretary.



     Disagreements on the Content
     On contentious issues, the corporate secretary should exercise care to be sure
     that the directors involved have submitted their comments before draft extracts
     are issued, just in case there is a disagreement as to what the minutes should say.
     The corporate secretary should advise the chairman in situations of disagreement.
     In some circumstances, it may be necessary to reconsider the issue at the next
     meeting or call an emergency meeting to come to a consensus on an issue where
     there has been a misunderstanding.



     Recording Decisions
     Minutes should reflect how the decisions were taken at the meeting. One way
     of doing this is to include by reference the papers and presentations used/
     referred to at the meeting and to keep a copy of the paper/presentation with
     the minutes.

     To avoid misunderstandings, especially on boards where there are directors with
     different mother tongues, the corporate secretary may advise the chairman
     to repeat back to the board decisions that have been made, before they have
     been recorded in the minutes, so the chairman is confident that everyone is
     in agreement.




     Writing and Storing the Minutes
     Minutes should be:

        •	 Written in the past tense, as they are recording something that has passed.

        •	 Written in the conditional tense (would, should, could), as this creates
          flexibility for the decision to be changed if the conditions change. If the
          change is material, then it will have to be brought back to the board for
          another decision. If conditional tense is not used, then the decision in
          theory has to be implemented no matter what.




44                                    The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
TIPS FOR MINUTES WRITING

Before the         XX Many   chairmen appear difficult to approach. You should
meeting                take steps to develop a relationship with the chairman.
                       Relationships will take time to develop and can be made
                       easier if you can show the chairman that you understand
                       the challenges that he or she faces and aim to be
                       supportive.
                   XX If you lack knowledge about meeting topics, prepare as
                       much as possible prior to the meeting. Read background
                       materials and the previous minutes. If necessary, carry
                       out additional research. Talk to the chairman and the
                       meeting participants to increase your knowledge and
                       understanding of the topics.
                   XX If you suffer from the perception that “anyone” can do
                       minutes, be professional and politely assertive in making
                       your case that minute taking is a skill to be developed.
                       Take the initiative to get training or mentoring to help you
                       develop your minute-taking skills.

During the         XX Don’t  be afraid to interrupt in the meeting if you have not
meeting                been able to hear something or if you think a decision is
                       unclear or has not actually been made. Politely ask the
                       chairman, “For the minutes can I just clarify…?”
                   XX Make   notes of the decisions made and summarize how
                       the board came to those decisions. This means that you
                       don’t have to write everything down, just the key points.
                       To achieve this, listen more and write less.

After the          XX Composing    minutes is a skill and takes practice. Before
meeting                drafting the minutes you should do the following:
                       —— Look   at previous minutes for the meeting you have
                           been asked to attend and see how they have been
                           structured and written. Develop a list of useful words
                           and phrases for reference.
                       —— Not  worry about what people think. Do your best, and
                           ask your colleagues for advice on the parts of minutes
                           they are more knowledgeable about.




Chapter 4: Role After a Board Meeting
                                                                                      45
        •	 Formal documents that provide evidence of what occurred at the meeting.
          If a decision is to be implemented by a particular individual, that person
          should be named. If the decision is to be implemented by a particular job
          holder, then the job title should be used. This is to circumvent the situation
          where an individual no longer holds the position.

     Minutes should not be written in company jargon or be full of acronyms which
     may make them difficult to understand in the future. The corporate secretary
     should spell out all words or explain jargon so that it is understandable to all
     that read them. This is particularly important when new directors join the board.

     If passwords are used to keep projects secret, the corporate secretary needs to
     keep a record of what these passwords represent. Again, this helps in the future
     if the board minutes are read by individuals who were not part of the original
     discussions.

     Previous minutes need to be archived along with a copy of the board pack and
     any papers or presentations circulated at the meeting. The materials are usually
     kept in a sealed envelope so that they do not get canabalized over time.

     Minutes should be kept in minute books that are stored in a secure place such
     as a bombproof and fireproof cabinet or safe. Separate minute books should be
     kept for board minutes and shareholder minutes. Shareholders are only able to
     inspect minutes of their meetings, not board minutes, without a court order.

     Corporate secretaries should have a process in place to destroy any notes of the
     meeting as soon as minutes have been approved. This is to make sure that they
     cannot be used as an alternative record of the meeting. These notes are usually
     fuller and have not been “sanitized.”

     Where minutes are also kept in an electronic format, the corporate secretary
     should assess the sensitivity of the information contained within them. If it
     is very sensitive, provision for the minutes and board papers to be kept on a
     server solely used for this purpose with restricted access may be necessary.

     Minutes should be approved at the next board meeting and signed by the
     chairman and secretary to the meeting. The corporate secretary should ensure
     that this happens.




46                                   The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
CHAPTER 5:
Role in the Delegation of Authority




If an organization consists of more than one person, then it is necessary for
authority to be allocated and delegated to individuals within the organization.
Best practice requires that the allocation and delegation of authority be
documented. Corporate secretaries usually would play an important role in
documenting delegation within an organization. (See Figure 5.1.)

The role of the corporate secretary in the delegation of authority to the board
and individuals typically would include the responsibilities listed below.




1.	 Ensuring that, through the company’s constitution, articles
    of association, or bylaws, authority is delegated from the
    shareholders to the board.
   As all power in an organization rests with the shareholders and requires
   delegation, the corporate secretary should ensure that (through the
   company’s constitution, articles of association, or bylaws) authority is
   devolved from the shareholders to the board of directors, and in some
   cases to the managing director (CEO). In some companies, shareholder
   agreements may also devolve power to the board or to individual directors.




2.	 Advising the board on the delegative authority from the
    shareholders and ensuring that the board operates within it.
   The corporate secretary should also advise the board on the delegative
   authority from the shareholders and ensure that the board operates within
   it. Where the board requires additional authority, the corporate secretary
   should ensure that shareholder approval is obtained by making changes to




Chapter 5: Role in the Delegation of Authority
                                                                                  47
     Figure 5.1: 
                 Slide 6 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 1/Delegation
                 presentation.




              Delegation of Authority

                                                           Shareholders
                                                               Constitution
                                                   Resolutions at shareholder meetings
                                                        Shareholder Agreement
                                                                  Others



                                                                Board
                                                          Governance manual
                                                              Code of ethics
                                                         Policies and procedures




                                                                                   Individuals
                                                                                    Directors
                                                                                 Management
                            Board Committees                                  Power to sub-delegate
                              Terms of reference


                                                                             Into the Organization
                                                                         Through policies and procedures




            CORPORATE SECRETARIES TOOLKIT                                                                  6
            PART 2 MODULE 1 / DELEGATION




     Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




        the articles and/or drafting and proposing for approval resolutions to the
        shareholders—usually in general meetings.




     3.	 Ensuring that the board members realize they are acting as a
         “collective.”
        Authority delegated to the board by shareholders is delegated to the
        board as a collective not to individual members of the board, unless those
        individuals are specifically mentioned in the constitution. The corporate
        secretary should ensure that the board members understand this concept. It
        means that even where members of the board do not agree with a particular
        proposal, if the proposal is approved they are bound by it.




48                                                   The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
4.	Advising the board on delegating authority and documenting such
   delegation.
   The board should decide what authority it wants to sub-delegate and to
   whom, for example, its members, committees, or other individuals within the
   organization. The corporate secretary can assist the board in deciding on this
   sub-delegation.




5.	 Advising the board on separating the roles of chairman and chief
    executive officer.
   The corporate secretary should document those powers that have been
   reserved to the board and those that have been sub-delegated to management,
   usually in a governance manual or board charter. Where authority may be
   delegated further into the organization, the corporate secretary should ensure
   that the power to sub-delegate is also given as appropriate.




6.	 Advising the chief executive officer on delegating his or her authority.
   When advising on which powers should be delegated and which should be
   reserved, the corporate secretary should take into account the following:

   •	 All major decisions that should be kept with the governing body, especially
     those that relate to the determination of the future of the organization and
     that protect its assets and reputation.

   •	 Any duties and responsibilities of directors as set out in laws, regulations,
     standards, and codes, many of which result in personal liability. The
     corporate secretary should ensure that the directors are aware of
     this liability.

   •	 Any accountability to shareowners and other stakeholders.

   •	 The responsibility of the governing body for determining the organization’s
     values and ethical position.




Chapter 5: Role in the Delegation of Authority
                                                                                      49
     Figure 5.2: 
                 Slide 21 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 1/Delegation
                 presentation.




              Skills for Delegation
                      What you should do                    How you should do it
              Listen actively                         Show genuine interest
              Use open questions                      Encourage speakers to share
              Clarify reasons                         Confirm goals and objectives
              Be aware of body language               Be friendly and open
              Speak on behalf of yourself             Use “I” statements
              Focus on constructive ideas             Ask for practical suggestions
              Stay calm                               Respect different views; reschedule
                                                      discussions
              Avoid misunderstanding                  Paraphrase ideas or statements
              Allow others to save face               Help reformulate statements



            CORPORATE SECRETARIES TOOLKIT                                                   21
            PART 2 MODULE 1 / DELEGATION




     Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




     7.	 Advising the board on the appointment of authorized
         representatives and drafting of powers of attorney.
        If the delegation is not included in the company’s articles, the corporate
        secretary should advise the board on whether it is appropriate to follow best
        practice and separate the roles of chairman and chief executive officer (or
        managing director). Whether this separation is appropriate will depend on
        the size of the company and whether it is listed or not. If the roles are to be
        separated, the corporate secretary should develop terms of reference for
        each position. 	




50                                           The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
8.	 Ensuring that appropriate policies and procedures for the
    organization are in place.
   Where day-to-day authority has been delegated to a chief executive
   officer (or managing director), he or she may then pass on some of the
   authority to members of the management team. The corporate secretary is
   sometimes asked to help the chief executive officer in this sub-delegation to
   management, which is usually documented in an operations manual.




9.	 Appointing authorized representatives.
   The board, in addition to the above delegations, can from time to time
   appoint authorized representatives to sign or carry out certain activities.
   The corporate secretary usually would advise the board on the necessity of
   this action and develops any resolutions or powers of attorney to give effect
   to these delegations. These types of delegations are usually for specific
   activities and have a specific time period of up to a year. In some countries
   the corporate secretary will be required to have the authorization/power of
   attorney notarized/legalized or an apostille affixed.




10.	Notifying the board that its involvement is required for
    development of policies and procedures.
   An organization must develop policies and procedures to provide high-level
   guidance for behavior and operations within the organization. The corporate
   secretary should advise the board as to which policies and procedures in the
   organization require board involvement.




Chapter 5: Role in the Delegation of Authority
                                                                                   51
     DECISION TREE
     The decision tree is a useful method of delegation. Think of your company and
     your board as a green and growing tree that bears fruit. To ensure its ongoing
     health, countless decisions are made daily, weekly, monthly.

     The goal of the decision tree is to identify clearly which categories decisions
     and actions fall into, so board members and management know exactly where
     they have the authority to make decisions and take action.

     There are four categories of decisions:


     1. Leaf Decisions:
     Make the decision. Act on it. Do not report the action you took.

              Management makes a decision on daily operations that does
     Example: 
                 not require reporting.


     2. Branch Decisions:
     Make the decision. Act on it. Report the action you took.

              Management makes a decision and reports it to the board or a board
     Example: 
                 committee.


     3. Trunk Decisions:
     Make the decision. Report your decision before taking any action.

     Example: A committee’s recommendation to the board.


     4. Root Decisions:
     Make the decision jointly, with input from other people. These are the major
     decisions that only the board has the authority to make.

              A board reaches consensus and approves a committee’s
     Example: 
                 recommendation.

     Adapted from: Jeanne Wirth, Rivers Quest Consulting.




52                                         The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
Delegation to Committees


In addition to delegation to individuals, the board may want to delegate to a
committee. The corporate secretary typically would be involved in the actions
described below.




1.	 Advising the board as to which committees should be constituted.
   The corporate secretary would usually be involved in advising the board
   regarding which committees should be constituted. The corporate secretary
   should check to find out what committees may be mandated in the
   organization by law, regulation, standard, or code. Where committees are not
   mandated, the corporate secretary should advise the board when delegating
   to a committee is appropriate.




2.	 Checking to learn whether the board has the power to delegate
    to committees.
   The corporate secretary should check that the board has the power to
   delegate to committees before advising the board, as the articles may also
   stipulate who can sit on a committee. The corporate secretary should play a
   vital role in developing the terms of reference and scope of responsibility for
   committees and for advising the chairman on what should and should not be
   delegated.




3.	 Acting as secretary to the committees.
   Best practice advises that the corporate secretary should also be the
   secretary of any board committees. This ensures that good corporate
   governance practices are maintained at the committee level.




Chapter 5: Role in the Delegation of Authority
                                                                                     53
     4.	Ensuring strong communication and the smooth flow of
        information between the committee and the board.
       The corporate secretary has an important role in ensuring that there is
       strong communication and smooth information flow between the committee
       and the board. If a function head or member of management acts as the
       secretary of the committee, that person often can be conflicted and find it
       difficult to carry out both roles at a meeting. When the corporate secretary
       serves as secretary to the committee, he or she can co-ordinate between the
       committee and the function head and assist with any conflicts that may arise
       between the two.




     5.	 Ensuring that the performance of the committees is evaluated
         annually.
       Best practice states that board committees should be evaluated annually.
       Please see Chapter 8.




     6.	 Advising on training opportunities for the committees.




     7.	 Obtain independent professional advice for the committee or its
         members, as appropriate.




     Delegation for Non-Corporations


     Organizations such as family businesses, not-for-profit organizations, and
     organizations in other sectors also need to allocate and delegate authority from
     the person(s) or organizations that set them up. If these organizations have




54                                  The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
access to the services of a corporate secretary to ensure that good governance
practices are adopted, the corporate secretary should assist as appropriate in
the ways listed below.




1.	 Ensuring that once the organization gets the right people for the
    jobs that have been identified, they understand their roles.
   These people are given a list of key responsibilities, so they know what they
   should be doing and what they are going to be held accountable for. This is
   very important in family businesses, where disputes can arise between family
   members over who should have done what.




2.	 Informing an organization and those working within it about who is
    responsible for making what decisions in the organization.
   This again can be done by making a list and agreeing who has responsibility
   for making which decisions. The corporate secretary also needs to record
   what has been decided and who has accountability for implementing the
   decisions—usually by reporting on progress in achieving the implementation
   of the decisions.



Whatever the size of the organization, it is important for those running it to
recognize that “fit for size” structures, policies, and procedures will need to be
put in place for the organization to succeed. These will differ from organization
to organization. (See Table 5.1.)




Chapter 5: Role in the Delegation of Authority
                                                                                     55
     Table 5.1: Elements of a Board Charter



      Defining              Key board             Improving board      Board
      governance roles      functions             processes            effectiveness

      Board                 The board and         Board meetings       Director
      composition           strategy                                   protection


      Role of the board     The board and         Board meeting        Board evaluation
                            the CEO               agenda


      Role of individual    Monitoring            Board papers         Director
      directors                                                        remuneration


      Role of the           Risk management       Board calendar       Director selection
      chairman


      Role of the           Compliance            Committees           Director induction
      company
      secretary


      Role of the CEO       Policy framework                           Director
                                                                       development


                            Networking


                            Stakeholder
                            communication


                            Decision making




56                                     The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
CHAPTER 6:
Role in Board Composition and
Succession Planning



Board Composition


The corporate secretary should advise the chairman on the size and
composition of the board, the tenure of board directors, and board directors
selection and appointment. Policies on all of these should be developed by the
corporate secretary and approved by the board. These policies should be part
of a governance manual.

Most corporate governance codes provide that companies have a balanced
board, though definitions of a balanced board may vary. It is therefore
important for the corporate secretary to know what constitutes a balanced
board in the organization’s jurisdiction.

The corporate secretary typically would be responsible for the tasks listed below.




1.	 Advising the board on the requirements for a balanced board.
   Generally speaking, a balanced board should contain an appropriate mix of:

      •	 Members from the executive management team;

      •	 Members who are linked in some way to the organization but are
        not employed within it, non-executive members, such as shareholder
        representatives;

      •	 Independent members—those who have no link to the organization and
        meet best-practice guidelines for independence; and

      •	 Members who have the skills, experience, and attributes required by the
        organization to meet its strategic goals.




Chapter 6: 
           Role in Board Composition and Succession Planning
                                                                                     57
     2.	 Ensuring that the requirements for independence are met and
         maintained.
       The corporate secretary should ensure that independent non-executive
       directors have the following characteristics:

          •	 Independence of character and judgment;

          •	 Not involved in the day-to-day management of the organization;

          •	 Receive no benefits other than fees and approved expenses;

          •	 Undertake no advisory work unless approved by the board in advance;

          •	 Constructively challenge and contribute to board discussions; and

          •	 Demand accurate financial information and robust internal risk
            management.




     3.	 Advising on the most effective board size for the organization.
       Each organization has its own ideal board size, and the corporate secretary
       should assist the chairman in deciding what size is the best for their
       organization. In doing so, the corporate secretary should choose a board size
       that will enable the board to:

          •	 Hold productive, constructive discussions;

          •	 Make prompt, rational decisions;

          •	 Efficiently organize the work of its committees, if these are
            established; and

          •	 Ensure that the organization operates effectively.




58                                  The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
4.	Advising on directors’ tenure.
   The corporate secretary should be aware of the requirements for term limits
   in the organization’s jurisdiction. Requirements may differ depending on the
   type of organization.

   In addition to term limits, most countries require directors to seek reelection
   by shareholders periodically. This process is often referred to as rotation
   of directors. A corporate secretary should keep a record of who has been
   reelected when and when their next reelection is due. Reelection of directors
   usually takes place at a company’s annual general meeting.

   The corporate secretary will usually be responsible for organizing all of
   the regulatory filings and announcements related to the departure of a
   board director.

   The corporate secretary will also have to advise the board on whether it can
   appoint a replacement director or will require shareholder approval for the
   appointment. This would usually be done at the next board meeting unless
   the resignation threatens the quorum. Following the departure, if the board
   is unable to meet the quorum requirements, the corporate secretary should
   advise the board that a shareholders meeting will need to be called and
   additional directors appointed.




Succession Planning


Corporate governance best practice states that there should be a progressive
refreshing of the board and an organized succession plan, as finding new
directors can take time.

Planning for succession in advance, especially for the chairman and CEO, helps
the company avoid disruptions to decision making or to changes in policies or
strategic direction. The corporate secretary is usually the person who drafts
the succession policy for approval by the board and the succession plan. (See
Figure 6.1 on page 60.)




Chapter 6: 
           Role in Board Composition and Succession Planning
                                                                                     59
     Figure 6.1: 
                 Slide 22 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 2/Board
                 Composition and Succession Planning presentation.




              Succession Planning

                 The corporate secretary’s role in succession planning:
                 !   Develop a succession plan for submission to the board
                 !   Stagger succession to ensure that institutional memory and
                     knowledge are maintained
                  !  Review and keep up to date the board composition matrix and
                     director succession timetable




                                                                                           22



     Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




     The corporate secretary’s role in succession planning typically would include the
     actions listed below.




     1.	 Identifying board capability gaps and creating a board
         composition matrix.
        The corporate secretary should create a “skills and experience matrix” for
        the board, setting out on one axis which director is to retire when, and on
        the other axis the skills and experience required for the board. The corporate
        secretary then plots where and when gaps are likely to occur and can advise
        the chairman of them.




60                                           The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
BOARD COMPOSITION MATRIX


                              SKILLS AND EXPERIENCE REQUIRED OF THE BOARD

 DIRECTORS            SKILL A      SKILL B      SKILL C       SKILL D      SKILL E      SKILL F



 MR. Z
                         •                                       •
 MRS. Y
                         •            •
 MRS. X
                                                   •             •
 MR. W
                                                                 •                           •
In this matrix, the corporate secretary should advise the board to look for a
director with Skill E and possibly skills B, C, and F, but not D, because the board
has several directors with that skill.

Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2/Module 2: Board Composition and Succession
Planning. 2013.




   Areas that could be included in a “skills and experience matrix” are as follows:

         •	 Financial expertise

         •	 Relevant industry experience

         •	 Legal expertise

         •	 Capacity to represent key stakeholders

         •	 Experience operating internationally

         •	 Honesty and integrity

         •	 Diversity (including gender, age, and so on)




Chapter 6: 
           Role in Board Composition and Succession Planning
                                                                                                  61
     2.	 Developing director specifications.
       The corporate secretary should draw up director specifications based on the
       skills, experience, and personal attributes needed to fill any current or future
       gaps. The skills and experience needed for board members should be in
       alignment with the company’s strategic goals.




     3.	 Developing a search plan.
       The corporate secretary should, in coordination with the chairman, develop a
       search plan and lead the search process. This may involve the use of search
       consultants and agreement on which non-executive directors will compose the
       interview panel. Some countries require that the position be advertized. If so, the
       corporate secretary will arrange advertisements in appropriate newspapers.




     4.	Agreeing on the terms and conditions for the director.
       The corporate secretary should help the board (or the remuneration
       committee, if one exists) design a remuneration package that is compatible
       with the company’s financial status and is likely to attract the right kind of
       candidates. The corporate secretary should be mindful of the reactions of
       stakeholders, including shareholders, to the package being offered, especially
       if the board member is to be part of the management team, such as the CEO.




     5.	 Getting to know the candidates.
       The corporate secretary should arrange for the chairman and a group of non-
       executive directors to interview candidates.

       This is especially important when the board member is also to be part of the
       management team. The Enron scandal evolved partly because the board
       did not know the incoming CEO. Boards should consider having potential




62                                   The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
   CEOs give presentations to allow the board to learn more about candidates’
   business plans and how they are perceived within the organization.




6.	 Selecting the best qualified candidate.
   The corporate secretary should ensure that a transparent process is followed
   to select the best candidates for the vacant positions on the board. Typically
   the corporate secretary would be involved in circulating CVs and any other
   information on the shortlisted individuals, with the feedback from the interview
   panel. There should be a clear recommendation of the selected candidate,
   including why. This should be presented to the full board for approval.




7.	 Recommending the candidate for election at the general meeting.
   In most countries, shareholders have the right to elect and remove board
   members. The corporate secretary should be aware of the rules in the
   organization’s jurisdiction. If shareholder approval is required, the corporate
   secretary should ensure that the board respects this right, and that all
   aspects of the nomination and election process are transparent.




8.	 Ensuring age limits for directors.
   Contention abounds in many counties about age limits for directors. In the
   U.S. S&P 500, the average retirement age is between 70 and 72. Best practice
   would be to ensure that you have the best person for the job, regardless of
   age. The corporate secretary should be aware of any requirements relating to
   the age of members of the board for the organization and ensure that they
   are respected.




Chapter 6: 
           Role in Board Composition and Succession Planning
                                                                                      63
     Appointment of Directors


     Following the appointment of the director, the corporate secretary typically
     would be responsible for the tasks listed below.




     1.	 initiating regulatory filings and announcements.




     2.	 Drafting and issuing appointment letters for independent directors.
       When corporate secretaries draft letters of appointment, it is important for
       them to set out, as a minimum, the following (see also Figure 6.2 on page
       66):

           •	 The term of the appointment (For example, a term of three years,
              renewable for an additional term of three years).

           •	 The amount of time the director should expect to commit to board
              duties. For four board meetings a year, it may be in the neighborhood of
              20 days, if you include, for example, the meeting days, preparation for
              meetings, training, board evaluation, and strategy retreats.

           •	 The duties the director will be expected to perform, including any
              committees to which the director will be appointed.

           •	 Remuneration and expenses.

           •	 Independence and outside interests.

           •	 Review process.

           •	 Process for obtaining independent professional advice.




     3.	 Reviewing service contracts for executive directors.
       Corporate secretaries can sometimes be involved in reviewing drafts of
       service contracts for executive directors to ensure that they comply with
       prevailing stakeholder concerns and corporate governance best practices.




64                                   The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
TIPS FOR DIRECTORS INDUCTION,
DESIGN, AND DELIVERY

ENGAGE         Engage with the new director before designing the induction
               program, as each program should be designed with the needs of
               the individual director in mind.

AVOID          Avoid overloading the director with new information by
               phasing the timing of delivery.

AGREE          Agree on the schedule for the induction program with
               the director.

VARY           Vary the delivery of the information—reading materials,
               meetings, presentations, site visits, and training courses.

ARRANGE        Arrange meetings with management, advisers, shareholders,
               and other relevant stakeholders over a reasonable period
               of time.

CONSIDER Consider pairing the director with one of the current directors
               on the board to assist with assimilation of information.

DOUBLE-        Keep double-checking with the director in case any further
CHECK          induction is required.




4.	Securing directors and officers (D&O) insurance.




5.	 Organizing directors indemnities.
   Directors indemnities are permitted in some countries. The corporate
   secretary is often responsible for issuing them and, if they are claimed
   against, dealing with claims.




Chapter 6: 
           Role in Board Composition and Succession Planning
                                                                               65
     6.	 Facilitating director induction.
         All directors should receive induction on joining a board and should be made
         aware of future training opportunities to update and refresh their skills and
         knowledge. The corporate secretary usually organizes the induction of and
         any briefing materials for new directors. The corporate secretary should
         ensure that the induction is comprehensive, formal, and tailored to the needs
         of each director. The induction program is usually facilitated by the corporate
         secretary.

         Specific induction and training may be required for non-executive directors
         who serve on key committees of the board, particularly the audit committee.



     Figure 6.2: 
                 Slide 7 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 7/ Board
                 Directors presentation.




              Appointment letters for directors should
              cover the following:
              !  Roles, duties, and responsibilities
              !  Duration and notice period
              !  Time commitment
              !  Remuneration and expenses
              !  Confidentiality
              !  Outside interests—potential conflicts of interest
              !  Induction and ongoing professional development
              !  Review process and any reasons for termination
              !  D&O insurance and indemnities
              !  Independent professional advice
              !  Committee membership


                                                                                            7



     Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




66                                           The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
CHAPTER 7:
Role with Directors




In this chapter we will refer to board directors, but in many civil law countries it
is the managers who have these duties. The corporate secretary typically would
be responsible for performing the duties listed below.




1.	 Familiarizing directors with their duties and liabilities.
   The corporate secretary should be familiar with all the local requirements for
   board directors’ duties, whether these are set out in statute, regulations, case
   law, the articles of association, or corporate governance best practice.

   In addition to corporate duties listed in the box, below, there are multiple
   laws under which board directors have statutory obligations. The corporate
   secretary should advise the board directors on these obligations, which
   include the following areas: anti-trust, employee rights, data protection and
   privacy, health and safety rights, customer rights, and the environment.




UK COMPANIES ACT 2006 – DIRECTORS DUTIES
XX Duty   to act within powers

XX Duty   to promote the success of the company

XX Duty   to exercise independent judgement

XX Duty   to exercise reasonable care, skill, and diligence

XX Duty   to avoid conflicts of interest

XX Duty   not to accept benefits from third parties

XX Duty   to declare an interest in a proposed transaction or arrangement




Chapter 7: Role with Directors
                                                                                       67
     2.	 Advising the board, as matters come up, on how to apply its duties
         and liabilities.




     3.	 Providing information on duties and liabilities as part of a
         director’s induction and the directors’ annual training program.
        The corporate secretary should advise the board on how all duties apply
        in the organization’s jurisdiction and ensure that policies, processes, and
        procedures are introduced to ensure that board directors do not breach their
        duties through, for example, conflicts of interest, related-party transactions,
        share dealings, and so on.




     BOARD DIRECTORS DUTIES

     Nigeria
     In Nigeria, board directors of the nine troubled banks that emerged in the
     2009 regulatory intervention were unprepared for the repercussions from
     the liability standpoint. A case in point was the heavily publicized situation of
     Intercontinental Bank, when visibly shocked non-executive board directors were
     taken into detention and imprisoned.

     Also, in 2004, the board of First Bank fired its CEO and the executive director
     (risk) for not acting within their powers in proceeding with a huge investment in
     the telecommunications sector that subsequently failed. Seven years later, the
     courts decided that the CEO had been unfairly terminated. By implication, this
     CEO was still the substantive CEO, even though the bank had had three other
     CEOs since 2004.




68                                   The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
Related-Party Transactions


A related-party transaction (RPT) is a transfer of resources, services, or
obligations between a company and a related party, regardless of whether
a price is charged, for example, a business transaction between a major
shareholder and the company or a director and the company.

Parties are considered to be related if one party has the ability, directly or
indirectly, to control the other party or exercise significant influence over the
other party in making financial or operating decisions.

Different jurisdictions define related parties and RPTs differently, and the corporate
secretary should be aware of the definitions applicable in his or her jurisdiction.

The board bears primary responsibility for related-party transactions. However, a
corporate secretary typically would be involved in the actions described below.




1.	 Advising the board on issues related to RPTs, such as whether
    the transaction is problematic or can be classified as part of the
    ordinary course of business on market terms.




2.	 Drafting, implementing, and enforcing a policy on related-party
    transactions.
   The policy should be approved by the board of directors and should address
   the company’s approach to the following:

      •	 Definition of related parties and related-party transactions for their
         organizations

      •	 Communication and operation of the policy

      •	 Board approval

      •	 Shareholder approval (if required in the jurisdiction)

      •	 Reporting

      •	 Auditors’ role (Internal and external)




Chapter 7: Role with Directors
                                                                                         69
     3.	 Seeking approvals for RPTs, whether at the board or shareholder
         level.




     4.	Drafting and making disclosures on RPTs, whether in the financial
        statements or via press releases and regulatory announcements.
        Corporate secretaries must be alert for RPTs, because failure to identify and
        appropriately disclose significant RPTs may result in:

           •	 A material misstatement in the financial statements;

           •	 Those inside the company adding to their incomes;

           •	 The tunneling of resources from the company;

           •	 Infringement of shareholder rights;

           •	 Potential reputational risk for the company.



     Not all related-party transactions are bad. When they occur, they should be, at
     a minimum, disclosed.

     Many jurisdictions distinguish between benign RPTs, such as recurrent
     transactions in the ordinary course of business on market terms, and
     problematic RPTs. Problematic RPTs are often large transactions not on
     market terms.




     Conflicts of Interest


     The corporate secretary should put in place a policy and process for dealing with
     actual or potential conflicts of interests of board directors. Conflicts of interest
     may arise where an individual’s personal or family interests and/or loyalties
     conflict with those of the company. Not all conflicts of interest are bad.




70                                     The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
The corporate secretary should ensure that board directors declare their
interests as well as contracts, gifts, or hospitality received in connection with
their role as a member of the board of the organization. These declarations
should be updated, and, at least annually, members of the board should
reconfirm that their declarations are up to date and complete.

The corporate secretary should also ensure that there is a policy and procedures
for what to do when a board director declares or is found to have a conflict
of interest. For instance, most constitutions state that at a board meeting
conflicted members are not allowed to be counted in a quorum or vote on an
issue in which they have an interest. Others also require the individual to leave
the room while the issue is being discussed, and they require the corporate
secretary to remove from papers or minutes forwarded to that individual
anything referring to the subject of the conflict of interest.

When an individual is excluded, the corporate secretary should ensure that a
record is made in the minutes, recording:

   •	 The nature and extent of the conflict,

   •	 An outline of the discussion, and

   •	 The actions taken to manage the conflict.

Some jurisdictions require companies to report annually where a member of
the board benefits from a decision made by the board. Where this requirement
exists, the corporate secretary should advise the board accordingly.

The corporate secretary should also advise board directors not to be involved
in managing or monitoring a contract in which they have an interest. When they
have to be involved, provision needs to be made for an independent review of
the contract and for determining if the contract should be terminated, especially
when performance is unsatisfactory.




Chapter 7: Role with Directors
                                                                                    71
     Directors’ Rights


     The corporate secretary should ensure that board directors are aware of their
     rights. For example, a corporate secretary should ensure that board directors:

        •	 Have access to all the information they need to carry out their duties,
          especially to make informed decisions.

        •	 Are aware of any issues within the company that may cause them liability.

        •	 Receive reimbursements for all pre-approved expenses they have incurred
          in carrying out their duties as board directors of the company.

        •	 Can discharge their duties without interference from fellow board directors.
          If the corporate secretary becomes aware that interference, often through
          lobbying, is taking place, the issue should be raised with the chairman—or
          another senior director, if the chairman is causing the problem.

        •	 Receive notice of meetings and are able to attend and participate in the
          meetings.

        •	 Have access to advice. This may be professional advice at the expense of
          the company, or internal advice from the corporate secretary, a member of
          the management team, or a technical expert.

        •	 Are able to delegate and, where the power to sub-delegate has been given
          to an individual director, able to use this power. Again, if there is a problem
          with this, the corporate secretary’s first port of call should be the chairman.




     Directors’ Liabilities


       The corporate secretary should ensure that the board directors know what
       their liabilities are and advise them when they are taking actions that could
       lead to a particular liability. The corporate secretary should advise the board
       or individual board directors that they should take independent advice and
       should arrange such advice at the company’s expense.




72                                   The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
CHAPTER 8:
Role in Board Evaluation




Best practice states that the performance of boards should be evaluated on an
annual basis. Organizations are also required in most jurisdictions to assess and
report on their performance against corporate governance practices. A list of the
types of evaluations that organizations may be required to perform is set out in
Figure 8.1.




Figure 8.1: Types of Evaluation


Evaluation of:

The performance of the board chairman




The board as a whole
Individual board members




The performance of any board committees




The performance of the chief executive officer




The corporate governance practices of the organization




Chapter 8: Role in Board Evaluation
                                                                                    73
     The corporate secretary has a role to play as the primary facilitator for the
     board to carry out these evaluations effectively.

     The corporate secretary typically would be responsible for the items listed below.




     1.	 Identifying the requirements for evaluations in the organization’s
         jurisdiction and advising the board chairman of them.




     2.	 Informing the board chairman of the requirements and agreeing
         what evaluations should take place.




     3.	 Assisting the board chairman in explaining to the other board
         members the reasons for the evaluations, the types of evaluations,
         and how the evaluations will be carried out.
        The board chairman should get buy-in from other board members. The
        corporate secretary should ensure that the topic is included in the agenda for
        a board meeting.

        Many members of boards may be reluctant to enter into the evaluation
        process, fearing that their performance may be found wanting. The corporate
        secretary has to practice the skills of diplomacy and empathy in persuading
        board members to participate. The corporate secretary should reassure
        members of boards that the process is confidential. It may be helpful to
        focus a board’s attention to procedural issues in the first year, as this is less
        threatening than dealing with behavioral issues upfront.

        It is very important for the corporate secretary to advise the board that
        the purpose of the evaluations is to make the board, its members, and
        its committees more effective. The outcome of the evaluations should be
        forward looking—how we can become more effective as a team—rather than
        a witch hunt focusing on the past.




74                                    The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
Evaluation of the Performance of the Board and Board
Committees


Once the board has agreed in principle to evaluations of the board and board
committee, the corporate secretary typically would be responsible for the tasks
listed below.




1.	 Advising the board in determining whether the evaluations should
    be carried out in-house (usually by the corporate secretary) or
    through engaging external consultants.
   This decision will depend on the size of the company and the requirements
   in the jurisdiction. If external consultants are to be engaged, the board may
   ask the corporate secretary to carry out a tender to choose the firm. This will
   require the corporate secretary to develop terms of reference, which will be
   based on the core criteria agreed by the board.




2.	 Assisting the board in developing core criteria for the evaluation,
    including how to report the findings and actions resulting from
    the evaluation.
   It is very important that these are agreed before the process begins.




3.	 Ensuring that the questionnaires and questions to be used for the
    interviews are tailored to deal with company-specific issues.
   The corporate secretary should brief the board members so that they
   allocate sufficient time to filling in the questionnaires and attending
   interviews. If an external consultant is involved, the corporate secretary will
   be involved in organizing meetings between the board members and the
   consultant. If there is no external consultant, then the chairman may ask the
   corporate secretary to carry out the interviews. Interviews should also be
   held with management and possibly shareholders and advisers.




Chapter 8: Role in Board Evaluation
                                                                                     75
     4.	Analyzing the questionnaires and the interview responses.
       Where there is no external consultant, the corporate secretary will usually be
       involved in the analysis of the questionnaires and the interview responses.
       This will require absolute trust by board members in the confidentiality of the
       corporate secretary so that they are fully transparent in their views.




     5.	 Discussing the findings and recommendations with the chairman.
       Once the analysis has been carried out, the findings and recommendations
       should be discussed with the chairman and presented to the board. Feedback
       should lead to a board discussion and a commitment to take certain actions.




     6.	 Developing an action plan and monitoring progress against agreed
         actions/timelines.
       The corporate secretary should record all of the commitments made by the
       board in an action plan with timelines and responsibilities. Progress against
       the action plan should be checked at regular intervals, and the corporate
       secretary should ensure that the issue is included on board agendas and time
       is made available to discuss progress. Failure to agree on and monitor a set
       of actions will probably lead to no changes in the board’s performance.




     7.	 Ensuring that a reference to the evaluations is included in the
         corporate governance statement in the organization’s annual report.
       The corporate secretary is usually responsible for reporting on the board
       evaluations in the annual report of the company. The annual reports should
       explain the methodology used in board evaluations in line with the relevant
       corporate governance codes/regulations. Reporting on outcomes varies from
       company to company. The corporate secretary should make sure that, in its
       annual reports, the company reports on the progress of key actions from
       board evaluations.




76                                  The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
Individual Board Directors Evaluations


The corporate secretary typically would be involved in the actions listed below.




1.	 Assisting the chairman by organizing the evaluation of individual
    members of the board.
   The choice of the evaluation process depends on the size and type of
   company. The different types are set out in the box on page 78.




2.	 Advising the board that the evaluation will be of the board
    members’ performance as part of a team.
   A board is a team, and it is the performance of the board members as part
   of that team that is to be assessed. The corporate secretary should ensure
   that this is the case and that board members are not making subjective
   assessments of their colleagues’ performance based on personal grudges.




3.	 Reassuring individual board members.
   Corporate secretaries should be aware that many boards are reluctant
   to face up to members’ poor performance. The challenge will be for the
   corporate secretary to persuade the chairman that it will be impossible for
   the board to function as a high-performance team without demanding high
   performance from its members.




4.	Advising the board that it is important to assess executive
   directors not just on their managerial roles but also as members of
   the board.




Chapter 8: Role in Board Evaluation
                                                                                   77
     TYPES OF INDIVIDUAL DIRECTOR EVALUATIONS

     Annual discussion between the chairman and each director
     This can be guided by a questionnaire that the corporate secretary helps the
     chairman develop.


     Self-evaluation
     Directors evaluate their own performance and receive feedback from the
     other members of the board on their performance. Again, the corporate
     secretary can assist the chairman with this process and also in developing
     any questionnaires.


     Peer reviews
     Many chairmen turn to peer reviews, which entail board members providing
     the chairman with structured feedback on the performance of their fellow
     board members. Peer reviews can involve a questionnaire or an interview.
     Because these reviews are often sensitive, many chairmen prefer to have
     them carried out by an external consultant who can collect, tabulate,
     analyze, and provide the feedback. Again, it will depend on whether the
     board members feel that the corporate secretary has the qualities and skills
     required to carry out the peer reviews.


     360-degree analysis
     This process entails obtaining feedback from members of a director’s immediate
     work circle. Most often, this will include direct feedback from management,
     peers, and the corporate secretary and from external sources, such as major
     shareholders, customers, suppliers, or other interested stakeholders.


     Structured interview
     The use of a questionnaire can leave recipients of the feedback unsure why
     they were rated highly on some aspects and not so highly on others. Many
     organizations adopt a hybrid approach of a structured interview, where the
     evaluator completes the questionnaire in discussions with the member.




78                                  The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
   Some executive directors view their attendance at board meetings solely
   as being supporters of the CEO, though this may not always be the case.
   Executive directors should make decisions in the best interests of the
   company, though this may not be easy if it results in the executive director
   going against the wishes of the CEO.




5.	 Assisting the chairman in deciding who should stand for reelection
    or retire from the board.
   The outcome of the individual directors’ evaluations is usually to decide on the
   nominations for reelection at an upcoming general meeting. The corporate
   secretary, if this is the case, should ensure that the information collected as
   part of the evaluation is incorporated into the decision-making process on
   which directors should stand for reelection or and which should retire.




6.	 Developing directors training programs.
   Corporate secretaries should also use the outcome of individual evaluations
   as a method of developing individual and board development programs.

   One of the key responsibilities of a corporate secretary is organizing training
   for the board. Good corporate secretaries have to come up with innovative
   ways of training their boards, and not just rely on classroom-type academic
   learning. Examples include the following:

      •	 Building training into agenda items. For example, if the board is going
        to approve a policy, then include within the agenda item information on
        the issue which develops the skills and knowledge of the directors.

      •	 Offering a variety of training so that directors can choose what suits them.

      •	 Incorporating a training session into a board retreat.

      •	 Ensuring that training is experiential rather than academic.

      •	 Focusing on smart skills, team dynamics, and group behaviors and
        weaving more traditional needs into these workshops.




Chapter 8: Role in Board Evaluation
                                                                                        79
       A corporate secretary who has the necessary skills and experience may be
       able to carry out some of the training. It is also important to have external
       facilitators, as they bring new ideas into the board.

       The corporate secretary is also responsible for including a report on the
       training in the corporate governance statement in the annual report.




     Board Chairman Evaluation Process


     In supporting evaluation of the chairman, the corporate secretary typically
     would have the duties listed below.




     1.	 Prompting the lead board member or senior independent director
         to begin the evaluation of the chairman.
       If there is no lead board member or senior independent director, the
       corporate secretary should prompt the chairman to raise with the board the
       issue of who should be responsible for carrying out the evaluation. The board
       may decide to ask the corporate secretary, one of the independent directors,
       or an external consultant to carry out the evaluation.




     2.	 Advising on how the evaluation will occur.
       Often the other members of the board complete a questionnaire,
       anonymously reviewing the performance of the chairman. Follow-up
       interviews may then be held. The information collected is analyzed and
       feedback given to the chairman. If appropriate, a development plan is agreed
       on, and the corporate secretary usually would be responsible for working
       with the chairman to implement the plan.




80                                  The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
3.	 Advising on the criteria to be used to assess the board chairman.
   The corporate secretary should ensure that the performance of the chairman
   is assessed in the following areas:

      •	 Chairing board meetings;

      •	 Providing input into board agendas;

      •	 Working with the CEO;

      •	 Communicating with fellow directors; and

      •	 Communicating with shareholders and other stakeholders.

   The corporate secretary should ensure that, as with the evaluation of the board
   as a whole, the evaluation is tailored to the particular company and individual.




4.	Agreeing with the board chairman as to what findings and
   recommendations should be fed back to the board as a whole.
   A key issue is whether the whole board should receive any information on
   the feedback the board chairman has received on his or her performance.
   Many feel it is best not to share the full report with the entire board, to
   prevent any embarrassment or defensiveness on the part of the chairman,
   and that it should be left to the chairman to decide what should be shared
   with the board.




5.	 Assisting the board chairman with any actions resulting from the
    evaluation.
   If the board chairman requires assistance with sourcing training courses,
   mentoring, coaching, and so on, the corporate secretary should be prepared
   to provide such assistance.




Chapter 8: Role in Board Evaluation
                                                                                      81
     CEO Evaluation


     Corporate secretaries are sometimes called on to help in the evaluation of
     the CEO. If this happens, the corporate secretary typically would provide the
     services listed below.




     1.	 Being available to assist the CEO and/or the HR department in
         the development of the job description and key performance
         indicators (KPIs) for the CEO.




     2.	 Ensuring that the CEO is clear on the expectations of the board.
        The corporate secretary can also make certain that the line is not crossed
        between board oversight and interference.




     3.	 Ensuring that information is provided to the board to enable it to
         monitor the performance of the CEO against the KPIs that have
         been set by the board.
        If the corporate secretary reports to the CEO, it may be difficult to carry
        out this role effectively. Care should be taken by the board to ensure that a
        corporate secretary is not put in an impossible position.




     Evaluation of Compliance with Corporate Governance
     Codes and Regulations


     Most jurisdictions require organizations to report annually on how they are
     applying corporate governance best practices within their organizations. The
     corporate secretary would usually be responsible for the actions listed below.




82                                   The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
1.	 Advising the board to carry out the assessment.
   It is best practice for a company each year to assess itself against corporate
   governance best practices, usually reflected in the law, regulations, and/or a
   code of best practice. This is usually done by the corporate secretary as part
   of the annual accounts process.




2.	 Ensuring that an evaluation does not just become a box-ticking
    exercise.
   The corporate secretary should ensure that the board is committed to good
   governance and seriously considers the company’s performance in the
   spirit of the provisions it is assessing itself against rather than just doing the
   minimum required to be able to tick off the requirement. Real governance is
   about making sure that the structures, processes, and policies are working
   effectively and that strong cultures of governance are being built.




3.	 Analyzing the findings and making recommendations for
    improvements.
   Corporate secretaries, when recommending corporate governance best
   practices to the board, should be commercial in their approach and ensure
   that what they are proposing will help the business and not just be a
   recommendation based on the letter of the law.




4.	Developing an action plan and monitoring progress against
   actions/timelines.




Chapter 8: Role in Board Evaluation
                                                                                        83
     PERSONAL ATTRIBUTES TO BE ASSESSED AS
     PART OF A DIRECTORS INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENT

     What attributes from the following list does the director see as
     strengths he or she brings to the board?


     •	 Critical analysis                      •	 Engaging communicator


     •	 Independent judgment                   •	 Intuitiveness


     •	 Vision and imagination                 •	 Interpersonal sensitivity


     •	 Strategic perspective                  •	 Influence


     •	 Managerial experience                  •	 Motivation


     •	 Resource management                    •	 Conscientiousness


     •	 Achieving results                      •	 Banking


     •	 Risk management                        •	 Financial analysis


     •	 Others




84                               The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
CHAPTER 9:
Role with Shareholders




“Being the manager rather of other people’s money
than of their own, it cannot be well expected that they
would watch over it with the same anxious vigilance
with which (shareholders) watch over their own.”

          —Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations Book V (1827)



This separation of ownership and control has been the focus of companies and
securities laws and regulations as well as corporate governance best practices,
which have developed globally to ensure that the rights and assets of the
investors/owners of companies are protected from unscrupulous managers.

The position of the corporate secretary is part of this framework of protection
that has developed over the years. One of the fundamental roles of the
corporate secretary is shareholder relations in its many forms, for example:

   •	 Dialogue

   •	 Accountability

   •	 Ensuring rights (ownership, transfer and conveyance, to information, to
     participate in the affairs of the company, and so on)

   •	 Enabling powers to be exercised

   •	 Ensuring fairness in treatment of shareholders whatever, their size

   •	 Protecting value through policies and processes

   •	 Governance




Chapter 9: Role with Shareholders
                                                                                  85
     The relationship the corporate secretary has with shareholders will depend on
     the type of shareholder.

        •	 Registered shareholder—the person (or corporation) entered into the
          shareholder register of the company. This person or organization could
          be the beneficial owner (ultimately owns a share in a company) or a
          nominee/custodian (a person or organization that holds shares on behalf
          of another person or organization who may or may not be the ultimate
          owner of the shares).

        •	 Retail shareholder—an individual investor who buys and sells securities for
          his or her personal account, and not for another company or organization.
          The individual usually registers the shares in the name of a nominee
          belonging to a stock-broking firm such as Barclays Nominees Limited.

        •	 Institutional shareholder—an organization that trades securities in large
          enough share quantities or dollar amounts to qualify for preferential
          treatment and lower commissions. Institutional investors face fewer
          protective regulations, because it is assumed that they are more
          knowledgeable and better able to protect themselves. Typical institutional
          investors include banks, insurance companies, retirement or pension funds,
          hedge funds, investment advisers, and mutual funds.

        •	 Some institutional shareholders, however, do actively engage with
          companies on their corporate governance. Examples include Hermes,
          CalPers, The Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association–College
          Retirement Equities Fund (TIAA-CREF), APG (Dutch), and Norgist Fund,
          and others. This dialogue is usually with the larger companies and will
          usually be with the corporate secretary.

     The role of the corporate secretary in protecting shareholder ownership
     typically would include providing the services listed below.




     1.	 Ensuring that a new shareholder’s interest is registered.
        A person or entity can become a shareholder in many different ways and in
        doing so will usually interact with a corporate secretary. (See Figure 9.1.)




86                                   The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
   Incorporation: The corporate secretary is often involved in the incorporation
   of the company. In common law countries, an individual subscribes for shares
   in a company to be incorporated. Once the company is incorporated, the
   corporate secretary will enter the names of the subscribers into the register
   of members, and those subscribers then become the first shareholders of the
   company.

   Subscription: If a company decides to go public, individuals subscribe for
   shares in the initial public offering. The corporate secretary will work with the
   brokers to decide who receives what shares and then will enter the names of
   individuals into the register of members.




Figure 9.1: 
            Slide 7 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 8/Shareholders
            presentation.




         Becoming a Shareholder

         !  On incorporation
         !  Subscription
         !  Issue of shares
         !  Transfer of shares
         !  Transmission of shares on death, bankruptcy, or
            mental disorder
         !  Others




                                                                                     7



Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




Chapter 9: Role with Shareholders
                                                                                           87
     2.	 Organizing the transfer or transmission of shares from one
         shareholder to another.
       The corporate secretary will often be responsible for organizing the transfer or
       transmission of shares from one shareholder to another.

       When issuing or transferring shares to a shareholder, the corporate secretary
       must check that there are no restrictions on the individual or corporation
       becoming a shareholder. In most countries, an individual needs to be a
       person or a legally incorporated entity to own shares. Partnerships, clubs,
       and associations are therefore unable to own shares themselves; they have
       to own them through one or more of their members or through a nominee
       shareholder.

       Where limited liability partnerships exist, these can usually own shares in
       their own right, as they have been legally incorporated.

       In many countries, a company cannot be a member of its own holding
       company. There are exceptions to this rule, such as a group employee share
       plan or pension plan. Also, a company may not be a member of itself. Again,
       there are exceptions, including purchases of own shares, treasury shares,
       redemption of shares, forfeited or surrendered shares.

       Minors are often able to become shareholders, but problems arise when the
       minor wants to sell the shares. In common law countries, minors are not able
       to enter into contracts, so this can cause issues for companies. For example,
       a minor will be able to avoid any allotment or transfer while he or she is a
       minor or within a reasonable time after becoming an adult. Also, where a
       member does transfer shares to a minor, even in ignorance, the member is
       liable for any future calls on those shares until the minor comes of age.




     3.	 Dealing with shareholders who cease to be members.
       The corporate secretary should also be aware of how an individual or
       organization ceases to be a shareholder. The most common way a member
       ceases to be a shareholder is by transferring his or her shares. In a common
       law country, in an unlisted company, this can be done by lodging the
       appropriate forms with the corporate secretary. (See Figure 9.2.)




88                                  The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
   If a shareholder dies, becomes bankrupt, or is of unsound mind, his or her
   shares will be transferred to his or her legal representative or beneficiary.
   Again, the corporate secretary may be involved in receiving and processing
   the documents to accomplish the transfer.

   In common law countries, articles of association of public companies
   often include provisions for the compulsory transfer of shares, such as in
   enforcement of a lien on those shares.

   If shares have only been partly paid, and the holder is unable to pay the
   outstanding amount for the shares, then the shares will be forfeited. In this
   case, the corporate secretary will be involved in writing to the shareholder on
   behalf of the board, stating that if the outstanding balance is not paid within
   a specified time limit, then the shares will be forfeited. If there is no response,



Figure 9.2: 
            Slide 9 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 8/Shareholders
            presentation.




         Ceasing to be a Shareholder

         !  Transfer of shares
         !  Transmission of shares on death, bankruptcy, or
            mental disorder
         !  Enforcement of a lien on the shares
         !  Forfeiture




                                                                                     9



Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




Chapter 9: Role with Shareholders
                                                                                           89
       the board will pass a resolution following the process for forfeiture set out
       in the articles of association. The corporate secretary will then make the
       appropriate entries into the register of members.




     4.	Advising on and drafting shareholder agreements.
       The shareholders of many non-listed companies will require shareholder
       agreements to enable them to deal with conflict and/or exit the organization.
       The corporate secretary will often be called on to advise on the content of
       these agreements and then to draft them.




     5.	 Ensuring that shareholder powers and rights are protected.
       Shareholders generally have a number of powers and rights, which the
       corporate secretary has a role in protecting. The corporate secretary fulfills
       this role by advising the board when these rights are being or could be
       infringed. Corporate secretaries also assist shareholders in exercising their
       powers and rights.

       Shareholder powers include the following:

          •	 Distributing profits via dividends, share buybacks, and so on

          •	 Appointing and removing directors (although in two-tier systems
            shareholders only have indirect power over the appointment and
            removal of members of the management board)

          •	 Appointing auditors

          •	 Remunerating directors

          •	 Amending the articles

          •	 Amending the capital structure

          •	 Making de facto changes, including mergers, acquisitions, and disposals,
            which affect the fundamental legal and de facto bases of the company




90                                   The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
SHAREHOLDERS’ AGREEMENTS
IN BRAZIL
Shareholders’ agreements are common in Brazil. Pursuant to article 118 of the
Brazilian Corporations Act, shareholders’ agreements need to be in writing and
registered in order to be valid among the shareholders and third parties. The
agreements may regulate only:

1.	 The purchase and sale of shares

2.	 The preference to acquire shares

3.	 The exercise of voting rights

4.	 The exercise of control

Other subjects, such as the company’s policy on investments and the company’s
budget, may also be regulated by the agreement, but non-company issues
cannot be regulated.

The most common types of clauses in shareholder agreements in Brazil are:

1.	 The right of first refusal

2.	 The tag-along and drag-along clauses

3.	 The preparatory meetings among the shareholders who executed the
   shareholders’ agreement to decide how to vote in the general meetings of
   the company
Source: IBA Guide on Shareholders’ Agreements, Brazil, Horacio Brenardes Neto and Bruno Oliveira
Maggi Xavier, Bernades, Braganca Sociedade de Advogados.




Shareholders generally have the following rights:

       •	 To accurate information presented in a timely manner

       •	 To attend and participate in shareholder meetings

       •	 To vote at shareholder meetings

       •	 To exercise rights set out in legislation, the company’s constitution,
          resolutions of shareholders, shareholder agreements, and so on




Chapter 9: Role with Shareholders
                                                                                                   91
     6.	 Protecting shareholders from abuse.
     The corporate secretary plays a major role in ensuring that the abuses described
     below do not occur in their organizations. (See Figure 9.3.)

     Insider Trading
     Insider trading, or as it is known in some countries insider dealing, occurs when
     a person:

         •	 Knowingly attempts to, or actually does, deal in shares of a company when in
           possession of unpublished price-sensitive information about that company.

         •	 Communicates unpublished price-sensitive information to a third party
           with the purpose that that third party may use it to trade unfairly.



     Figure 9.3: 
                 Slide 14 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 2 Module 8/Shareholders
                 presentation.




              Types of Shareholder Abuse

              !  Insider trading
              !  Dilution
              !  Tunneling
              !  Related-party transaction
              !  Others




                                                                                           14



     Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




92                                           The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
Corporate secretaries are often responsible for introducing processes and
procedures to help directors, managers, and other employees avoid infringing
the laws and regulations on insider dealing. They do this by introducing share-
dealing policies, which include provisions restricting dealing by the board and
certain employees at certain times when there is unpublished price-sensitive
information about the company. At other times the policies may require
the board and certain employees to request permission to deal. Often the
corporate secretary is the designated person for providing this permission or for
organizing a director to approve the requests.

Corporate secretaries may also be required by laws, regulations, or best practice
to keep lists of those aware of a particular transaction that is considered price
sensitive. These lists, often known as “insider lists,” contain the names of internal
and external people involved in, or aware of, a particular transaction that is
considered price sensitive.

Dilution
Corporate secretaries are usually involved in the allotment of shares, so they are
best placed to monitor dilution.

Dilution can occur in three ways:

   •	 Ownership percentage of voting control is reduced.

   •	 Per-share earnings may be cut when disbursed among a greater number of
     shareholders.

   •	 Share values may fall depending on proceeds received from selling more
     shares to investors.

In countries where shareholders have the right of “preemption” in relation to the
issue of new shares, that is to say that the shares must be offered first to the
existing shareholders in proportion to their existing holdings before they can
be offered to others, the corporate secretary is usually responsible for ensuring
that this right is waived for certain share issuances, for example, all employee
share plans. The corporate secretary should in these cases ensure that a
resolution is included in the agenda for the annual shareholder meeting and that
the amount of the waiver requested is in line with what shareholders expect.
Many institutional shareholder representative bodies have rules about the level
of dilution that is acceptable. In the United Kingdom, it is a maximum 5 percent
each year.




Chapter 9: Role with Shareholders
                                                                                        93
     Tunneling
     Corporate secretaries should monitor the activities of directors and controlling
     shareholders to ensure that they do not infringe shareholder rights through
     what has become known as tunneling.

     Tunnels occur when there are:

        •	 Asset transfers at non-market prices;

        •	 Value-destroying acquisitions and investments to help related companies;

        •	 Off-balance-sheet loan guarantees; and

        •	 Exploitation of corporate opportunities by related companies.


     Related-Party Transactions
     A corporate secretary is involved in drafting, implementing, and enforcing
     a policy on related-party transactions. Where a related-party transaction
     occurs, the corporate secretary will advise the director and the board about
     the consequences. These may range from disclosure in the annual accounts to
     obtaining shareholder approval.

     If shareholder approval is required, then the corporate secretary will have
     to arrange for the general meeting and the appropriate documentation to
     be prepared.




     7.	 Issuing/cancelling shares.
     Directors are usually authorized to issue (allot) shares in the articles of
     association or by resolution of shareholders in the general meeting. The
     corporate secretary should plan and manage the process of allotting new shares
     in the company by:

        •	 Checking that the directors are authorized to issue shares.

        •	 Checking that the shares to be issued are in proportion to the existing
          holdings of the shareholders. If they are not, the corporate secretary
          should check that shareholders have waived their preemption rights for the
          shares to be issued.




94                                    The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
   •	 Sending application forms to those applying for the shares.

   •	 Processing the application forms and the payments received for the shares.

   •	 Arranging for the board to pass a resolution issuing the shares.

   •	 Entering the names of the new shareholders in the register of members.

   •	 Sending out share certificates to the new members.

   •	 Filing any forms with the registrar for companies.

If the company is listed, the corporate secretary also applies to have the shares
listed for trading with the local stock exchange.




8.	 Advising on and organizing capital actions.
There are various capital actions that a corporate secretary will play a part.
Below are some examples.


Bonus Issues
A bonus issue, which is also referred to as capitalization issue, is when fully
paid shares of the same class are issued free of charge to existing shareholders
in proportion to their existing holding. For example, the company may have a
bonus issue of 3:1, in which case shareholders receive one new share for each
three shares they hold. Companies use bonus issues as a method of returning
value to shareholders. It is often perceived by the market as a sign of confidence
in the company’s fortunes and strong financial position.

Rights Issue
A rights issue is an issue of rights to existing shareholders to buy at a specified
price a new share in the company pro rata to their existing holdings, for
example, the right to buy two new shares for each share the shareholder
holds. Shareholders can take up the rights or waive the rights. The rights that
have been waived are offered to other potential investors. Companies use
rights issues as a method of obtaining additional funding from the company’s
shareholders, rather than borrowing from banks and other financial institutions.




Chapter 9: Role with Shareholders
                                                                                      95
     Stock Splits/Consolidations
     Most corporate secretaries will be involved at some time or another during
     their careers in a change to a company’s share capital. The power to change a
     company’s share capital is usually found in the company’s articles of association
     and usually requires a resolution from shareholders in the general meeting.
     Stock can either be split into two or more shares or be consolidated by
     combining a number of shares.

     Redemption of Shares
     If a company issues redeemable shares, at some stage in the future the
     shares will have to be redeemed, and the corporate secretary arranges for the
     redemption.

     Purchase of Own Shares
     For shareholders, the company buying back its own shares constitutes a hybrid
     between a sale and a dividend. On the one hand, the shareholders sell their
     shares. On the other, this situation resembles a dividend, because surplus money
     is given out by the company to the shareholders. If a company decides to buy
     back its shares, the corporate secretary usually organizes the buyback through
     the company’s brokers.




96                                   The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
CHAPTER 10:
Role in Shareholder Meetings




BEFORE THE MEETING


A corporate secretary would usually prepare a timetable setting out what needs
to be done when leading up to the annual general meeting. This timetable
typically includes planning for the tasks described below.




1.	 Setting the date.
   Most countries have requirements regarding the date of the AGM, and these
   should be taken into consideration. Within these requirements the corporate
   secretary usually proposes to the board a date that allows time for the
   preparation of all of the documents to be circulated to shareholders prior to
   the AGM, the most important of these being the annual report and accounts.




2.	 Advising the board on the timing and location for the AGM.
   The corporate secretary in advising the board on the choice of timing and
   location of the AGM should consider what is convenient for shareholders
   generally. For instance, in the United Kingdom, AGMs are usually held at
   11:00 am to give shareholders time to get to the meeting after peak times
   for travel. Some companies have moved the location of their AGM to enable
   shareholders from different parts of the country to attend. Companies should
   try to avoid holding their AGM on the same day as others in the same sector,
   to enable shareholders who own shares in several companies to attend all the
   AGMs personally.




Chapter 10: Role in Shareholder Meetings
                                                                                   97
     3.	 Coordinating with the chairman on refreshments.
       The corporate secretary should coordinate with the chairman of the board on
       the type of refreshments to be provided to shareholders. It is usual to provide
       for an 11:00 am meeting tea, coffee, and so on on and then lunch after the
       meeting. Some companies provide alcoholic beverages, especially those who
       produce them, and care needs to be taken to ensure that shareholders do
       not over indulge.




     4.	Coordinating on gifts.
       At the AGMs consumer goods companies often give out goody bags at the
       AGMs containing company products. The corporate secretary usually has to
       work with the marketing department to determine what should go into the
       bag or be the gift for that year’s AGM. Care should be taken that the bag
       does not become too heavy, as many attending AGMs may be elderly.




     5.	 Checking facilities for disabled shareholders.
       The corporate secretary should ensure that the venue for the AGM is
       accessible for shareholders with disabilities, including those with poor
       hearing. Many companies put in hearing loops for the deaf, and some even
       provide an expert in sign language to give an instantaneous translation of
       proceedings to those with hearing difficulties. If the company provides these
       types of services, it is useful to say so in the notice to the meeting and to
       indicate in which section of the hall people with hearing disabilities should sit
       to take advantage of them.




     6.	 Checking health and safety requirements.
       The corporate secretary should ensure that a security briefing for
       shareholders is conducted prior to the AGM. This can be carried out by the




98                                  The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
   venue staff, the chairman, the head of security, or the corporate secretary.
   The briefing should advise shareholders what to do in the event of a fire or
   terrorist threat.

   If companies are expecting many shareholders or a lot of elderly people at
   the meeting, they should be sure there is a nurse or paramedic on-site.




7.	 Planning for questions.
   Many companies these days plan for questions at the AGM. This allows the
   chairman to be properly briefed. Also, if the company is expecting a lot of
   shareholders, such planning can help with managing time at the meeting.

   The simplest way to plan for questions is to ask the shareholders to submit
   their questions to the corporate secretary in advance. Companies often send
   out with the AGM materials a sheet asking for shareholders to submit any
   questions they have and to indicate whether they are happy with a response
   in writing prior to the meeting or would want the chairman to answer the
   question at the meeting. The corporate secretary can then either answer
   them in writing before the meeting or prepare the chairman to answer them
   at the meeting, according to the shareholder’s preference.

   The second method is to ask shareholders to register their questions when
   they arrive at the AGM. This allows some time for organizing the questions
   for the chairman to answer.




8.	 Planning for voting.
   Corporate secretaries should advise the board members on the best-practice
   method of voting at the AGM for their type of company in their jurisdiction.
   There are two main types of voting: by show of hands or in writing by way of
   a poll. If voting is by way of a poll, it can be carried out during the meeting or
   by mail.

   Many large companies these days carry out voting at their AGMs
   electronically. To assist with this, they usually send barcoded voting cards out




Chapter 10: Role in Shareholder Meetings
                                                                                        99
  Figure 10.1: Sample Agenda for Annual General Meeting




                                     ABC LIMITED

                         AGENDA for the Annual General Meeting

          to be held at_________on the __________day of______________ 20XX




        1.	 To request that the Notice of the Meeting be taken as read.1

        2.	 THAT the report of the directors and the audited accounts for the year
           ended _______________ 20XX be laid before the meeting.

           To request that the report of the Auditors be taken as read.2

           _____________________________ to second the resolution.3

           The Chairman to invite questions from shareholders and, having replied
           to those questions,4 to put the resolution to the vote at the meeting and
           declare the result of the vote.

        3.	 THAT a dividend of _______ per share be declared payable
           on________________________ 20XX to holders of shares registered at
           the close of business on ________________________ 20XX.

           _____________________________ to second the resolution.

           The Chairman to invite questions from shareholders and, having replied
           to those questions, to put the resolution to the vote at the meeting and
           declare the result of the vote.

        4.	 THAT_____________________________ be appointed a director of the
           company.

           _____________________________ to second the resolution.

           The Chairman to invite questions from shareholders and, having replied
           to those questions, to put the resolution to the vote at the meeting and
           declare the result of the vote.




100                                  The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
                                               ABC LIMITED

      5.	 THAT the director retiring by rotation be reelected a director of the
             company.

             _____________________________ to second the resolution.

             The Chairman to invite questions from shareholders and, having replied
             to those questions, to put the resolution to the vote at the meeting and
             declare the result of the vote.

      6.	 THAT _____________________________ be reappointed auditors of
             the company to hold office until the conclusion of the next general
             meeting at which accounts are laid before the company and that their
             remuneration be determined by the directors.

             _____________________________ to second the resolution.

             The Chairman to invite questions from shareholders and, having replied
             to those questions, to put the resolution to the vote at the meeting and
             declare the result of the vote.

      7.	 Other business will be proposed by the Chairman and in some cases by
             shareholders.

      8.	 The Chairman to close the meeting.


       1	
            In many countries it is possible, with the meeting’s consent, for the notice of the meeting to be taken
            as read. This helps time management at AGMs especially when the Notice is lengthy. Where consent
            is obtained and the Notice is not read at the meeting, the Notice should still be made available to
            shareholders at the meeting, usually by putting a copy on the chairs at the meeting.
       2	
            In many countries it is possible, with the meeting’s consent, for the report of the auditors to be taken
            as read. This again helps with time management at the AGM. The auditors, even where consent is
            obtained, should be available at the meeting to answer questions from shareholders on the audited
            accounts.
       3	
            In most countries there is no legal requirement for resolutions at AGMs to be seconded. Some
            companies adopt the practice either out of custom or to make shareholders feel more involved in the
            process.
       4	
            Although best practice is for questions from shareholders at an AGM to be answered, in many
            countries there is no legal requirement for the Chairman to do so. This enables Chairman to request
            Management or others to provide answers outside of the meeting.




Chapter 10: Role in Shareholder Meetings
                                                                                                                       101
      to shareholders in advance of the meeting. The registrar can then swipe the
      card when the shareholder arrives and activate it for voting at the meeting.

      Corporate secretaries can also prepare in advance documentation to allow
      for corporate representatives to be appointed so that they can attend the
      meeting. Most countries have requirements for proxy forms to be circulated
      with AGM materials so that if shareholders cannot attend in person they are
      able to appoint someone to attend in their place and vote on their behalf.




  9.	 Developing the agenda for the meeting.
      Most AGMs have a standard format agenda, which is circulated with the notice
      of the meeting. An example is shown in Figure 10.1 on pages 100 and 101.

      Special items that may be considered include, for example, authorizing
      allotment of shares, waiving preemption rights to new shares, directors’
      remuneration, share and share option plans, changes to the articles of
      association, and so on.

      When organizing the resolutions for the agenda, best practice says that
      separate items of business should not be bundled, that is, combined into
      one resolution. Corporate secretaries should ensure that there is a separate
      resolution for each item of business. This prevents companies from coupling
      unpopular or contentious issues with items that should pass easily.

      In addition to the formal agenda on which shareholders will be asked to vote,
      the chairman and management often give presentations on performance and
      future plans for the company. Some companies go further and have videos,
      displays, and/or demonstrations at their AGMs. Corporate secretaries will be
      involved to varying degrees in these activities.




  10.	Preparing and distributing materials.
      The corporate secretary is usually responsible for preparing (to varying
      degrees) and distributing the materials for the AGM. These would usually
      include:




102                                The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
   •	 The notice of the AGM;

   •	 Annual report and accounts;

   •	 Letter from the chairman explaining the business of the meeting. In the
     United States this is called the proxy form;

   •	 Proxy/voting forms;

   •	 Other documents supporting the resolutions, such as amended articles,
     share option plan rules, and so on.

   Most countries require companies to provide details of directors who are to
   be appointed at the meeting. Their names, relevant experience (including but
   not just limited to a list of their other directorships and positions), the date
   they were first appointed to the board, details of any board committees they
   served on, and a history of their attendance at board meetings, committee
   meetings, and so on, during their terms.

   The corporate secretary has to decide, if it is not stipulated in law, how long
   before the meeting the AGM documents should be circulated. Normally for a
   listed company with multinational shareholders the materials are sent out six
   to eight weeks before the meeting (double the time usually required by law).
   to allow shareholders time to receive the materials and then vote.




11.	 Organizing associated events.
The corporate secretary may be required to organize board meetings or lunches
either before or after the AGM. If they are after the event, time should be given
for the directors to mingle with shareholders to discuss issues after the meeting.




12.	 Briefing the chairman for Q&A.
A corporate secretary usually works with management to prepare a briefing
pack for the chairman. This would include both operational and governance
issues. Companies may also do a Q&A rehearsal. Participants will be asked to
hold a Q&A rehearsal during the workshop.




Chapter 10: Role in Shareholder Meetings
                                                                                      103
  REHEARSING AGM QUESTIONS
  A murder board is a committee of questioners set up to help someone prepare
  for a difficult oral examination.

  The Q&A session at an annual shareholders’ meeting is an important
  opportunity for a chairman to demonstrate his or her capacity to engage
  shareholders in a constructive exchange. The following example is a missed
  opportunity. How do you think the shareholder felt at the end of this exchange?

  Shareholder: “I’ve been a shareholder for 12 years. I remember standing in a
  phone box buying CCA shares over the phone....Just one question: I’d like to
  know if CCA has a policy on genetically modified foods....If you currently use
  them or if you have a policy of not using them, or if you’re indifferent. There’s
  a lot of movement nowadays for people to choose products that are GMO-
  free, and if our company could come to that position, if indeed that’s possible, I
  believe that would be extra value to shareholders.

  Chairman: “Thank you for the question...but I can’t resist noting, have you seen
  any telephone boxes around lately? We are working on those figures and will get
  back to you. Any other questions? No one else wants to talk about telephone
  boxes or...?”

  As corporate secretary, you want the chairman to project an image of engaged
  and informed leadership. Ensure the chairman rehearses succinct responses to
  questions from shareholders to avoid antagonizing them at the meeting.




104                                   The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
ON THE DAY OF THE MEETING


The corporate secretary during a meeting typically would perform the tasks below.




1.	 Ensuring that all directors are in attendance and
    seated appropriately.
   Wherever possible, all directors should attend the AGM. The chairman of the
   remuneration committee for a listed company should also be prepared to
   answer questions from shareholders at the meeting.

   It is usual practice for the directors to be seated on the stage with the
   chairman, facing the shareholders. Some companies with many directors
   have tried seating directors in the front row and having on the stage only the
   board members who may be giving presentations or need to be available to
   answer questions. Shareholders seem to prefer seeing all the directors.




2.	 Reading the notice of AGM.
   In some parts of the world it is still common practice for the corporate
   secretary to read the notice of the meeting to shareholders before the
   business of the meeting commences. Best practice indicates that where the
   notice has been sent to all shareholders it is no longer necessary for it to be
   read at the meeting, the chairman taking it as read. However, a copy should
   be made available to shareholders at the meeting, often by placing a copy on
   the chairs at the meeting.




                               .
3.	 Reading the auditors report
   It is also common in some parts of the world for the auditors to read their
   audit opinion to shareholders at the annual shareholder meeting. Best
   practice indicates that as the audit opinion has been sent to all shareholders




Chapter 10: Role in Shareholder Meetings
                                                                                     105
      with the financial statements it is no longer necessary for it to be read at the
      meeting, the chairman taking it as read or noted unless a shareholder has an
      issue with it or it is qualified.




  4.	Proposing and seconding of resolutions.
      Unless provided for in the articles of the company, there is no requirement
      for resolutions proposed by the chairman to be seconded before they are
      voted on. Although a chairman could propose his or her own appointment,
      usually the chairman asks one of the other directors (often the chairman of
      the remuneration committee) to do so.




  SHAREHOLDER DIALOGUE
  In The Forsyte Saga, set in the late nineteenth century, John Galsworthy
  described an annual general meeting where Old Jolyon Forsyte was the
  chairman and his nephew, Soames, was in attendance:

  And now Old Jolyon rose, to present the report and accounts.

  Veiling under a Jove-like serenity that perpetual antagonism deep-seated in the
  bosom of a director towards his shareholders, he faced them calmly . . . .

  “If any shareholder has any question to put, I shall be glad to answer it.” A soft
  thump. Old Jolyon had let the report and accounts fall, and stood twisting
  tortoise-shell glasses between thumb and forefinger.

  The ghost of a smile appeared on Soames’ face. They had better hurry up with
  their questions. He well knew his uncle’s method (the ideal one) of at once
  saying “I propose, then, that the report and accounts be adopted.” Never let
  them get their wind—shareholders were notoriously wasteful of time.

  Although this meeting reflects its time, over one hundred years ago, it is often
  argued that not much has changed.




106                                       The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
5.	 Organizing questions from shareholders.
   This usually happens after the presentations of the chairman and
   management and before the voting on the resolutions. As mentioned earlier,
   some companies plan their Q&A session.

   Shareholders in most countries only have the right to ask questions on the
   business of the meeting. Most companies, however, allow shareholders to ask
   questions that go beyond the matters to be voted on at the meeting.

   Chairmen are not compelled to answer questions but usually do so unless the
   question is about something specific to the individual asking it, in which case
   they may direct the questioner to someone in management or the corporate
   secretary to answer the query outside of the meeting.

   It is important for a chairman to manage the Q&A session or it can become
   a waste of time with trivial, uninformed, or repetitive questions. There is
   also the threat that a pressure group could try to use the Q&A session to
   disrupt the meeting. A good corporate secretary will assist the chairman
   in managing the Q&A session by organizing the questions and keeping the
   chairman on track.




6.	 Collating proxies.
   It is now best practice for the proxy votes to be disclosed to those
   shareholders in the meeting when they vote on the resolutions. The
   corporate secretary should organize this. If voting is by a show of hands and
   the votes in the hall bring a different outcome from those represented by
   proxies, the chairman of the meeting is usually required to call a poll. The
   corporate secretary is responsible for advising the chairman of this and for
   organizing it. Many companies, especially listed companies, hold all of their
   voting by poll so this is not an issue.




Chapter 10: Role in Shareholder Meetings
                                                                                   107
  7.	 Dealing with shareholder requests to change resolutions and other
      procedural issues.
      These are dealt with in one of the activities in the workshop. The corporate
      secretary is responsible for ensuring that the chairman is briefed on what to
      do and say in these circumstances.




  8.	 Keeping order at the AGM.
      Minor activists often try to disrupt AGMs to attract publicity for their cause.
      Their protests usually take the form of continuous heckling, but in some
      cases they have been known to storm the directors table. The problem can
      be exacerbated if protestors manage to provoke shareholders or come into
      contact with company personnel, especially security personnel.

      Corporate secretaries can take precautions, such as putting a barrier
      between the stage and the audience, usually by putting flowers in front of
      the stage, and filling the front two rows of seats with friendly attendees,
      employees, or former employee shareholders. The corporate secretary
      should also have briefed security and other staff attending as to what to do
      if a demonstration should occur—that is, leave it to the professionals and
      call the police if things start getting violent or property is being damaged.
      The corporate secretary should also brief the chairman and, if things are
      getting out of hand, advise the chairman to give a warning and, if the
      warning is unheeded, adjourn the meeting.




  9.	 Organizing the media.
      In the past, many representatives of the media bought one share to enable
      them to attend AGMs. As this is costly and a nuisance to companies, many
      companies these days invite the media to attend meetings.




108                                The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
10.	Managing logistics.
   The corporate secretary will also have to continue to manage the logistics at
   the meeting. For instance, if the room has become overcrowded, alternatives
   may have to be organized. Usually if this is a possibility the corporate
   secretary will have organized, prior to the meeting, overflow rooms that will
   be connected by audio-visual equipment to the main hall.




AFTER THE ANNUAL SHAREHOLDERS MEETING


After the AGM, the corporate secretary typically would be responsible for the
tasks listed below.




1.	 Filing resolutions.
   The corporate secretary is usually responsible for preparing copies of any
   resolutions passed at the AGM for filing with the companies registry or with
   regulators if the company is listed.




2.	 Preparing minutes.
    These are usually fairly brief, focusing on the business of the meeting. Some
    companies organize a verbatim reporting of the Q&A session, which is a
    separate document from the minutes but kept with them.




3.	 Paying the dividend (if approved at the meeting).




Chapter 10: Role in Shareholder Meetings
                                                                                   109
      4.	 Announcing the voting results.
           There are sometimes requirements for voting results to be published in
           newspapers or on a company’s website. If this is required, the corporate
           secretary usually would organize this.




      Corporate Secretaries and other Shareholder Meetings


      The corporate secretary would also typically be involved in the other types of
      shareholder meetings mentioned in Figure 10.2.


      Figure 10.2: S
                    lide 13 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 7/ Shareholders’
                   Meetings presentation.




               Other Shareholders’ Meetings

                 Shareholders’ meetings (other than the annual
                    meeting)
                   Requisitioned meetings
                   Class meetings for shareholders holding different
                    classes of shares
                   Capital reduction meetings
                   Meetings related to the winding up of the company
                   Others




             CORPORATE SECRETARIES TOOLKIT                                                    19
             PART 3 MODULE 7 / SHAREHOLDERS’ MEETINGS




      Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




110                                            The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
CHAPTER 11:
Role in Strategy, Risk, and
Good Corporate Citizenship



Best practice is for the board to have overall responsibility for strategy and risk
management. The corporate secretary typically would have a role in both, as
the primary facilitator for the board, to carry out these functions effectively.
The size of the role will depend on the size of the organization and the sector in
which it operates. It will also depend on the position of the corporate secretary
in the organization.




The Corporate Secretary’s Role in Strategy


The corporate secretary typically would have the responsibilities outlined below.




1.	 Ensuring that strategic discussions take place at the board.
   Best practice states that strategic discussions should make up two-thirds of
   the board’s time. The corporate secretary typically would ensure that board
   agendas include the following (see also Figure 11.1):

   •	 Development of the vision, mission, and values for the organization;

   •	 An annual strategy review;

   •	 Periodic reviews of the key performance indicators relating to the
     implementation of the strategy;

   •	 Activities such as training, information sessions, and field visits, which
     should enable board members to familiarize themselves with the market
     environment in which their organization operates. The corporate secretary
     typically would play a role in organizing all of these.




Chapter 11: R
             ole in Strategy, Risk, and Good Corporate Citizenship
                                                                                      111
      Figure 11.1: 
                   Slide 6 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 1/Strategy:
                   Development and Analysis presentation.




                 Strategic Planning Process

                                                  ENVISION


                                                                              ANALYZE
                 EVALUATE




                                   IMPLEMENT &
                                                                          FORMULATE
                                     MONITOR
                                                                           STRATEGY
                                   (Management)



             CORPORATE SECRETARIES TOOLKIT                                                     6
             PART 3 MODULE 1 / STRATEGY: DEVELOPMENT AND ANALYSIS




      Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




      2.	 Advising the board on compliance with the organization’s
          objectives.
         When the board is discussing different strategic options, the corporate
         secretary can advise on compliance with the organization’s objectives
         (purpose), which are usually set out in the organization’s constitution
         (memorandum and articles of association, bylaws, and so on).

         If the intended strategic direction does not fit within the objectives set
         out in the organization’s constitution and the board believes that it is the
         best interests of the organization to still carry out the activities, then the




112                                            The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
   corporate secretary should advise the board how the objectives should be
   changed. This would normally require the corporate secretary to:

   •	 Engage with shareholders on the proposed changes;

   •	 Draft documents required to convene a shareholder meeting—agenda,
     resolutions, voting materials, and so on;

   •	 Organize and attend the shareholder meeting;

   •	 Oversee the voting;

   •	 Develop a set of minutes for the shareholder meeting;

   •	 Be responsible for regulatory filings resulting from decisions made at the
     shareholder meeting.




3.	 Advising the board on whether the proposed strategy is consistent
    with good governance.




4.	Ensuring an effective and structured monitoring of progress
   against strategic objectives.
   The corporate secretary typically would ensure that there is an effective
   and structured framework for the board to continuously monitor/oversee
   management’s progress against the strategic objectives/targets. As part of
   the preparation for board meetings, the corporate secretary typically would
   be required to collect information and reports (from management) of the
   performance of the organization against the strategic targets/objectives.




5.	 Sharing third-party reports on the organization’s performance.
   The corporate secretary should consider reports from external stakeholders
   on the strategy and its implementation and determine whether they may also




Chapter 11: R
             ole in Strategy, Risk and Good Corporate Citizenship
                                                                                   113
         help the board in future decision making. Such third-party reports include,
         press clippings, analyst reports, share representative body reports, and so on,
         which should also be shared with the board as appropriate.




      6.	 Advising on disclosure requirements.
         For listed companies, the corporate secretary may be required to advise
         the board on disclosure requirements relating to the strategy and its
         development and performance against targets.




      Additional Responsibilities for corporate secretary.
      In some organizations, the corporate secretary will play a larger role:

         •	 At the request of the board, the corporate secretary could be involved in
           the development of the organization’s vision, mission, and values. This will
           involve engagement with senior management.

         •	 If the corporate secretary is in a senior position, the board may ask
           the corporate secretary to coordinate with senior management on the
           development of the strategic plan. The corporate secretary is often in a
           unique position, having an overview of the whole organization through
           engagement with senior management across all departments as part of
           the board meeting process. This will enable the corporate secretary to
           advise and coordinate with senior management during the formulation
           stage of the strategy and in some cases mediate between members of
           senior management.

         •	 The corporate secretary may be called on to advise the board on whether
           the strategy is acceptable in relation to risk, especially reputational risk.

         •	 The corporate secretary may be involved in the wider communication of
           the strategy both within the organization and to external stakeholders. This
           also includes reviewing disclosures to ensure that the right message gets
           out, balancing both the positive and negative information.




114                                    The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
The Corporate Secretary’s Role in Risk Management


Since the global financial crisis, the responsibility of the board for effective
risk management has come under ever greater scrutiny. Many countries have
strengthened their corporate governance practices to ensure that boards have
a greater responsibility for risk. In the United Kingdom, for example, the UK
Corporate Governance Code has been revised. (See Figure 11.2. on page 116.)

The board has overall responsibility for risk management. In practice this
responsibility is delegated to executive management, but the board retains the
following responsibilities:

   •	 Deciding the risk appetite of the company;

   •	 Developing board guidelines for risk, which reflect the board’s decision on
     the risk appetite for the company;

   •	 Ensuring that executive management manages risks within the board
     guidelines for risk;

   •	 Monitoring the performance of executive management to ensure that the
     business is being managed within the risk guidelines set by the board;

   •	 Evaluating the risk management system to ensure that it is effective and
     achieves its purpose.

The corporate secretary typically would have the responsibilities listed below to
assist the board in meeting its responsibilities with regard to risk management.




1.	 Ensuring that risk is on the board’s agenda.
   An organization should have a risk management policy and framework
   approved by the board. The board should also be considering the
   organization’s long-term continuity/sustainability.




Chapter 11: R
             ole in Strategy, Risk and Good Corporate Citizenship
                                                                                    115
      Figure 11.2: Risk Management Example




      UK CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CODE
      SEPTEMBER 2014

      C.2: Risk Management and Internal Control

          Main Principle
          The board is responsible for determining the nature and extent of the
          principal risks it is willing to take in achieving its strategic objectives.
          The board should maintain sound risk management and internal control
          systems.

                Code Provisions

                C.2.1 The directors should confirm in the annual report that they
                have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the
                company; including those that would threaten its business model,
                future performance, solvency or liquidity. The directors should
                describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or
                mitigated.

                C.2.2 Taking account of the company’s current position and principal
                risks, the directors should explain in the annual report how they have
                assessed the prospects of the company, over what period they have
                done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate. The
                directors should state whether they have a reasonable expectation
                that the company will be able to continue in operation and meet its
                liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment, drawing
                attention to any qualifications or assumptions as necessary.

                C.2.3 The board should monitor the company’s risk management and
                internal control systems, and at least annually, carry out a review of
                their effectiveness, and report on that review in the annual report. The
                monitoring and review should cover all material controls, including
                financial, operational and compliance controls.




116                                    The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
2.	 Ensuring that management identifies risks associated with
    particular agenda items.




3.	 Advising the board on the setting up of a risk committee..
   In certain regulated organizations, such as financial institutions, the corporate
   secretary advises on the setting up of a board committee with specific
   responsibility for risk. If a company does not have a risk committee, risk should
   be on the board agenda or the audit committee agenda if one exists.




4.	Making the board aware of its responsibilities for risk.
   At the board meeting, when the board is considering the annual report, the
   corporate secretary typically would make the board members aware of the
   statements they are agreeing to and any potential duties or liabilities they
   may have with regard to them, for example:

   •	 Statement of directors responsibilities;

   •	 Effectiveness of internal controls;

   •	 Going concern;

   •	 Board reports—remuneration, business, review, and so on.




5.	 Assisting the board with assessment of the effectiveness of the risk
    management system and internal controls.
   The corporate secretary typically would ensure that there is an effective
   and structured framework for the board to evaluate the effectiveness of the
   risk management system. As part of the preparation for board meetings,
   the corporate secretary will be required to collect information and reports
   from management and internal audit on risk and the effectiveness of the risk
   management within the organization.




Chapter 11: R
             ole in Strategy, Risk and Good Corporate Citizenship
                                                                                       117
         In some organizations, the corporate secretary may play a larger role, which
         could include one or both of the following additional activities:

         •	 The drafting or reviewing of statements in company reports, such as the
           annual report, which set out the company’s general attitude toward risk;

         •	 At the request of the board, the collation of information supporting the
           board’s assessment that the system of internal controls is effective. This
           can include internal audits and certifications by management and staff that
           they have complied with all policies that apply to them.




      6.	 Developing board guidelines for risk that reflect the board’s
          decision on the risk appetite for the company.
         The corporate secretary should ensure that a discussion on risk appetite and
         risk tolerance is included on the board agenda annually.




      RISK APPETITE AND TOLERANCE DEFINED
      Risk appetite is the level of risk that an organization is willing to take in the
      pursuit of its objectives.

      Risk tolerance is the amount of risk that an organization could accept without
      a serious threat to its financial stability. It is usually expressed as a quantitative
      measure.




         Once the risk appetite and tolerance has been agreed, a set of guidelines
         should be developed that would also include a more detailed description
         of the steps shown in Figure 11.3. The corporate secretary could be involved
         in developing these guidelines depending on the his or her role in risk
         management in the organization.




118                                     The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
Figure 11.3: Risk Management Process




STEP        1        Risk indentification (based on the company’s or department’s
                     objectives)

STEP        2        Risk assessment



STEP        3        Risk response – deciding on appropriate action



STEP        4        Risk monitoring and reporting by management



STEP        5        Evaulation of the risk management process and risk responses
                     by the board

STEP        6        Report to stakeholders, including shareholders


Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3/Module 2: Risk and Business Continuity Planning.




7.	 Managing (Identify, assess, mitigate, and monitor) risks within the
    areas of the corporate secretary’s responsibilities.
   The corporate secretary’s department should have its own risk register,
   which will feed into the organization’s risk register. The corporate secretary
   may be asked to assist the board in managing governance risks, especially
   reputational risk.



Additional responsibilities of the corporate secretary.
In some organizations, the corporate secretary is asked to be the organization’s
risk manager or to oversee the risk function:

   •	 Developing best practice says that the company secretary should be
      responsible for protecting the reputation of the company and is therefore
      responsible for identifying the reputational risk associated with the
      decisions, actions taken, or inaction by the board.




Chapter 11: R
             ole in Strategy, Risk and Good Corporate Citizenship
                                                                                                   119
      •	 Advising the board on business continuity planning—the long-term
        sustainability of the organization. The corporate secretary may be called on
        by the board to coordinate the drafting of a business continuity plan, the
        communication of different aspects of the plan to different stakeholders
        (both internal and external), and the follow-up on actions within the plan,
        which should be approved by the board.




  The Corporate Secretary’s Role in Corporate Citizenship


  In many jurisdictions the concepts of sustainability, corporate social
  responsibility, and good corporate citizenship are seen as an integral part
  of corporate governance. The board has responsibility for the formulation
  of policies and strategies addressing ethical behavior, employee welfare,
  stakeholder engagement, social and community issues, and environmental
  issues. Where countries adopt this approach, it is important that such issues be
  integrated into the organization’s business model and hence its operations. (See
  Figure 11.4.)




  CORPORATE CITIZENSHIP DEFINED
  An organization, as well as being an economic entity, is a citizen of the countries
  in which it operates and has a moral and social standing within the society of
  those countries, with all the responsibilities attached to that status. Therefore,
  when making decisions an organization should consider the impact of those
  decisions on its stakeholders (both internal and external), the environment, and
  society as a whole.




  In light of its citizenship responsibilities, an organization should:

      •	 Develop an ethical approach to conducting business, usually reflected in a
        code of ethics, ethical business principles, and so on.

      •	 Develop and implement polices and procedures that reflect concern for all
        the organization’s stakeholders, both internal and external.




120                                 The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
   •	 Develop and implement polices and procedures that reflect concern for
      social and environmental issues

An organization’s board has to reach a balance between achieving the above
objectives and its long-term sustainability. A corporate secretary should be able
to help a board with this. The typical responsibilities of a corporate secretary in
this area include those listed below.




1.	 Ensuring that the laws, regulations, standards, and codes
    applicable to the organization have been identified and are being
    complied with.



Figure 11.4: 
             Slide 10 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 4/Good
             Corporate Citizenship presentation.




         Good Corporate Citizenship Through the
         Decades economic       social    environmental
                                             occupational health & safety
           1990s                                community development
                                                    health & safety
                                                         HIV/AIDS         environmental
                                                                              protection
                           ethical business          human rights
                                                                           water security
                               practices            corporate social
           2000s                                       investment            biodiversity
                          industry codes &
                               standards
                                                                          climate change
                          energy efficiency
                                                          employee
           2010s          integrated thinking,            wellness
                            reporting and risk                              Green Growth
                              management                                   adapted from: M Reichardt


       CORPORATE SECRETARIES TOOLKIT                                                                   10
       PART 3 MODULE 4 / GOOD CORPORATE CITIZENSHIP




Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013..




Chapter 11: R
             ole in Strategy, Risk and Good Corporate Citizenship
                                                                                                            121
      The corporate secretary should advise the board on compliance with all laws,
      regulations, codes, and standards applicable to the organization. He or she
      should also advise, where appropriate, to go beyond the minimum standard
      set by the laws, regulations, codes, and standards to meet current stakeholder
      expectations. (See Figure 11.5.)

  Figure 11.5: 
               Slide 12 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 4/Good
               Corporate Citizenship presentation.




           Good Corporate Citizenship Matrix



                        high

                                     philanthropy              partnering
                  Benefits
                    to
                  Society

                                         pet
                                                              propaganda
                                       projects
                         low
                               low              Benefits to Business        high


         CORPORATE SECRETARIES TOOLKIT                                                    12
         PART 3 MODULE 4 / GOOD CORPORATE CITIZENSHIP




  Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




  2.	 Advising the board and, where possible, providing inspiration
      for the inclusion of good corporate citizenship activities in the
      organization’s strategic and business continuity planning.
      The corporate secretary typically would advise the board on the drivers for
      good corporate citizenship. These are set out in Figure 11.6.




122                                        The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
Figure 11.6: 
             Slide 17 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 4/Good
             Corporate Citizenship presentation.




         Drivers of Good Corporate Citizenship
          (KPMG International 2011)
                         Driver                       2005    2008       2011
         Reputation or brand                          27%     55%        67%
         Ethical considerations                       53%     69%        58%
         Innovation and learning                      53%     55%        44%
         Employee motivation                          47%     52%        44%
         Risk management or reduction                 47%     35%        35%
         Access to capital/increased s/h value        39%     29%        32%
         Economic considerations                      74%     68%        32%
         Strengthened supplier relationships          13%     32%        22%
         Market position improvement                  21%     22%        22%
         Improved relations with government.          9%      21%        18%
         Cost savings                                 9%      17%        10%


       CORPORATE SECRETARIES TOOLKIT                                                 17
       PART 3 MODULE 4 / GOOD CORPORATE CITIZENSHIP




Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




3.	 Monitoring corporate citizenship activities.
   This may include developing and implementing policies and monitoring compliance
   with such policies as well as reporting breaches in the policies to the board.




4.	Communicating the board’s views and actions in this area to
   stakeholders, both internally and externally.




Chapter 11: R
             ole in Strategy, Risk and Good Corporate Citizenship
                                                                                          123
  5.	 Drafting integrated or stand-alone sustainability report.
      The corporate secretary typically would agree with the board whether to
      have CSR reporting as part of the annual report or as a separate report. The
      next chapter discusses the benefits of an integrated report. KPMG’s Survey
      on Corporate Responsibility reporting 2013, offers the view that the debate
      about whether companies should or should not report on their corporate
      responsibility activities is over.




  KPMG VIEW

  To Report or not to report? The debate is over
  Companies should no longer ask whether or not they should publish a CR
  Report. We believe that debate is over. The high rates of CR reporting in all
  regions suggest it is now standard business practices worldwide. The leaders
  of N100 or G250 companies that still do not publish CR Reports should ask
  themselves whether it benefits them to continue swimming against the tide or
  whether it puts them at risk.
  Source: The KPMG Survey of Corporate Responsibility Reporting 2013: Executive Summary.




  6.	 Advising on setting up a board committee.
      Once the committee has been established, the corporate secretary typically
      would be required to support the committee.




124                                     The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
CHAPTER 12:
Role in Financial Oversight and Reporting




The area of financial oversight and reporting is part of good governance,
involving the concepts of accountability and transparency. The corporate
secretary as the governance professional is responsible for ensuring that the
organization, the board, and management are accountable and transparent
in their financial systems and reporting. To carry out this role the corporate
secretary has to be competent in financial accounting and reporting. It also
is becoming common practice for organizations to report on nonfinancial
information. Corporate secretaries have a growing role in this area and need to
be aware of developments and requirements in their jurisdictions.

The corporate secretary’s responsibilities in this area typically would include
those listed below.




1.	 Ensuring compliance with legal, shareholding, and other
    stakeholder requirements.
   For example, those relating to the content and timing for disclosures of the
   financial and nonfinancial statements and other disclosures.




2.	 Interpreting in nonfinancial terms the financial performance and
    results of the organization.
   The corporate secretary should be able to provide narrative reporting to
   explain the figures in the financial statement produced by the organization.
   In some cases, the corporate secretary will be expected to advise the board
   on the implications of accounting policies and disclosures, especially under
   International Financial Reporting Standards. The corporate secretary may
   also be required to write some of them, such as those relating to related-
   party transactions, directors remuneration, and so on.



Chapter 12: Role in Financial Oversight and Reporting
                                                                                  125
  3.	 Advising the board on the implications and the potential
      reputational risk of the financial performance and results for the
      organization, the shareholders, and other stakeholders.




  4.	Advising and assisting the board with its financial oversight role.
      The board’s role in financial oversight is set out in Figure 12.1. In addition to
      assisting with the board’s financial oversight role, the corporate secretary
      typically would advise the board (or the audit committee, if one exists) on:

      •	 The appointment and remuneration of the external auditor.

      •	 External auditor independence.

      •	 Non-audit fees. Many jurisdictions have rules concerning auditors carrying
        out non-audit work.

      •	 The evaluation of the external auditor. This should be included as an
        agenda item each year.

      •	 Attendance at annual shareholder meetings of the external auditor. In some
        jurisdictions it is still the practice for the external auditors to present their
        audit report and answer questions on it at the annual shareholder meeting.
        In other jurisdictions external auditors attend the meeting but only speak if
        asked a specific question by a shareholder.

      •	 Auditor rotation. Again, this differs between jurisdictions. Best practice
        seems to be that at least the audit partner should change every five years
        for larger companies, and that smaller ones should consider changing audit
        firms every five years.

      •	 External auditors annual management letter. The corporate secretary
        should ensure that an action plan is developed by management and that
        updates on progress to resolve the issues raised in the letter are presented
        to the board regularly.




126                                 The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
Figure 12.1: 
             Slide 6 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 10/Financial
             Oversight and Analysis presentation.




         Board: Role in Financial Oversight

         !  To fulfill their duties to shareholders (act honestly, in
            good faith, and for a proper purpose)
         !  To maintain proper accounting records
         !  To establish an accounting reference date
         !  To disclose the company’s financial position and
            performance
         !  To establish and evaluate the effectiveness of internal
            controls
         !  To ensure proper external controls and audit
         !  To ensure that directors have the required skills,
            experience, and knowledge to fulfil these roles


                                                                                          6



Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




5.	 Advising the board on whether it is appropriate to delegate the
    financial oversight role to an audit committee.
   If an audit committee is to be set up, the corporate secretary should:

    •	 Develop terms of reference for the audit committee with well-defined
      responsibilities.

    •	 Advise on the appropriate composition of the committee. Many
      jurisdictions require members to be independent and to have financial
      experience.

    •	 Ensure that members with appropriate skills and experience are included in
      the board’s succession planning.




Chapter 12: Role in Financial Oversight and Reporting
                                                                                              127
      •	 Develop an annual calendar of activities for the committee to ensure that
        the committee gives sufficient time to all of its responsibilities.

      •	 Ensuring that the committee has sufficient resources to carry out its role.
        This may include advising the board on when it is appropriate to set up an
        internal audit and risk functions.

      •	 Assist the committee members in their understanding of current and
        emerging issues, especially those from shareholders, regulators, and other
        stakeholders.

      •	 Assist the committee in sourcing the advice of experts on issues under the
        Committee’s responsibility.

      •	 Organizing professional development for the committee members in those
        areas under the committee’s responsibility, such as audit, risk, and financial
        oversight.

      •	 Acting as secretary to the committee, providing governance, procedural,
        and logistical support to the committee and its chairman.

      •	 Organizing the annual evaluation of the performance of the committee and
        its chairman.




  6.	 Coordinating with internal and external auditors.
      In organizations without audit committees, the corporate secretary, on
      behalf of the board, should coordinate with the internal and external auditors
      to ensure that the board is aware of audit findings and that management
      actions emanating from them are tracked and updates reported to the board.

      In organizations with audit committees, the corporate secretary should
      be available to assist the chairman of the committee, often as secretary of
      the committee.




  7.	 Advising the board on its responsibilities with regard to risk
      management and internal controls.
      To fulfill this role effectively, the corporate secretary requires a basic
      understanding of the risk management process and the system of internal




128                                 The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
   controls as well as of the role of internal audit. More information on this area
   can be found in Chapter 11.




8.	 Providing advice and oversight, on behalf of the board, for the
    preparation of the annual report and accounts.
   The corporate secretary’s role may include:

   •	 Being a member of or leading the production team for the annual report
     and accounts.

   •	 Ensuring that the annual report and accounts meets all the requirements of
     applicable laws, regulations, standards, and codes.

   •	 Conducting quality control/verification of the facts, views, and opinions
     contained within the annual report and accounts.

   •	 Ensuring that the information within the annual report and accounts:

      –– Is transparent,

      –– Is balanced between the positive and negative information, properly
        reporting everything of relevance,

      –– Is presented in a fashion that nonfinancial people can understand,

      –– Is not “window dressed”—that is, that the true financial position of the
        organization is not hidden.

   •	 Distributing the annual report and accounts to shareholders.




9.	 Advising the board on the applicable laws, regulations, standards,
    and codes relating to reporting of nonfinancial information.
    The corporate secretary should advise the board on the applicable laws,
    regulations, standards, and codes relating to the reporting of nonfinancial
    information within its jurisdictions. This includes whether the organization
    should consider producing an integrated report. The benefits of an
    integrated report are set out in Figure 12.2. An integrated report should
    enable an organization to understand better the relationships between its




Chapter 12: Role in Financial Oversight and Reporting
                                                                                      129
  Figure 12.2: 
               Slide 22 from IFC,s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 5/Integrated
               Reporting presentation.




           Benefits of an Integrated Report

                                                      GREATER
                                                      CLARITY




                                                    SUSTAINABLE
                                      LOWER        STRATEGY FOR
                                                                      BETTER
                                   REPUTATIONAL          A           DECISIONS
                                       RISK
                                                    SUSTAINABLE
                                                      SOCIETY




                                                      DEEPER
                                                    ENGAGEMENT




         CORPORATE SECRETARIES TOOLKIT                                                    22
         PART 3 MODULE 5 / INTEGRATED REPORTING




  Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.


       various operating and functional units and the resources the organization
       uses and needs to achieve its strategic goals. An organization will also be
       able to understand:

         •	 The external context within which it operates.

         •	 The opportunities and risks it faces and how to tailor strategies to
            manage them.

         •	 The nature and quality of its relationships with key stakeholders.

  A good corporate secretary develops relationships across all departments within
  an organization and uses those relationships to coordinate the departments
  to ensure that they do not operate as “silos” but rather as an integrated team.
  The corporate secretary should also be able to advise both the board and
  management on the company’s external relationships with stakeholders.




130                                        The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
CHAPTER 13:
Role in Building Ethical Cultures




Corporate secretaries are often known as the “conscience of the company” due
to their governance role. There will be situations where it may be in the best
short-term interests of the organization to ignore best governance practices
or even act in an unethical way. For example, if the board is trying to “window
dress” bad news, or maybe management is considering bribing a government
official to win a lucrative contract.




WHAT ARE BUSINESS ETHICS?
Business ethics underlie the basic principles of corporate governance. This is
why it is so important for an organization to set out clearly what its ethical
standards are. Also as the governance professional it is important for the
corporate secretary to be able to articulate what the expected ethical behaviors
are and to ensure that they are applied when decisions are made. As stated
above, this often means advising the board and/or senior managers to take
actions that may be above the law, regulations, standards, and codes of the
countries in which the organization is operating.




Being the conscience of the company is not an easy role and may often lead
to corporate secretaries either leaving or being asked to leave a job because
of the statement of these views. For the corporate secretary to be protected
and able to properly fulfill this role, it is important for the corporate secretary
not to be under the influence of any one individual, such as the chairman or
the CEO. This is why many countries require the appointment of the corporate
secretary to be a matter for the whole board.




Chapter 13: R
             ole in Building Ethical Cultures
                                                                                      131
  The corporate secretary, to be able to fulfill the role of the conscience of
  the company, must be independent minded. He or she also needs to be
  commercially aware and to recognize the longer-term threats to the reputation
  of the organization that a proposed course of action may present. The
  corporate secretary also needs to have the respect of the executive managers
  and the board, including the chairman, to be able to speak out on these often
  quite sensitive matters. Many argue that this is one of the reasons the corporate
  secretary should occupy a senior position in the organization. The corporate
  secretary’s responsibilities in this area typically would include those listed below.




  1.	 Speaking out against bad governance and unethical behavior.
      The corporate secretary should speak out against bad governance and
      unethical practices, and remind the board and senior executives of the
      appropriate course of conduct and principles of good governance that they
      should apply to protect the reputation of the organization and ensure that
      the organization is sustainable in the long-term. Corporate secretaries have
      a responsibility to ensure that the organizations they work for “do the right
      thing.” Often this may be going beyond what is required in law.

      Traditionally, ethics was often described as the gray area between the law
      and the realities of acceptable behavior. Today, many ethicists prefer to see
      ethics as legal activities that are interpreted according to the values of the
      company or individual.

      The gray-area question was showcased in the tax evasion accusations levied
      against Starbucks, Google, and Amazon in the United Kingdom. Though legal,
      the licensing and supply agreements and the steps taken by these companies
      to minimize tax and customs duties created a political storm at a time of
      national austerity, prompting Starbucks to make a voluntary tax payment
      of £10 million after five years of zero liability. This tax issue and Starbuck’s
      voluntary actions go beyond legal considerations to a more fundamental
      question of the ethics and values that govern how a company wishes to portray
      its way of doing business. In the United States, the same ethical debate has
      surfaced over Apple’s tax status with offshore structures that, though legal,
      have seen the company paying little or no corporate taxes on over $70 billion.

      Corporate secretaries have to develop skills, policies, and procedures to ensure
      that they are able to test the acceptability of a certain course of action to




132                                  The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
Figure 13.1: 
             Slide 10 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 3/Building
             Ethical Cultures presentation.




         What does an organization need to do to
         create an ethical culture?

           Lead from the top
           Develop policies
           Consult and benchmark the policies that have been
              developed
             Set up a monitoring system
             Set up a whistleblowing policy and process
             Organize training
             Ensure that reward systems reward ethical behavior
              and are aligned with the company’s risk appetite

       CORPORATE SECRETARIES TOOLKIT                                                     18
       PART 3 MODULE 3 / BUILDING ETHICAL CULTURES




Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.



   external stakeholders and advise the board and management accordingly of
   the impact on the organization of implementing the decision they are about
   to make. Again, this is not always easy, as corporate secretaries do not have
   crystal balls, but by engaging with stakeholders, listening to their opinions
   and views, and enlightening the board and senior management to legitimate
   concerns and interests of key stakeholder groups a corporate secretary should
   be able to carry out this role.




2.	 Ensuring that the board sets standards of ethical business.
   One of the key roles of the board is to set standards of ethical behavior
   that it and the owners of the organization expect the board and all the




Chapter 13: R
             ole in Building Ethical Cultures
                                                                                              133
      organization’s employees to follow. This entails creating a vision, mission, and
      ethical values for the organization. How the organization expects the ethical
      values to be practiced by the board and those employed by the organization
      will be reflected in a code of ethics approved by the board.

      The standards of ethical behavior and the attitudes associated with them,
      “the corporate culture,” should also be consistent with the way the company
      is governed, so the corporate secretary is often asked by the board to work
      with senior management to develop the ethical values of the organization.

      The corporate secretary should advise the board and senior management
      to select ethical values for the organization that are appropriate to that
      organization. To achieve this best practice is to develop ethical values and
      standards of behavior from the bottom up. Employees should be asked for
      their opinions, and the values and standards of behavior should be developed
      including their input.

      Corporate secretaries should be wary of plucking values from the Internet
      with little thought and plastering them on the walls of the organization.
      Employees, and often the board, struggle to associate with them and in many
      cases even remember them. As we will see later in the chapter, being able to
      embed an organization’s ethical values is very important to the success of
      the organization.

      Corporate secretaries should be careful when choosing “integrity” as a value,
      which many organizations do. In itself, integrity does not have a meaning; it
      needs to be combined with other values. It is an assurance that the values will
      be lived up to, as integrity means we will do what we say we will do. When
      choosing integrity as a value, many associate their own values with it and so
      assume that it means being honest, truthful, and so on. In reality people who
      are dishonest can be so with integrity if they make it clear it is their intention
      to be so.




  3.	 Developing a code of ethics.
      The corporate secretary is often asked by the board to develop a the code of
      ethics. (See Figure 13.2.)




134                                 The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
Figure 13.2: Developing a Code of Ethics




   THE ROLE OF THE CORPORATE SECRETARY
   IN DEVELOPING A CODE OF ETHICS

    DRAFT THE CODE                         Avoid recommending the adoption of
                                           someone else’s code. Rather, take time
                                           to develop a code specifically for the
                                           organization.

    CONSULT WITH                           Work with HR/internal audit function to pilot
    EMPLOYEES ON THE                       the code, collect input from employees, give
    CODE AND SHARE                         feedback to the board on the success of the
    FEEDBACK WITH THE
                                           pilot, and suggest amendments that arise from
    BOARD
                                           the pilot. This is to ensure buy-in by employees.

    ROLL OUT THE CODE                      Work with HR to roll out the code throughout
                                           the organization. This will include posters,
                                           workshops, and information on the company’s
                                           intranet site.

    MONITOR THE CODE                       Work with the internal audit function to
                                           monitor compliance with the code. Establish
                                           a whistleblowing policy and procedure. Any
                                           breaches of the code should be reported to the
                                           board via the audit committee (if one exists).

    EVALUATE THE CODE                      Recommend any needed amendments to
                                           the code and submit them to the board for
                                           approval. With the help of HR, communicate
                                           the changes to employees.

                                           Amendments to the code should only be
                                           made when absolutely necessary, as constant
                                           changes will confuse employees.

   Source: See the Global Corporate Governance Forum’s publication, Focus 7: The Moral Compass
   of Companies: Business Ethics and Corporate Governance as Anti-Corruption Tools, for a detailed
   discussion on different types of codes of ethics, including their advantages and disadvantages and
   step-by-step guidance on how to implement them across a wide range of companies with varying
   levels of resources.




  Chapter 13: R
               ole in Building Ethical Cultures
                                                                                                        135
  4.	Communicating the expected standards of ethical behavior.
        It is important for organizations to indicate to the board and its employees
        the standards of behavior expected, because, as with individuals, each
        organization will have its own ethical values and standards of behavior.
        To honor these values, those connected with the company need to know
        what the values are and how the organization expects them to act in
        certain circumstances. Sometimes the approach to governance adopted
        by the organization can influence the expected action. For example, if the
        organization has a shareholder approach to corporate governance, its values
        may indicate that it puts the interests of shareholders ahead of the interests
        of anyone else. If the organization adopts a stakeholder approach, its values
        may indicate that the board and its employees should take into consideration
        the needs and concerns of a wider stakeholder group than just shareholders.
        These indications will result in different behaviors.

        When disseminating the values, the corporate secretary should ensure
        that the reason why the value is so important for the organization is also
        communicated. This will help employees identify with the importance of
        living up to the value.




  5.	 Advising the board and management on building an ethical
      culture.
        In The Moral Compass of Companies: Business Ethics and Corporate
        Governance as Anti-Corruption Tools,1 John D. Sullivan suggests that it is
        never too late to start building an ethical organization. He suggests that there
        are three levels of progression in building an ethical organization:

             1.	 Starting from mere compliance,

             2.	 Continuing to the systematic implementation of an integrated ethics
                 program,

             3.	 Culminating with organizational leadership and innovations that set
                 new standards and benchmarks of business ethics.


  1	
       IFC Global Corporate Governance Forum, Focus 7: The Moral Compass of Companies: Business Ethics and Corporate
       Governance as Anti-Corruption Tools, by John D. Sullivan.




136                                             The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
   He claims that level 1 is a defensive position, while levels 2 and 3 are more
   proactive and offensive in nature, going beyond the requirements established
   by law or the benchmarks set by national best practices. (See Figure 13.3 on
   page 138.)




6.	 Alerting the board and management to the professional ethical
    standards of advisers and others.
   Corporate secretaries should also be aware of any professional ethical
   standards of people within the organization or those dealing with it, and
   they should ensure that the board and management are alerted to them
   when developing the organization’s standards. This is to ensure that the
   organization does not develop standards that are contradictory to the
   professional standards. For example, auditors are required to comply with
   certain professional standards when carrying out an audit.




7.	 Ensuring that compliance with the values and the code of ethics is
    monitored and breaches are reported to the board.
   The corporate secretary should ensure that management and internal audit
   are monitoring compliance with the values and code of ethics. Any breaches
   should be reported to the board via the audit committee (if one exists). The
   corporate secretary should review the breaches and advise the board on
   whether changes are needed to the values and/or code of ethics.




8.	 Ensuring that ethical values and the code of ethics are reviewed
    from time to time.
   A good corporate secretary will also be aware that ethical values change
   over time. This can often be detected from the types of issues that are raised
   through the whistleblowing procedure, reported in the press, and received
   in information from professional bodies and advisers. At least annually, the
   corporate secretary should review the organization’s values and standards of
   behavior and propose amendments to the values and code of ethics, when
   necessary, to the board.




Chapter 13: R
             ole in Building Ethical Cultures
                                                                                    137
  Figure 13.3: Building an Ethical Culture­
                                          —Every Step Counts



                                   SETTING THE FOUNDATION
                          LEVEL 1: 
                                        Complying with Legal and Regulatory Requirements

                          XX Designated ethics officer responsible for all reporting and disclosure
                             requirements established by law and regulations
                          XX Written    code of ethics in place, adopted by board of directors
                                    and external stakeholders consulted on company’s ethical
                          XX Internal
                             performance


                                   COMMITTED ENGAGEMENT
                          LEVEL 2: 
                                        Institutionalizing a Comprehensive Ethics Program

                          XX Commission  external company ethics assessment to determine risks
                             and opportunities
      PRACTICAL ACTIONS




                                  engagement of internal and external stakeholders to determine
                          XX Active
                             company ethics program
                          XX Ethics program is an integrated and systematic application of key inter-
                             related components:
                             —— Ethics structure at board level providing strategic leadership (perhaps
                                an ethics committee or sub-committee)
                             —— Ethics office, with appropriate level of designated staff and resources
                             —— Communications strategy tailored to internal and external
                                stakeholders
                             —— Safe reporting lines for ethical misconduct (anonymous whistle-
                                blowing hotline
                             —— Ethics training program at all levels of organization and key external
                                stakeholders
                             —— internal monitoring and audit systems to report on effectiveness of
                                ethics program components
                             —— Reporting and disclosure of ethical performance to external
                                stakeholders
                          XX Certification   of company ethics officers


                                   LEADING BY EXAMPLE
                          LEVEL 3: 
                                        Setting New Ethical Standards

                          XX Externalindependent verification of ethics program and assurance of
                             performance
                          XX Leader  in initiating collective action solutions or forming coalitions to
                             fight corruption




138                                                  The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
9.	 Ensuring that the board approves and monitors implementation of
    whistleblowing policies and procedures.
   To assist boards in monitoring adherence to codes of ethics, many
   organizations adopt whistleblowing policies. Corporate secretaries often get
   involved in drafting these policies and working with either internal audit or
   the Human Resources function to implement them. (See Figure 13.4.)

   The term “whistleblower” has different meanings in different jurisdictions,
   but it is mostly associated with a definition derived from the renowned U.S.
   statute, the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978. The Act defines a whistleblower
   as an employee “[W]ho discloses information he reasonably believes
   evidences a violation of any law, rule, or regulation, or mismanagement, a
   gross waste of public funds, an abuse of authority, or a substantial or specific
   danger to public health or safety.”


Figure 13.4: 
             Slide 24 from IFC,s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 3/Building
             Ethical Cultures presentation.




         Whistleblowing – Policies and Procedures

         !  Are employees aware of the whistleblowing procedures?
         !  Can employees raise concerns without risk of censure?
         !  Does the company act promptly on concerns?
         !  Are genuine whistleblowers protected?
         !  Is there a senior manager responsible?
         !  Do all managers understand the policy and accept the principle of
            whistleblowing?
         !  Are all reports generated by the whistleblowing procedure
            submitted to the board (audit committee)?
         !  Are all whistleblowing procedures known and available to all
            stakeholders, including the public?



                                                                                     24




Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




Chapter 13: R
             ole in Building Ethical Cultures
                                                                                          139
      Often, a whistleblower is a current or past employee, or someone connected
      to the organization, who makes an accusation against the organization.

      Best practices indicate that boards/audit committees should provide a
      secure legal environment in which the internal audit function, employees, and
      others are able to report fraud and other unethical practices that may come
      to their attention. Employees are a good source of information concerning
      possible issues that may arise. These issues may be considered and dealt
      with through internal controls prior to any damage to company brand or
      reputation.

      A secure legal environment must ensure that proper policies and procedures
      are in place to consider:

         •	 The interests of the person(s) who is the subject of the complaint

         •	 The interests of the whistleblower

         •	 Responses and investigatory procedures that are complete, thorough,
           and nonthreatening

      The audit committee’s role should include a review and assessment of the
      policies and procedures applying to whistleblowers. The committee should
      assure itself that procedures take account of and do not contravene local
      applicable laws, especially those relating to privacy and labor protection.

      When issues are reported to the audit committee through whistleblowing
      mechanisms, the actions it may take include:

         •	 Investigating and documenting the issues and findings

         •	 Accessing and checking with legal advisers regarding appropriate
           action

         •	 Reporting on its findings to the board and to relevant senior members
           of management

         •	 Ensuring that management has taken appropriate action

      Given its wider responsibilities of duties of care and diligence, action by the
      board/audit committee is most important if it is notified of wrongdoing and
      has established that wrongdoing has taken place.




140                                The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
CHAPTER 14:
Role in Stakeholder Management




“No surprises” is one of the most important principles of good corporate
governance. Frequently, reputable companies find themselves caught in what
appears to them to be a surprise controversy, despite professional public
relations work and elaborate mechanisms of internal control. Business leaders
are starting to recognize that their traditional approaches to running their
companies are insufficient to handle changing societal expectations around the
globe. They are starting to realize that stakeholder engagement is important to
business success and society’s trust.

In many companies, the board looks to the corporate secretary to assist with
stakeholder engagement. The corporate secretary typically would do this in the
ways described below.




1.	 Engaging with his or her own stakeholder group.
   A corporate secretary’s own stakeholder group could include:

      •	 Shareholders

      •	 Regulators

      •	 Social and environmental groups (if the corporate secretary has
        responsibility for CSR)

      •	 Suppliers (including share registrars/transfer agents, if this function is
        outsourced).




Chapter 14: R
             ole in Stakeholder Management
                                                                                      141
  2.	 Explaining to the board the business case for stakeholder
      engagement.
      The business case for stakeholder engagement is:

         •	 Build and strengthen a good reputation and brand recognition.

         •	 Create value and wealth.

         •	 Gain and retain loyal customers while avoiding boycotts or other
           undesirable consumer actions.

         •	 Create the perception that the company is a desirable place to work
           and increase ability to recruit and retain talented staff members.

         •	 Identify ways to increase efficiency and reduce costs in their operations.

         •	 Show a more responsible approach to risk taking, which reduces risk.

         •	 Become better able to leverage opportunities, giving the company
           competitive advantage as they are able to identify new ideas for
           products or services that address stakeholder needs. Effective
           stakeholder engagement promotes corporate learning and innovation.

         •	 Be more readily welcomed into new markets, as companies embedded
           in those markets perceive them as less hostile to local values and ways
           of operating.




  3.	 Assisting the board with stakeholder engagement.
      The corporate secretary should be ready to assist the board with
      stakeholder engagement as a core corporate value and to coordinate with
      management to ensure that policies and plans are implemented to make
      sure that the company leverages its stakeholder engagement. Once the
      board has adopted stakeholder engagement as a core value, the corporate
      secretary may be called upon to assist and advise the board in the
      following areas:




142                                The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
      •	 Identifying which stakeholders have legitimate expectations and interests.

      •	 Mapping the power and interest of stakeholders or stakeholder groups,
        so that they can develop a strategy for engaging with them. (Figure 14.1
        on page 144)

      •	 Identifying, discussing, and prioritizing the key risks associated with
        changing societal expectations.

      •	 Determining the board’s financial and nonfinancial needs for decision
        making, management oversight, and monitoring with regard to key
        stakeholder relationships associated with creating value and long-term
        sustainability.

      •	 Discussing and approving key performance indicators for social,
        environmental, and financial performance.

      •	 Approving a policy for external, financial, nonfinancial (sustainability), or
        integrated reporting.

      •	 Looking to integrate stakeholder issues into annual shareholder
        meetings. This can be done through resolutions, presentations at
        meetings, and/or displays at the entrance or in the meeting room.

      •	 Discussing the risks and impacts (positive and negative) of projects
        and operations and providing transparent disclosure information to
        stakeholders (including shareholders).

      •	 Convening stakeholder forums and inviting key stakeholder
        representatives to address board meetings, so members of boards hear
        from stakeholders directly about their concerns and issues.

      •	 Documenting the concerns and issues of stakeholders and lessons
        learned and feeding this into the risk management, strategic planning,
        and business continuity processes, so that the company is able to
        leverage opportunities and lessen negative impacts.

      •	 Recognizing that different stakeholder groups may have different
        interests and ideas. Tailoring engagement and dialogue to better
        represent stakeholders’ disparate interests to help them understand the
        reasons for board decisions.

      •	 Developing policies on who within the organization should be the prime
        communicator for each stakeholder group.




Chapter 14: R
             ole in Stakeholder Management
                                                                                     143
  Figure 14.1: 
               Slide 17 from IFC’s Corporate Secretary Toolkit, Part 3 Module 6/
               The Company Secretary: The Board’s Communicator presentation.




           Stakeholder Mapping

                                                       LEVEL OF INTEREST
                                                 LOW                   HIGH




                                                                 KEEP INFORMED
                        LEVEL OF POWER




                                                  KEEP
                                         HIGH                    INVOLVED AND
                                                SATISFIED
                                                                 CONTRIBUTING




                                                MINIMAL               KEEP
                                         LOW    EFFORT              INFORMED




                                                                                               17




  Source: IFC Corporate Secretary Toolkit, 2013.




  4.	Advising the board on any reputational-risk aspects to stakeholder
     engagement.




  5.	 Coordinating with management to ensure that the board is advised
      on how to engage with different stakeholder groups.




144                                             The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
WAYS TO ENGAGE WITH STAKEHOLDERS

REACTIVELY
The organization engages defensively, when forced to in response to a crisis and
usually in an attempt to rebuild its reputation.


PROACTIVELY
The organization tries to understand its stakeholders’ concerns and issues. The
corporate secretary could advise the board and management to:

Carry out customer surveys, focus groups, shareholder surveys, competitor
research, and so on. This information can then feed into the decision-
making process.

Engage directly with stakeholders to get their input before making decisions.
This is often the case with shareholders and their representative bodies.
Organizations will run a proposal or idea past some of their larger shareholders
before making a final decision on an issue, such as remuneration packages for
directors or senior executives.

Involve stakeholders in the decision-making process. For example, an
organization could bring together groups of stakeholders (employees, the
community, and so on.) and ask them to vote on an action. For example,
LaFarge Cement involved people in the community in Morocco in the process of
finding a new location for a cement plant.


INTERACTIVELY
The organization has ongoing relationships of mutual respect, openness, and
trust with stakeholders. The organization can do this through many of the
channels mentioned under “proactively,” above.

Most engagements have fixed timetables to ensure that results are achieved.
The corporate secretary may be asked to develop a timetable, which should be
based on input from all parties. It is important to establish ground rules for public
disclosure and for managing expenses related to the engagement. Organizations
should avoid giving money to stakeholder groups as part of the engagement as




Chapter 14: R
             ole in Stakeholder Management
                                                                                    145
  this could be misconstrued as a bribe. Any money that is paid over should be
  documented and reported, giving the reason for the payment.

  Communication to employees about the purpose of the engagement, and what
  the organization seeks to achieve from it is also important and ensures that the
  organization communicates a consistent message.

  Where issues and concerns raised through a stakeholder engagement cannot
  be addressed, an organization should be honest and transparent about why
  this is the case. For example, many pharmaceutical companies are asked by
  stakeholders to eliminate testing on animals, but many governments require
  such tests for product approval. Novo Nordisk, the world’s largest maker of
  insulin products for diabetics, acknowledges that reducing its reliance on testing
  on animals is desirable, but notes that it cannot do so until governments change
  the approvals process. The company publicly reports on the number of animals
  used in testing and its progress in changing or influencing government policies
  on product testing.




  6.	 Advising the board on reporting on stakeholder engagement.
      The corporate secretary advises the board on reporting— and ensuring that
      management make recommendations for reporting—to specific stakeholder
      groups, and where appropriate, develops reports to specific stakeholder
      groups. The Global Reporting Initiative Sustainability Reporting Framework
      (GRI) is one of the most popular reporting frameworks.




  7.	 Alerting the board and/or management to opportunities and risks
      associated with stakeholders engagements.
      The corporate secretary may be asked to work with management,
      compliance officers, and investor relations officers to ensure that the correct
      strategies, policies, and procedures are in place to manage risks, especially
      reputational risk, and to take advantage of the opportunities presented by




146                                The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
      particular stakeholders, particularly partnership opportunities that support
      the organization’s strategic objectives.

      In relation to partnerships, the corporate secretary should advise the board
      of the following elements of a successful partnership, which were identified
      as part of a McKinsey survey:1

           •	 Identify clear reasons to collaborate.

           •	 Find a “fairy godmother”—a group of people totally committed to and
              knowledgeable about what the organization is trying to achieve.

           •	 Set simple, credible goals.

           •	 Get professional help; it is important to have an honest broker to
              facilitate the conclusion of partnership.

           •	 Dedicate good people to the cause.

           •	 Be flexible in defining the success of the partnership.

           •	 Prepare to let go; plan for either the wind-down of the partnership or to
              spin it off into an independent entity. No collaboration should be kept
              alive beyond its useful lifetime.




8.	 Advising the board on the setting up of a committee responsible
    for stakeholder issues.
      The corporate secretary should advise the board on whether a separate
      committee should be established to deal with stakeholder issues. These
      committees are often called the corporate responsibility committee, the ethics
      committee, or the reputation committee, as they are often responsible for
      ethical and/or reputational issues. These committees often have members of
      management on them as well as the board members. The chairman should be
      a board member, and the quorum should be a majority of board members. The
      corporate secretary typically would be the secretary of the committee.



1	
     Sheila Bonini and Stephen Gorner, “The business of sustainability: McKinsey Global Survey Results” (McKinsey & Com-
     pany, October 2011), mckinsey.com.




Chapter 14: R
             ole in Stakeholder Management
                                                                                                                       147
  REFERENCES
  APPCGG. 2012. “Elevating the role of the company secretary: Lessons from
  the FTSE All Share.” (May) London: The All Party Parliamentary Corporate
  Governance Group.

  Bauer, R., and H.A. Guenster. 2003. Good corporate governance pays off! Well-
  governed companies perform better on the stock market.” Working Paper
  (April).

  Bradbury, Travis, and Jean Graves. 2009. Emotional Intelligence. San Diego:
  TalentSmart.

  CCA. 2005. “The corporate secretary from record-keeper to gate-keeper.”
  Governance Matters (November). Canadian Co-operative Association. www.
  governance.coop.

  Chatroom. 2009. “Company Secretary Joseph Mau discusses corporate social
  responsibility at the HKEx and the role of the Secretariat Services Department.”
  Exchange (October).

  Collins, Jim. 2001. Good to Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap and
  others Don’t. New York: Harper Collins Publishers.

  Dunne, Patrick. 2006. Running Board Meetings. London: Kogan Page.

  ICSA. 2013. “Reporting lines for company secretaries.” Guidance Note (July).
  www.icsaglobal.com.

  IFA. 2007. Le Secretaire du Conseil & La Governance de L’Entreprise. Institut
  Francias des Administrateurs.

  IFC . 2005. “Corporate secretary: Recommendations for Ukrainian companies.”
  Handbook. Washington, D.C.: International Finance Corporation.

  Kelsey, Dee, and Pam Plumb. 2004. Great Meetings! Great Results. Portland
  Maine: Great Meetings! Inc.

  Kuper, Lawrence. 2006. Ethics—The Leadership Edge. Cape Town: Zebra Press.

  Laborde, Genie Z. 2011. Influencing with Integrity: Management Skills for
  Communication and Negotiation. Carmarthan, Wales: Crown House Publishing.




148                               The Corporate Secretary: The Governance Professional
Lencioni, Patrick. 2004. Death by Meeting. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Lencioni, Patrick. 2005. Five Dysfunctions of a Team. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

McCarthy, Bernice and Dennis McCarthy. 2005. Teaching Around the 4MAT
Cycle. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.

Monks, Robert A.G., and Nell Minnow. 2011. Watching the Watchers. Cambridge
University Press.

Nadler, David A., Beverley A. Behan, and Mark B. Nadler (editors). 2006. Building
Better Boards: A Blueprint for Effective Governance. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Robson, Rob, Archana Karki, and Philip Davis. 2013. Effective Minute Taking.
London: ICSA Information & Training Ltd.




References
                                                                                    149
International Finance Corporation
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW,
Washington, DC 20433

www.ifc.org



                                    January 2016
