          DISCUSSION PAPER	           NO. 1612




How to Target Households in Adaptive
           Social Protection Systems?
    Relative Efficiency of Proxy Means
Test and Household Economy Analysis
                               in Niger

                              Pascale Schnitzer




                              October 2016
    How to Target Households in Adaptive Social Protection Systems?
    Relative Efficiency of Proxy Means Test and Household Economy
                            Analysis in Niger 1

                                               August 2016
                                            Pascale Schnitzer


Abstract

Proxy Means Test (PMT) and the Household Economy Analysis (HEA) are widely used methods to
target chronically poor households and those suffering from food crises respectively. Using panel data
from Niger, this study provides the first empirical evidence on the relative efficiency of these methods
in identifying households suffering from permanent or seasonal deprivations. Results show limited
overlap between households selected by each method. The PMT performs better in targeting
chronically poor households, while HEA performs better in targeting seasonal food insecure
households. The study also explores the extent to which these methods can be improved, used and
potentially combined to target households as part of ASP systems. Results show that the HEA formula
could be further improved to target seasonally food insecure households, including through a
regression model estimating food insecurity, and a principal component analysis (PCA) model.
Combinations of PMT with methods such as HEA, PCA, or a food insecurity formula may be considered
to identify households suffering from chronic poverty and seasonal food insecurity as part of an
efficient and scalable ASP system. Harmonizing data collection tools of PMT and HEA users would
serve as a crucial building block towards a unified registry and play a key role in improving the
efficiency of ASP systems.



Keywords: Poverty, cash transfers, means test, targeting, Africa, adaptive social protection
JEL: I32, I38


1
 Acknowledgments: I thank Carlo del Ninno, Patrick Premand, Bradford Mills, Quentin Stoeffler, Arthur Alik,
Phillippe Leite, Leila Bourahla, Marie Boulinaud, and Julius Gunnemann for very valuable inputs and comments
on the manuscript. Participants to workshops that took place in Washington, DC and Niger also provided useful
comments. They included the Food Economy Group (FEG) as well as different non-governmental organizations
making use of the Household Economy Analysis. The research and the compilation of this work would not have
been possible without the generous contribution from the Adaptive Social Protection Program for the Sahel
Multi-donor Trust Fund, funded by the United Kingdom.
Content
 1.      Background and objectives ........................................................................................................ 1
 2.      Description and literature of PMT and HEA methods ................................................................ 3
      2.1 PMT: Description and literature ............................................................................................... 3
      2.2 HEA: Description and literature................................................................................................ 5
      2.3 PMT and HEA methods used in Niger....................................................................................... 6
 3.      Data ............................................................................................................................................ 8
 4.      Methodology .............................................................................................................................. 9
      4.1 Simulating PMT and HEA selection of beneficiaries ................................................................. 9
      4.2 Welfare benchmarks, vulnerability and targeting errors - concepts and definitions ............ 11
 5.      Descriptive statistics on consumption per capita and the FCS ................................................ 14
 6.      Households targeted under the PMT and HEA methods ......................................................... 17
      6.1 Overlap between HEA and PMT ............................................................................................. 17
      6.2 Targeting efficiency ................................................................................................................ 18
      6.3 Characterizing households under each method .................................................................... 21
 7.      Can the design of formulas be improved? ............................................................................... 23
      7.1 Design of HEA ......................................................................................................................... 23
      7.2 Adjusting consumption for economies of scale and adult equivalent ................................... 26
 8.      How can the existing methods be used in the context of ASP systems? ................................. 28
      8.1 Combining PMT and HEA to get the best out of each method .............................................. 28
      8.2 Harmonize data collection tools applied by PMT and HEA users........................................... 29
 9.      Conclusion and policy implications .......................................................................................... 30
 References ........................................................................................................................................ 34
 Annex 1: Comparability of ECVM/A data with the HEA variables used for targeting ...................... 37
 Annex 2: Tables ................................................................................................................................ 39




                                                                            i
Tables

Table 1: General characteristics of PMT and HEA households ............................................................ 23
Table 2: Inclusion errors of quantitative methods aiming to replicate HEA ........................................ 26
Table 3: PMT inclusion errors when adjusting for household composition......................................... 27
Table 4: Inclusion errors for current programs and scenarios 1 and 2. ............................................... 29


Figures

Figure 1: Chronic and transitory poverty and food insecurity ............................................................. 15
Figure 2: Percentage change in welfare measures between the lean and harvest season ................. 16
Figure 3: Correlations between welfare measures .............................................................................. 17
Figure 4: Overlap between beneficiaries at different cut-off points ................................................... 18
Figure 5: Inclusion error based on consumption and FCS - Selection of 30% of households .............. 19
Figure 6: Rates of chronic and seasonal poor and food insecure among PMT and HEA selected
households ........................................................................................................................................... 20
Figure 7: Share of targeted households that are “deprived” based on different metrics ................... 21


Annex tables

Table A1: Food insecurity by season .................................................................................................... 39
Table A2: Poverty by season................................................................................................................. 39
Table A3: Percentage change in welfare measures between the lean and harvest season ................ 40
Table A4: Correlations between welfare measures ............................................................................. 40
Table A5: Overlap between beneficiaries when selecting different shares of households ................. 41
Table A6: PMT and HEA inclusion errors based on different welfare measures ................................. 41
Table A7: PMT performance based on temporary and chronic poverty and food insecurity ............. 42
Table A8: HEA performance based on temporary and chronic poverty and food insecurity .............. 42
Table A9: Share of targeted households that are “deprived” based on different welfare measures . 43
Table A10: Differences in livelihood diversification between PMT and HEA households ................... 43
Table A11: Differences in livelihoods between PMT and HEA households.......................................... 44




                                                                           ii
    1. Background and objectives

Adaptive Social Protection (ASP) systems are increasingly popular as an instrument to reduce
poverty and mitigate the impact of shocks. Poor and vulnerable people in developing
countries are facing ever greater and deeper shocks to their livelihoods. These include
climatic shocks, such as floods and droughts, as well as other financial, price, food or fuel
related stresses. With climate change, the magnitude and frequency of climate related shocks
is expected to increase, disproportionately affecting the poor 2. Reliance on subsistence
agriculture means the impact of shocks (such as droughts or floods) are felt most strongly by
rural poor people, whose survival often depends directly on food system outcomes. These
stresses make it increasingly difficult for poor people's usual coping strategies to effectively
protect their livelihoods from shocks with often long lasting implications for their wellbeing.

Interventions in the fields of Social Protection, Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk
Reduction all aim to reduce vulnerability to shocks. Adaptive Social Protection (ASP)
recognizes that greater integration and knowledge sharing among these three fields would
improve the effectiveness of interventions aimed at reducing vulnerability to shocks (Davies
et al 2013).

ASP follows a two-fold approach to mitigate the impact of shocks and to reduce poverty. First,
it builds resilience before shocks occur (through predictable transfers, building community
assets, and other programs that promote resilience). Second, it quickly scales up safety nets
in response to shocks.

Effectively identifying households that are poor and vulnerable to poverty is a critical aspect
of ASP to maximize social impact with scarce resources. Yet, limited evidence exist on
methods that can identify both population groups. Using household panel data from Niger,
this study compares the effectiveness of Household Economy Analysis (HEA) and Proxy
Means Test (PMT) targeting methods in Niger. The HEA targeting method used in Niger was

2
 Without appropriate interventions climate change could force more than 100 million people into extreme
poverty by 2030 (Hallegatte et al. 2016).



                                                    1
specifically developed to identify food insecure households in response to crises (with no
specific measurable welfare defined). By contrast, the PMT in Niger was developed to target
households that are chronically poor, i.e. those with low consumption per capita.

This study aims to address the following key questions:

   1. What is the overlap between households selected under the PMT and HEA method?
   2. What is the relative efficiency of the PMT and HEA based on key welfare benchmarks?
   3. How can the methods be improved?
   4. How can the existing methods be used in the context of an ASP systems in Niger?

This study focuses on the efficiency of the targeting methods in identifying two groups: (1)
households with low consumption per capita—as a measure of poverty; and (2) household
with a low Food Consumption Score (FCS) during the lean season—as a measure of food
insecurity. To investigate the performance of methods based on other dimensions of
household well-being, the analysis also looks at alternative metrics such as income, non-
productive assets, livestock and land.

Results show that PMT and HEA target two largely different types of population and that the
performance of each method depends on the welfare indicator used. PMT performs better
in targeting chronically poor households (measured by consumption per capita during both
the lean and harvest season), while HEA performs better in targeting seasonal food insecure
households (measured through the Food Consumption Score during the lean season). PMT
selected households consume less calories per capita, are relatively larger and are asset poor
but have, more diversified livelihoods. HEA selected households are relatively smaller, have
lower levels of livestock, less land and less diversified livelihoods. Key challenges in the
implementation of the HEA method are discussed and solutions are presented. Finally, the
study shows that a combination of the PMT and HEA method could be used effectively to
address the targeting needs of ASP systems.




                                              2
This study is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the PMT and HEA methods and links
those to the existing literature. Sections 3 and 4 describe the data and methodology,
respectively. Section 6, 7 and 8 discuss results and Section 9 presents the policy implications
and conclusion.

   2. Description and literature of PMT and HEA methods

Targeting households is difficult because the criteria for eligibility is hard to measure and
verify. Measuring household expenditures—the most widely used indicator of poverty in low
income settings—not only relies on long and expensive survey modules but also remains
difficult to verify. This is a major concern in the context of cash transfer programs when
households may have an incentive to strategically under report their well-being to gain access
to programs.

The challenges of measuring and verifying a specified eligibility criterion call for effective
targeting methods to identify the population of interest. A variety of methods exist for this
purpose. Two of the most common targeting methods in Sub-Saharan Africa are PMT and
HEA.

2.1 PMT: Description and literature
PMT generates a proxy for household welfare—normally measured by household
expenditures—that determines program eligibility through household and individual
characteristics that are easy-to-verify and measure (Grosh and Baker 1995). Characteristics
often include a household’s location and quality of dwelling, the ownership of durable goods,
demographic structure, education, and occupations of adult members. The selection and
weights of characteristics are determined through statistical models that predict household
welfare using comprehensive household surveys.

PMT is normally combined with other targeting methods including geographical targeting
and/or community based targeting (CBT). The main advantage of PMT is that it provides fairly
good targeting results for chronically poor households using a comparatively small amount



                                              3
of information that is easy to observe and relatively hard to manipulate. In addition, the PMT
does not discourage work or distort other incentives for households to increase their levels
of well-being, because applicants do not know which variables, and their respective weights,
determine the welfare/poverty level. However, PMTs do not normally perform well in
targeting households vulnerable to poverty. In other words, while a PMT can provide an
accurate picture of the poverty level at the time of data collection, it does not take into
account the likelihood of shocks and how these may affect households.

There is an important amount of evidence on the effectiveness of PMT. Del Ninno and Mills
(2014) conclude that it is possible to effectively target chronically poor households using
PMTs based on multi-country case studies from Sub-Saharan Africa. However, PMT efficacy
remains an open issue with respect to the identification of beneficiaries vulnerable to
poverty. Also, the authors suggest that further improvements are possible in the design of
PMT tools to substantially improve targeting performance by combining PMTs with other
targeting methods.

Using data collected in a pilot cash transfer program in Niger, McBride (2015) evaluates the
performance of the PMT assessed in this paper on the basis of different food security
indicators. The study shows mixed results. For some food insecurity indicators such as the
coping strategy index the study found a relatively weak but significant correlation with the
PMT. For other indicators such as the Food Consumption Score, it found no significant
correlation.

A large experiment in Indonesia compared the effectiveness and acceptability of PMT, CBT,
and a hybrid method combining the two (Alatas et al. 2012). Atlas et al. find that PMT is only
marginally more efficient than the other methods while CBT results in better community
acceptability. In Cameroon, a study by Stoeffler, Mills and Del Ninno (2016) reports a slightly
better performance of PMT targeting in identifying households with low per capita
consumption than the CBT. However, community choice seems to be driven by different
factors associated with poverty such as income potential, which includes human and physical



                                              4
capital. Karlan and Thuysbaert (2013) use data from Honduras and Peru to examine the
effectiveness of a hybrid two-step process that combines a participatory wealth ranking and
a verification household survey, relative to two proxy means tests. All methods performed
similarly on the basis of various metrics. Given similarities in effectiveness the authors suggest
that the decision should be driven by costs considerations.

2.2 HEA: Description and literature
The Household Economy Approach (HEA) is based on a livelihoods analysis framework for
analyzing household livelihoods and understanding how different shocks may affect them.3
A key feature of the approach is the production of an “HEA baseline”, which comprises three
main steps. The first step, the livelihood zooning, defines livelihood zones, i.e. geographical
areas within which people share broadly the same patterns of access to food and income and
have the same access to markets. The second step, the wealth breakdown, groups the
population within each livelihood zone into different wealth categories. It then provides the
household characteristics and quantifies the assets within each wealth group. The third step,
the livelihood strategy step, provides a quantified estimate of food and income needs for
households in each wealth group.

The HEA was developed by Save the Children UK and the Food Economy Group (FEG) in the
1990s in order to improve the ability of humanitarian agencies to anticipate and respond to
shocks affecting food access (Holzmann et al. 2008). Since then, the method has been further
developed and adapted for different purposes, among them household-level social
protection targeting, which is the focus of this paper. Today, humanitarian agencies rely on
“household level HEA targeting” as one of the most commonly used methods in identifying
households during crises for their vast programs in the Sahel. In 2014 alone ECHO funding
amounted to 202 million euros in response to food crises reaching an estimated 1.7 million
food insecure people (ECHO 2015). A large share of this population was reached through HEA
targeting.


3
    For more details on the HEA, see Holzmann et al. (2008)



                                                        5
Normally, targeting criteria vary by livelihood zone and largely rely on the conducted HEA
baseline. Yet, the exact way in which household level HEA targeting is implemented can vary
depending on the implementing organization and country. For example, in Burkina Faso, Chad
and Mali, HEA is implemented using a CBT approach together with the HEA baseline, but the
extent to which the HEA baseline is used in guiding the CBT varies by country. In Niger, by
contrast, HEA uses a formula in addition to CBT. Despite its importance and abundant use, up
to this date there is limited quantitative evidence on the effectiveness of HEA as a targeting
tool.

2.3 PMT and HEA methods used in Niger
The PMT formula evaluated in this paper was developed for the first phase of the World Bank
funded social safety nets (SSN) project which targeted 40,000 households. The SSN project
provided eligible households monthly cash transfers amounting 10,000 CFA and
accompanying measures for 24 months. The targeted population were chronically poor
households. To identify the population of interest, geographical and household level
targeting approaches were used. The geographical targeting approach selected communes
and determined beneficiary quotas in each through a poverty mapping exercise. Next, within
each commune, beneficiary villages were randomly selected. The number of villages selected
in each commune was set so that on average beneficiaries would represent 30 percent of the
total population of households in a given commune. The household level targeting approach
involved two main steps. First, a PMT method was applied to identify the 30 percent poorest
households in the selected communes. While the PMT ranking within a commune ultimately
determined the share of beneficiaries in each village, the minimum share of beneficiaries
possible was set at 10 percent and the maximum at 80 percent. Second, a community
validation process was applied.

The formula used for the PMT method evaluated in this study was calibrated using the EBCM
2007 national survey and had the explicit objective to proxy the consumption per capita of
households. Variables used in the formula included household demographics, the ownership
of goods, livestock, land, and dwelling characteristics.


                                               6
The HEA household-level targeting method evaluated in this paper 4 was developed and used
by the Alliance ECHO 5 in Niger to provide temporary cash transfers (for three to four months)
aimed at supporting food insecure households during the lean season. While the PMT in Niger
had the explicit objective of identifying households with low consumption per capita, the HEA
household-level targeting method does not explicitly define a measurable benchmark. For
instance, current users of the method in Niger have the objective to “improve the food and
nutritional situation of the most vulnerable households during the lean season in Niger”.6 Yet,
there is no specific measurable definition of vulnerable households. As the SSN project
implemented by the government, the Alliance also first relies on geographical targeting to
select those areas most affected by shocks. Next, a household level targeting approach is
conducted by following two parallel processes, in which roughly 30 percent of households are
identified as beneficiaries in each village:

    1. Two targeting committees (normally one composed of women and the other one of
        men) of about eight members each are formed. Using an exhaustive list of all
        households in the communities, each committee separately classifies each household
        into one of the four wealth groups.
    2. A short survey is applied to every household in the community. Next, a formula is used
        based on the collected data to classify households into the four wealth groups. This
        formula was developed by the Alliance in 2014 based on historic targeting data in
        order to develop consistent criteria along which to categorize and select households.
        The formula relied on household demographics, livestock, land, the duration of food
        coverage using own agricultural production and monthly household revenues.

Once the three rankings, i.e. those from the two committees and that from the formula, are
ready, any discrepancies are addressed by the NGOs together with community members
before agreeing on a final classification of households. All households that are classified as


4
  Described in Bourahla et al, (2014).
5
  Alliance ECHO is a partnership of five different NGOs (ACF, Acted, Concern, Oxfam and Save the Children).
6
  (Bourahla et al. 2014).



                                                      7
“very poor” are then selected as beneficiaries. On average, 30 percent of households were
classified as very poor.

This paper analyzes the performance of household level targeting only (and not the
geographical level targeting). In particular, the present study evaluates the relative efficiency
of the PMT and HEA formulas in areas that are representative of rural agro-pastoral zones.
While both approaches use a community based approach to validate beneficiary lists
obtained by applying each formula, the formulas are expected to closely match the final
beneficiary lists. In fact, for the case of the PMT, the final beneficiary list obtained from the
community validation process almost entirely overlaps with that obtained from the formula.
Similarly, for the case of the HEA, the community based process (that involves the two
targeting committees) closely matches the formula: around 90 percent of households
identified as beneficiaries are also selected according to the formula (Bourahla et al. 2014).
The fact that the community validation process closely overlaps with the PMT and HEA
methods does not necessarily mean that communities’ poverty perceptions are the same as
those from the PMT and HEA. Qualitative evidence suggests that during the validation
process communities tend to retract from disagreeing with the provided list of beneficiaries
because of cultural norms.

   3. Data

The present paper relies on the 2011 National Survey on Household Living Conditions and
Agriculture (ECVM/A). The ECVM/A is an integrated multi-topic household survey conducted
to quantify poverty and living conditions in Niger. The ECVM/A involved two visits to the same
households. Some survey modules were applied during both visits while others where applied
during the first or second visit only. The first visit took place during the lean or “hungry”
season, i.e. between June and August 2011. The second visit took place during the harvest
season, i.e. between October and December 2011.

The household questionnaire used during the second visit is a reduced version of that used
in the first round, expect for the section on livestock which is only asked during the second


                                               8
visit. The second visit questionnaire includes information to determine if members who were
in the household in the first visit are still in the household and if there are any new members.
When there are new members, the questionnaire is used to collect basic information on their
socio-demographic. In addition, information for all households is collected again on non-food
and food expenditures and food security.

The survey collected data from a total of 25,116 individuals from 3,968 households in 270
enumeration areas. The sample is nationally representative as well as representative of
Niamey, urban areas (excluding Niamey) and rural areas. Within the rural enumeration areas,
the sample is also representative of three ecological zones: agricultural, agro-pastoral, and
pastoral. The present study restricts the sample to agro-pastoral zones only. This is because
the HEA targeting formula was developed exclusively for agro-pastoral zones. The study
makes use of survey household sampling weights throughout to maintain representativeness.

    4. Methodology

4.1 Simulating PMT and HEA selection of beneficiaries
To evaluate the existing PMT and HEA methods, the present paper mimics the selection
procedure based on the formula of each targeting method using the ECVM/A-2011 survey.
Specifically, the application of each formula using the ECVM/A data provides both a PMT and
HEA score for each household representing their predicted level of wellbeing. These scores
are used to rank all households from worst off (those with the lowest scores) to best off
(those with the highest scores) and considers those ranked below the 30th percentile of the
respective distribution as beneficiaries. While the 30th percentile is chosen to approximate
the share of beneficiaries actually selected by both methods, the study also analyzes how the
performance changes at different cut-off points.

Applying the PMT approach based on the ECVM/A survey is straightforward since the
ECVM/A contains nearly all 7 PMT variables needed to identify beneficiary households. The

7
 With the exception of having a handicap member in the household. Handicap status is thus excluded from
the PMT formula that is simulated in this paper.



                                                    9
wording of the various questions is identical across both survey instruments. As a result, the
PMT formula together with a cut-off point can be applied directly on the ECVM/A dataset to
identify households that would be selected under PMT.

Identifying HEA households using the ECVM/A dataset is more complex given some
differences in the way questions are asked between the ECVM/A and the HEA survey
instruments. Specifically, while the HEA questionnaire tends to obtain information about
some variables through a small number of questions, the ECVM/A survey relies on a much
larger number of detailed questions. For instance, for variables including period of coverage
by own agricultural production (in months) and income, the HEA questionnaire asks two
questions, one for each variable while the ECVM/A survey has detailed modules on
agricultural production and income. The HEA questionnaire also uses a limited number of
questions about cultivated land, household size, number of children and ownership of
livestock, while the ECVM/A survey uses a larger set of questions on the household roster,
livestock ownership and land usage. Marital status and gender of the household head are
asked in similar ways in both survey questionnaires. Table 1 (Annex 1) lists the targeting
criteria used by HEA, and describes how these variables are constructed using the ECVM/A
dataset.

The present simulation “constructs” HEA variables by relying on the detailed ECVM/A
modules whereas the actual HEA method relies on a short survey. As such, the present study
evaluates the PMT and HEA formulas, as opposed to the actual processes through which
these formulas are implemented. Since this simulation relies on detailed modules to
construct HEA variables, in reality the HEA method is likely to perform worse than simulation
results. Not only some variables are difficult to collect through single questions (e.g. income
and period of coverage by own agricultural production), but, given difficulties in verifying this
information, household may have an incentive to under-report, especially in the context of a
welfare program.




                                               10
Another aspect to keep in mind in the simulation of methods relates to the timing of data
collection. As mentioned the ECVM/A was implemented during both the lean and harvest
season. While only those questions related to the household’s composition and consumption
were asked in both rounds, all other questions were asked in only one round. In constructing
the necessary PMT and HEA variables the present study relies on the information from the
first or second round only (for variables that were captured in only one round), or on the
average of the two (for variables that were captured in both rounds). See Table 1, annex 1 for
details on how each variable was constructed. The lack of some variables in one of the two
rounds prevents an assessment of the impact of the timing of data collection. However, most
variables used in both the PMT and HEA are not expected to change much (if at all)
throughout a given year.

4.2 Welfare benchmarks, vulnerability and targeting errors - concepts and definitions
Welfare benchmarks
To assess the efficiency of each method this paper analyzes targeting errors based on
different observed welfare benchmarks. This paper primarily focuses on two welfare
measures: consumption per capita as a measure of poverty, and the Food Consumption Score
as a measure of food insecurity. As such, the paper uses the term “poor” to refer to
households that have low levels of consumption per capita, and the term “food insecure” to
those with a low FCS. In addition to these two welfare measures the study also evaluates the
efficiency of targeting based on alternative indicators including income per capita, non-
productive assets, livestock, and the amount of cultivated land.

Consumption has been the most popular welfare indicator used for both research and policy
purposes in developing countries (Chaudhuri & Ravallion 1994). Research has shown that this
metric—generally used to determine the official poverty rates in developing countries—is a
good indicator of chronic poverty, as well as a good proxy for other poverty dimensions.

The consumption per capita measure was collected in both rounds of the survey. The present
study explores the efficiency of targeting based on the consumption per capita for each round



                                             11
separately, as well as the average consumption across the two rounds (which is the measure
that was used to estimate the official poverty rate in Niger). The measure includes
consumption expenditures coming from the following items: (a) food expenditures (including
meals eaten outside the home); (b) non-monetary food consumption resulting from
consumption of home production, gifts and in-kind payments; and (c) the purchase price of
new non-durable goods and services, an imputed value of rent for dwellings owned by the
household or rented free of charge by a third party, and an estimation of the use value of
durable goods. The aggregate is built in three steps. First, all consumption expenditures are
aggregated at the household level. Second, the aggregated consumption expenditures are
divided by the household size to adjust for differences in household composition. Lastly, the
measure is divided by a special deflator to take into account differences in the costs of living
across different geographical areas in the country (INS 2013).

In addition to consumption per capita, this study explores the targeting efficiency based on
consumption per adult equivalent as well as consumption per capita adjusted for economies
of scales. These variations to consumption per capita are explained in more detail in section
7.2.

The FCS is a widely used food insecurity measure developed by the World Food Program
(WFP) to proxy for household food security based on a seven-day food consumption recall
(WFP 2008). 8 The FCS score takes into account not only the frequency of consumption of
food items from 9 categories over the past seven days but also the quality – “nutrient density”
– of the consumed food items which is constructed based on assigning weights to the nine
food categories.

To look at the targeting efficiency based on livestock and non-productive assets, indices were
constructed using principal components analysis (PCA). PCA is a statistical technique often


8
 Specifically, the module used to construct the FCS indicator asked the number of days during the last 7 days in
which the household consumed each of the following products. Food groups included cereals and cereal
products, tubers and plantains, legumes and seeds, vegetables, fish and meat, fruits, milk and milk products, oil
and grease, sugar products, spices and condiments.



                                                       12
used in the creation of socio-economic status indices from household survey data. To create
the livestock index, variables indicating the ownership of different types of livestock were
used. To create the non-productive asset index the following set of variables were entered
into the PCA: dwelling characteristics and ownership of household goods such as telephone,
beds, chairs, furniture, etc. For each index, from a set of correlated variables, PCA creates
uncorrelated components that explain the variance in the data and thus provide synthesized
information on the underlying concept—in this case livestock and non-productive assets. The
components are ordered so that the first component explains the largest amount of variation
in the data. This first principal component is then used as an index (Vyas and Kumaranayake
2006; Filmer and Pritchett 2001).

Vulnerability
Regardless of the benchmark, welfare is not static. Some households live in a state of constant
deprivation, while others are exposed to deprivation only temporarily after experiencing a
shock (Del Ninno and Mills 2015; Hodinott, Rosegrant, and Torero 2012; Tesliuc et al. 2014).
A common definition of vulnerability is the probability (or risk) today of being in poverty or
falling into deeper poverty in the future (Coudouel et al. 2002).

Measuring vulnerability to poverty remains challenging. Anticipated income or consumption
changes matter to individuals and households before they occur—regardless of whether they
actually occur at all—and after they have occurred. The probability of falling into poverty
tomorrow is impossible to measure. Instead, one can analyze the dynamics and variability of
consumption (or other poverty proxies) to gauge vulnerability. This requires panel data which
is often unavailable or of poor quality in low income settings.

To address the non-static nature of welfare measures the present study relies on the two
survey rounds within the same year. Particularly, it explores the extent to which each of the
methods can identify households suffering from permanent or seasonal deprivations, defined
as being deprived in both or one round only respectively.




                                              13
Targeting errors
Once benchmarks have been defined, inclusion and exclusion errors measure a targeting
mechanism’s effectiveness to identify the target population. The literature has used different
definitions of inclusion and exclusion errors. The present study refers to inclusion error when
households that are not “eligible” are selected by the targeting criteria and enrolled in the
program. “Eligible” here is defined as households that are within 30 percent lowest scoring
households based on a given metric. For instance, households are ranked according to
different metrics. Next, the share of beneficiary households that are not within the 30 percent
lowest scoring households for a given metric is calculated. By contrast, exclusion errors occur
when “eligible” households are not selected by the targeting criteria and excluded from the
program.

In other words, the study relies on the predicted welfare (derived from the PMT and HEA
formulas) to replicate eligibility to the program, and then compares eligibility to the actual
welfare observed in the same data to calculate the targeting errors.

This study sets the share of beneficiaries at 30 percent, which is equivalent to the share of
“eligible” households. In this case the exclusion and inclusion error become the same, by
construction. As such, in this paper we only talk about inclusion errors.

Inclusion errors result from both an imperfect targeting method and failures in implementing
the targeting method. Because the present study conducts a simulation of formulas, it only
captures the former. Inclusion errors from each method are compared to those from a
random selection method to better illustrate the gains from each tool in identifying targeted
populations.

   5. Descriptive statistics on consumption per capita and the FCS

This section provides key descriptive statistics of the main welfare measures used to assess
targeting effectiveness, namely consumption per capita and the FCS. The height of bars in
Figure 1 represents the total prevalence of poverty (measured using consumption per capita



                                              14
and the national poverty line), and food insecurity (measured through the FCS and the food
insecurity threshold), during the lean and harvest season.9 The darker areas represent
households suffering from “chronic” poverty or food insecurity. Chronic in this paper is
defined as households that are below the poverty line/food insecure threshold in both survey
sounds. The lighter areas represent households suffering from “seasonal” poverty or food
insecurity. Seasonal in this paper is defined as households that are below the poverty
line/food insecure threshold during one season only.

                   Figure 1: Chronic and Transitory Poverty and Food Insecurity




    Note: Chronic poverty/food security is defined as being below the poverty line/food insecure threshold
    in both 2011 survey sounds (e.g. harvest and lean season). Seasonal poverty/food security is defined as
    being below the poverty line/food insecure threshold during one season only. Figure based on Table A1
    and Table A2, Annex 2.

During the lean season, 58 percent of households were poor and 34 percent households were
food insecure. The majority of poor households suffer from chronic poverty within the same
year—among 58 percent of poor households during the lean season, 21 percent of them
become non-poor during the harvest season. In contrast, food insecurity is mostly
experienced transitorily, with the majority of households that are food insecure during the
lean season becoming food secure during the harvest season (25 percent out of 34 percent).

9
  A household is considered poor if his annual consumption per capita is below 182,635 FCFA. A household is
considered food insecure if his FCS is less than 35 (INS Niger and World Bank 2013).
10
   Sectors include Agriculture & Fishing Wage Employment, Crop - Own Cons from Production Section,
Livestock Production, Non-Ag Self Employment, Non-Ag Wage Employment, Private transfers.



                                                      15
In other words, about one in four households in Niger were seasonal food insecure while only
8 percent were chronically food insecure during the lean season in 2011. Lastly, during the
harvest season there is a small share of households (around 10 percent) that experience
transitory poverty and food insecurity. This result may be linked to idiosyncratic shocks, or
covariate shocks that are not associated with the season.

While large seasonal variations exists in household welfare, these variations are not equally
experienced across the welfare distribution. As shown in Figure 2, households in the bottom
third of the distribution (of each respective variable) experience substantial variations in
welfare between seasons. For instance, the consumption per capita of the poorest decile
almost doubles in the harvest season. Most of this variation comes from the food part of
consumption, where the percentage change is about 170 percent for the lowest decile, as
opposed to the non-food part of consumption which changes by almost 50 percent. Yet, while
the food consumption changes substantially, the FCS changes even more; for the poorest
decile, the percentage change in the FCS is over 300 percent.

 Figure 2: Percentage Change in Welfare Measures between the Lean and Harvest Season
    350%
            Percentage change                                           Consumption per capita
    300%
                                                                        FCS
    250%
                                                                        Food consumption per capita
    200%
                                                                        Non-food consumption per capita
    150%

    100%

     50%

      0%

     -50%                                                      Deciles of each respective variable (first round)
              1         2       3        4        5       6         7           8           9          10

  Note: for each different welfare measure, the figure presents the percentage change between the lean
  and harvest season for each decile relative to the first round. Graph is based on Table A3, annex 2.

Consistent with Figure 2, Figure 3 shows that consumption per capita is a more stable
measure than the FCS; the correlation between consumption per capita in the first and
second round is 67 percent versus only 22 percent for the FCS. The correlation between the



                                                  16
FCS and consumption per capita during the lean season is especially weak (20 percent).
Nonetheless, during the harvest season, this correlation substantially increases to 45 percent.
In sum, consumption and the FCS capture different components of household deprivation.
Whereas the former tends to be more chronic in nature, the latter tends to be more seasonal.

                            Figure 3: Correlations between Welfare Measures

 0.80
                                            0.67

 0.60
                                                                                                0.45
 0.40
                  0.22                                                0.20
 0.20


 0.00
                fcs1-fcs2               cons1-cons2                fcs1-cons1                fcs2-cons2


Note: The Figure shows correlation coefficients between different indicators: Fcs1/fcs2 and cons1/cons2
correspond to the FCS and consumption per capita respectively during rounds 1 and 2, i.e. the lean and harvest
season. Figure is based on Table A4, annex 2.



    6. Households targeted under the PMT and HEA methods

6.1 Overlap between HEA and PMT
This section discusses the overlap of the existing PMT and HEA methods in Niger based on
simulations performed. Figure 4 shows the overlap between beneficiaries selected by the
PMT and HEA for different targeted shares of beneficiaries. The straight line illustrates the
overlap between beneficiaries selected under the two different methods selecting
beneficiaries at random, and shows that, by construction, the higher the share of
beneficiaries the higher the chance of having two methods with a larger overlap.

The overlap between households selected under the PMT and HEA is limited and increases
as the share of selected beneficiaries increases. For example, when selecting 30 percent of
beneficiaries based on the PMT, and 30 percent of beneficiaries selected based on the HEA,
only 24 percent among the PMT beneficiaries would also be HEA beneficiaries.



                                                      17
                                           Figure 4: Overlap between Beneficiaries at Different Cut-Off Points

                                     60%
  selected among PMT beneficiaries                                                                               51%
                                     50%
                                                                                                       39%
      Share of HEA beneficiaries



                                     40%

                                     30%                                             24%
                                     20%                        14%
                                                10%
                                     10%

                                     0%
                                                10%             20%                  30%               40%       50%
                                                                 Share of PMT beneficiaries selected



Note: Bars presents the overlap between beneficiaries selected under PMT and HEA for different shares of
beneficiaries selected. The diagonal line represents the overlap between beneficiaries selected under two
different methods selecting beneficiaries at random. Figures based on Table A5 in annex 2.


6.2 Targeting efficiency

Key welfare benchmarks
This section examines the targeting efficiency of PMT and HEA, starting with consumption
per capita and the FCS as welfare benchmarks. The blue bars in Figure 5 show inclusion errors
for the PMT and HEA on the basis of consumption per capita (denoted as “cons” in the graph)
and the FCS during the lean (R1) and harvest (R2) season. The red bar denotes the inclusion
error under a targeting tool that randomly selects households.

The performance of each method varies with the underlying indicator and the season. When
relying on consumption per capita from the lean season as a benchmark, PMT clearly
performs better. Specifically, when selecting the 30 percent of households with the lowest
score of each respective method, the inclusion error is 50 percent for PMT versus 72 percent
for HEA, a result that is no better than a random selection of households.

On the other hand, when using the FCS during the lean season as a benchmark the opposite
is true; the inclusion error for PMT becomes 70 percent (no better than random selection)
while this is 52 percent for HEA. In sum, during the lean season each method is best suited to




                                                                               18
reach their designated objectives: the PMT better targets the poor (based on consumption
per capita), whereas the HEA method better targets the food insecure (based on the FCS).

  Figure 5: Inclusion Error Based on Consumption and FCS - Selection of 30% of Households

 80%                                           72%        71%
         70%                                                             70%
 70%                                                                               65%
                                                                                                           61%
 60%                                                                                         52%
                            50%
 50%                                 44%
 40%
 30%
 20%
 10%
  0%
       Random               PMT      PMT       HEA       HEA             PMT      PMT        HEA       HEA
       selection            Lean    Harvest    Lean     Harvest          Lean    Harvest     Lean     Harvest
                           season   season    season    season          season   season     season    season
                              based on consumption indicator                      based on FCS indicator


Note: bars present the inclusion errors during the lean season for different methods on the basis of different
metrics. Inclusion errors are share of beneficiary households that are not within the eligible 30% lowest scoring
households based on the metric used. A household is considered PMT or HEA beneficiary when it is within the
30% lowest scoring households based on the PMT and HEA score respectively. The red bar indicates the inclusion
error under random selection. Figure is based on Table A6, annex 2.


The PMT method performs better in the harvest than in the lean season. This finding is likely
driven by the fact that consumption is harder to predict during lean season; shocks (e.g.
drought) are not observed, which translates into a higher error term during lean season.

In contrast, the efficiency of HEA drops to 61 percent in the harvest season relative to 51
percent in the lean season. This is consistent with the nature of the underlying FCS welfare
measure; the prevalence of food insecurity is much higher during lean than during harvest
season (34 percent vs. 8 percent respectively).

Figure 6 shows the share of PMT and HEA selected households suffering from chronic (in
darker color) and seasonal (in orange) poverty (left) and food insecurity (right), as a share of
the population using the lean season as a base.

Overall, PMT is better at identifying households suffering from chronic poverty while HEA is
better at identifying households suffering from seasonal food insecurity. PMT targets close


                                                         19
to twice as many households suffering from chronic poverty: PMT identifies 19 percent of
households that are chronic poor, while HEA targets only 10 percent. When considering
seasonal food insecurity, the opposite is true; HEA targets 11 percent of food insecure
households while the PMT targets only 6 percent.

   Figure 6: Rates of Chronic and Seasonal Poor and Food Insecure among PMT and HEA
                                    Selected Households




  Note: Chronic poverty (food security) is defined as being below the poverty line (food insecure) threshold
  in both 2011 survey sounds (e.g. harvest and lean season). Seasonal food security is defined as being below
  the poverty line (food insecure threshold) during the lean season only. Figures based on Table A7 and
  Table A8, annex 2.


Alternative indicators
This section explores the efficiency of methods based on alternative indicators. Figure 7
extends the PMT and HEA comparison by considering alternative indicators other than
consumption and the FCS. Specifically, Figure 7 shows the share of households targeted under
the two methods that are “deprived” in different dimensions (i.e. rank among the 30 percent
lowest scoring households based on different metrics). The orange line represents outcomes
under a perfect targeting method (as a theoretical benchmark) while the blue line represents
outcomes under a method that randomly identifies beneficiaries. As such, the closer to the
orange line and the further away from the blue line, the better the targeting performance.
More details can be found in Table A9, annex 2.




                                                     20
As reflected in the figure, HEA can identify particularly well households with little agricultural
related assets. For instance, 61 percent and 67 percent of households targeted by HEA are
correctly targeted eligible households based on livestock and total cultivated land,
respectively.

On the other hand PMT better identifies households with little non-productive assets; 43
percent of households selected by the PMT are correctly targeted eligible households on the
basis of a non-productive index. In terms of income per capita, both methods perform
similarly poorly. This is likely due to the difficulties in accurately measuring income in a
context with high seasonality and a high consumption reliance on self-production.

  Figure 7: Share of Targeted Households That Are “Deprived” Based on Different Metrics

                                 Random          Perfect            PMT1       HEA

                                             Income per capita
                                               100%
                                                80%
                                                60%                   Non-productive assets
                          Livestock index
                                                40%                          index
                                                20%
                                                 0%


                                FCS (R1)                              Consumption per capita



                                            Total cultivated land


    Note: this figure compares the performance of PMT and HEA targeting to a perfect and a random
    targeting benchmark for six different metrics. Since both the PMT and HEA method identified roughly
    30% of the population, a household is considered “deprived” according to each metric if it ranks
    among the 30% lowest scoring household on the metric. The orange line represents a scenario were
    households are perfectly identified under each metric, while the blue line corresponds to the
    performance of a method that randomly identifies households. Non-productive assets index included
    items such as dwelling characteristics and ownership of household goods such as telephone, beds,
    chairs and furniture. Figure based on Table A9, annex 2.


6.3 Characterizing households under each method
This section further describes differences between the two methods by looking at a variety
of household characteristics. Despite having a much lower poverty rate, HEA households may
appear to be “less resilient” on the basis of three main characteristics. First, the household


                                                      21
size of HEA households is considerably smaller than for PMT households (Table 1). In fact,
PMT households have 9 household members on average versus only 5 members for HEA
households. A larger number of household members might improve intra-household risk
sharing and thus enhance households’ ability to cope with a shock. Second, HEA households
have considerably less livestock which can be an important coping mechanism for households
to deal with shocks. Third, HEA households have less diversified livelihoods, with the average
PMT household engaging in 2.5 different sectors while the average HEA household only works
in 1.9 (Table A10). 10 Specifically, PMT households are more likely to participate in agriculture
& fishing, wage employment, crops (own consumption), livestock production, and non-
agricultural self-employment. Livelihood diversification is an important factor affecting
resilience (Ellis 1998). When households have more diversified livelihoods they can rely on
alternative sources of income when any given shock affects any particular type of livelihood.

There is also indication that HEA households may have more migrant members. About a fifth
(21 percent) of the income of HEA households comes from remittances versus 9 percent for
PMT households (Table A11). This may be part of the reason why HEA households may have
higher consumption despite owning fewer productive assets. There is also the concern that
providing social transfers to households already receiving private transfers may result in the
crowding out of private transfers as opposed to increased household welfare (Albarran and
Attanasio 2002).

Also, only 11 percent of PMT households have a female headed household versus 26 percent
for HEA households. This could be an indication that—to some extent—there may be HEA
households with male migrant former household members. Unfortunately the data does not
contain information on migrant members so this hypothesis cannot be tested.




10
   Sectors include Agriculture & Fishing Wage Employment, Crop - Own Cons from Production Section,
Livestock Production, Non-Ag Self Employment, Non-Ag Wage Employment, Private transfers.



                                                   22
                   Table 1: General Characteristics of PMT and HEA Households

                                                       (1)                (2)                 (1) – (2)
                                                       PMT                HEA                 PMT-HEA
 Household size                                        9.1                4.8                 4.31***
 Dependency ratio (0-9 and above 60)                   0.48               0.44                0.04**
 Female headed household                               0.11               0.26                -0.15***
 Consumption per capita (R1&R2)                        142,470            207,762             -65,292***
 Poor (R1&R2)                                          0.82               0.47                0.35***
 Energy consumption per capita R1                      2,142              2,441               -299***
 Energy consumption per capita R2                      2,053              2,314               -261***
 FCS R1                                                47                 37                  10***
 FCS R2                                                55                 54                  1
 Has land                                              0.99               0.89                0.11***
 Number of plots                                       3.2                1.7                 1.5***
 Has radio                                             0.35               0.30                0.05
 Has mobile phone                                      0.19               0.27                -0.08**
 Has cart                                              0.21               0.05                0.16***
 Has houe/dala                                         1.00               0.89                0.10***
 Number of small ruminants                             2.9                1.1                 1.9***
 Poultry owned                                         3.7                1.2                 2.4***
 Polygamous family                                     0.39               0.07                0.33***
 Number of large ruminants                             0.5                0.0                 0.50***
 Duration of food production (month)                   3.5                2.0                 1.5***
 Cultivated land (hectares)                            17                 5                   12***
 Age of household head                                 47                 44                  3**

Note: Statistical significance denoted * = 10%, ** = 5%, *** = 1%. The p-values are based on t tests for the
equality of means.


    7. Can the design of formulas be improved?

7.1 Design of HEA
Two important challenges related to the implementation of the HEA method exist. The first
challenge relates to the replicability of the HEA method used in Niger to other contexts or
countries. As mentioned, the weights of the HEA formula were qualitatively assigned based
on the NGO’s field experience during several years. As such, the development of weights fully
relied on context-specific experience that is not easily replicated.



                                                      23
The second challenge relates to the fact that variables used for the HEA method are not easy
to measure and verify, which is likely to result in substantial measurement error. Relatedly, it
is important to keep in mind that the present study relied on detailed modules on income
and household production to construct the variables used in the HEA formula. In reality, the
HEA method in Niger measures these variables through a considerably shorter questionnaire
(normally with one question per indicator). As such, efficiency results presented in this paper
are likely better than in reality. While a shorter questionnaire may considerably reduce costs
of data collection, measurement errors are likely to be substantial given the complexity of
these measures.

This section aims to see whether these challenges can be addressed by relying on a
quantitative (rather than a qualitative) approach to determine the formula’s weights, and by
using variables that are easy to measure and verify. Such a quantitative approach would have
the advantage of being (1) more easily replicated by exclusively relying on data and the choice
of indicators, and (2) more efficient by minimizing measurement errors.

Two quantitative methods of determining the formula’s weights are explored and
juxtaposed. The first method follows the same methodology as the PMT, that is, a linear
regression model that approximates a welfare measure. The welfare measure in this case is
food insecurity during the lean season (as opposed to consumption per capita, which was
used for the PMT). The regression model that best predicts the FCS is selected using a
stepwise procedure. The second method is a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) approach,
which synthetizes into one indicator all information contained from a set of variables (in this
case, among variables used by the HEA).

Table 2 shows the inclusion errors of the different quantitative approaches; for comparability
purposes, model 1 shows the inclusion errors for the existing HEA method. Model 2 shows
the results of a linear regression model estimating FCS during the lean season and relying
solely on variables that are relatively easy to measure and verify.11 Model 3 also shows the


11
     Variables included household composition, dwelling characteristics, land, livestock and other assets



                                                         24
results of a linear regression model estimating FCS during the lean season, but this time
including all variables used in HEA (such as period of coverage by own agricultural production
and income) in order to quantify how much additional explanatory power these variables
would add to the model. Finally, models 4-6 show results based on PCA that rely on livestock
data only (model 4), livestock and assets (model 5), and livestock and land (model 6).

The two linear regression models that estimate the FCS (models 2 and 3) perform
substantially better than the existing HEA method (1) at identifying households with a low
FCS. Yet their performance is only slightly better for consumption per capita, and substantially
worse for land and assets. Importantly, the inclusion of the additional variables that are not
easy to measure and verify (model 3 vs. model 2) does not significantly lower the inclusion
errors, which is why the more parsimonious model (model 2) is preferred.

The PCA approach relying on livestock only (model 4) nearly mimics the HEA method in terms
of efficiency with the exception of two welfare measures, i.e. livestock for which the PCA
targets perfectly (by construction) and land for which the PCA approach performs worse.
Adding assets to the PCA approach (model 5), results in an improvement in terms of
consumption and assets, but worsening of the FCS and livestock, relative to model 4. Finally,
adding land (instead of assets) to the PCA (model 6), results in a slight improvement of
efficiency based on land, but a slight worsening in terms of livestock, relative to model 4.

In sum, models 2 or 4 are preferred over models 3, 5 and 6 given the reduced number of
variables it uses and its efficiency in terms of different welfare benchmarks. Results in this
section showed that it is possible to achieve results largely similar to those from HEA through
a quantitative model and without relying on variables that are hard to measure and verify.




                                              25
             Table 2: Inclusion Errors of Quantitative Methods Aiming to Replicate HEA

                            (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)               (6)
                                                   LR - FCS add.       PCA -      PCA - Livestock   PCA - Livestock
 Welfare measure           HEA         LR - FCS
                                                     variables       Livestock       & assets          & land
 Consumption pc R1         72%           71%            70%            72%              64%              72%
 Consumption pc R2         71%           63%            63%            70%              64%              71%
 Cons. pc avg. R1&R2       71%           66%            66%            73%              64%              74%
 FCS R1                    55%           42%            40%            54%              65%              54%
 FCS R2                    59%           59%            61%            59%              58%              59%
 Land                      33%           56%            54%            58%              62%              51%
 Livestock                 43%           43%            44%             0%              55%               8%
 Asset                     61%           70%            74%            62%              19%              63%
 Income per capita         64%           60%            54%            67%              70%              68%

Note: Percentages represent the inclusion errors for different methods on the basis of different metrics.
Inclusion errors are defined as the share of beneficiary households that are not within the 30% lowest scoring
households based on the metric used. A household is considered beneficiary when it is within the 30% lowest
scoring households based on the predicted score of each respective model.


7.2 Adjusting consumption for economies of scale and adult equivalent
As mentioned above, there is a large difference in average household size between
households selected by the existing PMT versus those selected by the HEA method. A
potential explanation for this discrepancy may be that the existing PMT method estimates
consumption per capita without considering the household’s composition and economies of
scale. Specifically, households of different size and composition may have different needs or
consumption costs, and not adjusting for these differences in needs can result in biases. There
are two types of adjustments that can help address this problem – adjustments for (1) adult
equivalence and (2) economies of scale. The former takes into account that a household
member’s consumption varies with age, and that e.g. young children do not consume as much
as adults. The latter takes into account that larger households may be able to purchase goods
in bulk, and hence consume at cheaper unit prices, especially for consumer durables.

Evidence from other studies have shown that communities also adjust for household
composition and/or economies of scales in their targeting. For instance, a randomized
targeting study in Indonesia comparing efficiency outcomes between PMT, CBT and a hybrid


                                                     26
method of the two found that the CBT method adjusts for economies of scale when selecting
households (Alatas et al. 2012). Similarly, a study in Ghana finds that PMT and CBT methods
systematically target groups of different household size (Pop 2015).

This section aims to test whether adjusting PMT models for economies of scale or household
composition results in targeting outcomes closer to the HEA method (e.g. better performance
in terms of FCS). To achieve this objective, two additional models are developed and tested,
the former adjusting consumption per capita with an adult equivalence (AE) scale while the
latter adjusts for consumption per capita for economies of scale (ES).

Table 3 shows the inclusion errors of the existing PMT formula (1), the new AE adjusted PMT
formula (2) as well as the new ES-adjusted PMT formula (3). The analysis shows that adjusting
for AE or ES does not result in a profile of beneficiaries that is more similar to the HEA method.

          Table 3: PMT Inclusion Errors When Adjusting for Household Composition

                                              (1)               (2)                 (3)
           Welfare measure                   PMT              PMT-AE             PMT-ES
           Cons. pc R1                        50%               45%                42%
           Cons. pc R2                        44%               43%                40%
           Cons. pc avg. R1&R2                43%               39%                36%
           FCS R1                             70%               69%                68%
           FCS R2                             65%               62%                60%
           Land                               78%               78%                74%
           Livestock                          71%               78%                75%
           Asset                              57%               64%                59%
           Income per capita                  61%               65%                59%

         Note: Percentages present the inclusion errors for different methods. These are shares
         of beneficiary households that are not within the 30% lowest scoring households based
         on each respective welfare measure. A household considered to be a beneficiary when
         it is within the 30% lowest scoring households based on the PMT score.




                                                    27
   8. How can the existing methods be used in the context of ASP systems?

Based on the findings discussed in previous sections the present study proposes two main
approaches in using these methods in the context of ASP; (1) a combination of the two
targeting methods for programs to reach both, chronically poor households and those
suffering from temporary food insecurity; (2) the harmonization of data collection tools by
PMT and HEA users. Both of these ideas are discussed next.

8.1 Combining PMT and HEA to get the best out of each method
As previously mentioned, ASP systems aim to target both, chronically poor households and
those affected by shocks. Given this objective, ASP could rely on a combined approach using
the PMT to reach chronically poor households and HEA to reach households suffering from
seasonal food insecurity.

This section simulates a system that would use the PMT to target 30 percent of households
under a permanent program, and use the HEA to scale up the program in response to food
insecurity crises by adding 10 percent of households as beneficiaries. This scenario assumes
that households suffering from food insecurity during the lean season in our data only do so
during the year in which the data was collected (i.e. the food insecurity is treated as a
temporary shock). Preliminary analysis of two new survey rounds conducted during the lean
and harvest season in 2014 on the same households sampled in the ECVM/A 2011 survey
provides support to this assumption. Only 3 percent of households in agro-pastoral areas
suffered from chronic food insecurity in both 2011 and 2014. Further, of those who suffered
seasonal food insecurity in 2011, only 1 in 5 (20 percent) are also reported as seasonally food
insecure in 2014. Because households experiencing food insecurity in 2011 and 2014 are not
the same, the analysis suggests food insecurity may be experienced depending on temporary
shocks.

Table 4 shows the efficiency (inclusion errors) of the PMT (1) and HEA (2) current programs
and the expanded program during crises (3). Specifically, model 3 presents the inclusion error




                                              28
for the 10% of households selected using HEA, after targeting 30 percent of households using
PMT (1).

Results show that combining PMT with HEA can effectively identify households suffering from
chronic poverty and temporary food insecurity. The efficiency of HEA greatly improves when
selecting 10 percent (model 3) as opposed to 30 percent (model 2) of the population. For
instance, the inclusion errors based on food insecurity during the lean season decrease from
52 to 38 percent. Inclusion errors based on land decrease from 33 percent to 7 and 8 percent.
For livestock inclusion errors decrease from 40 percent to 28 and 29 percent. The large
decreases in inclusion errors suggests that HEA can be an effective method to reach those at
the very bottom part of the distribution on the basis of food insecurity and other metrics of
well-being. Also, by covering a larger share of households in the same geographical areas (40
percent under the expanded program as opposed to 30 percent), the targeting costs per
beneficiary is lower. This is because the fix cost of conducting a census in a given area can be
spread across a larger number of beneficiaries.

             Table 4: Inclusion Errors for Current Programs and Scenarios 1 and 2.

                                        Current programs             Expanded program during crises
 Model                                   1            2                              3
 Welfare measure                       PMT           HEA                           HEA
 Share of households selected          30%           30%               10% (after 30% PMT) = 40%
 Cons. pc R1                           50%           72%                           83%
 Cons. pc R2                           44%           71%                           82%
 Cons. pc avg. R1&R2                   43%           72%                           84%
 FCS R1                                70%           52%                           38%
 FCS R2                                65%           61%                           63%
 Land                                  78%           33%                            8%
 Livestock                             71%           40%                           29%
 Asset                                 57%           65%                           65%
 Income per capita                     61%           62%                           62%
Note: Inclusion errors are defined as the share of beneficiary households that are not within the 30% lowest
scoring households based on the metric used.

8.2 Harmonize data collection tools applied by PMT and HEA users
ASP systems aim to quickly respond to shocks. Yet a key constraint to quick and efficient
shock-responses is the availability of unified registries that allow for both quick identification



                                                    29
of households in need and coordination among different actors providing aid. One main step
in building such a unified registry is the creation, and use, of a common, harmonized data
collection tool. While the PMT and HEA methods target significantly different populations,
they both largely rely on the same type of information. The similarity in variables used implies
that PMT and HEA data collection tools would only need trivial adjustments in order to be
harmonized with each other. The harmonized questionnaire, therefore, could capture all
beneficiaries’ data needs so that the collected data has all the necessary variables to allow
for different programs to target beneficiaries according to their own eligibility criteria.
Furthermore, the harmonized questionnaire would improve efficiency of ASP systems
through three main channels. First, it minimizes data collection costs since the same data can
be used by different partners; all data is collected in the agreed format that is useful to all
actors. Second, the harmonized tool would allow greater coordination amongst social
protection actors and reduce overlap or unintentional double targeting of households. Third,
it would allow for broader and quicker responses to shocks because programs can be scaled
up based on the existing registry.

   9. Conclusion and policy implications

The PMT and HEA are among the most widely used methods in Sub-Saharan Africa to target
cash transfer beneficiaries. PMT is normally used to target chronically poor households and
the HEA is used in the context of emergency programs to target food insecure households.
This is the first study that provides quantitative evidence on the overlap and the relative
performance of these methods by addressing four key questions:

   1. What is the overlap between households selected under the PMT and HEA method?
   2. What is the relative efficiency of the PMT and HEA based on key welfare benchmarks?
   3. How can the methods be improved?
   4. How can the existing methods be used in the context of ASP systems?

Results showed limited overlap between households selected under the PMT and HEA
methods. PMT is more effective at identifying households suffering from chronic poverty


                                              30
while the HEA is more effective at identifying household suffering from seasonal food
insecurity.12

Households selected by the PMT tend to consume less calories per capita, are relatively
larger, have less non-productive assets and more diversified livelihoods. Households
identified by the HEA are characterized by a smaller household size, lower levels of livestock
and land, and less diversified livelihoods. Those differences in characteristics may suggest
that households identified through HEA may be less able to cope with shocks than households
identified through the PMT. Households with a smaller size, lower levels of livestock and less
diversified livelihoods may be less capable of sharing risk across household members, less
likely to rely on livestock as a buffer, and less likely to have alternative sources of revenues
when a shock affects a particular source of livelihood.

Importantly, this study evaluates the PMT and HEA formulas, and does not evaluate the
process through which these are implemented. Given the simulation relies on detailed
modules to construct HEA variables (as opposed to a limited set of questions as would be
case for an actual HEA questionnaire), the HEA method is likely to perform worse in reality
than the simulation results suggest. Not only are some variables difficult to collect through
single questions but household may have in addition the incentive to under-report if variables
are difficult to verify, especially in the context of a welfare program. Hence, several of the
HEA variables collected through the HEA questionnaire are likely to include substantial
measurement error which will ultimately have an impact on targeting efficiency. Based on
the available data, this study cannot investigate the extent of these measurement errors.
Future research could explore how these errors impact targeting efficiency.

A second challenge relates to the replicability of the HEA method used in Niger to other
contexts or countries. The weights of the HEA formula were qualitatively assigned based on




12
  Chronic poverty is measured based on consumption per capita while food insecurity is measured based on
the FCS during the lean season.



                                                   31
historical data from Niger, and as such may have limited value in contexts other than Niger if
not adapted to a different context.

The study presented two strategies that can be used to address these two challenges, namely
(1) choosing the formula’s weights based on quantitative (rather than a qualitative) data, and
(2) using variables that are easier to measure. Results showed that the HEA method can
indeed be largely mirrored through a quantitative approach, like the PCA, which relies on
easily measurable variables. Such a quantitative approach is more easily replicated since it is
only based on data and the choice of indicators, and more efficient in minimizing
measurement errors associated with difficult to measure variables.

Based on the above results the paper proposes two main approaches in using methods in the
context of an ASP system; (1) a combination of targeting methods to reach both, chronically
poor households and those suffering from temporary food insecurity; (2) the harmonization
of data collection tools by PMT and HEA users.

Specifically, the study explored using the PMT to target 30 percent of households under a
permanent program, which would then be expanded during food insecurity crises using the
HEA for an additional 10 percent of households. This scenario assumes that households
suffering from food insecurity during the lean season in our data only do so during the year
in which the data was collected (i.e. the food insecurity is treated as a temporary shock).
Preliminary analysis of two new survey rounds conducted during the lean and harvest season
in 2014 on the same households sampled in the ECVM/A 2011 survey provides strong support
to this assumption. Simulation results show that the efficiency of the HEA greatly improves
when selecting the 10 percent additional households (after selecting 30 percent of
households through the PMT). The more concentrated are the efforts in specific geographical
areas with a higher percentage of coverage the lower the targeting cost per beneficiary.

Combinations of PMT with methods such as HEA, PCA, or a food insecurity formula may be
considered to identify households suffering from chronic and seasonal food insecurity as part
of an efficient and scalable ASP system. The application of these methods needs to be



                                              32
accompanied by geographical targeting methods that can also identify both, areas suffering
from chronic poverty (i.e. through as a poverty mapping exercise), and areas suffering from
food insecurity (i.e. through the cadre harmonize). This is particularly relevant in Niger, where
every year there are areas that are identified as food insecure.

Regardless of whether or not the PMT and HEA methods are used in combination,
harmonizing data collection tools of PMT and HEA users would serve as a crucial building
block towards a unified registry and play a key role in improving the efficiency of ASP systems.
A unified registry would be used by multiple programs (for targeting, registration, and
monitoring) and provide the basis for greater coordination, whilst also reducing overlap or
unintentional double targeting. Each program could quickly identify households according to
their objectives and criteria. Further, the similarity in variables used under both targeting
methods implies that PMT and HEA data collection tools would only need slight adjustments
to be harmonized with each other.

In sum, a first and essential step in choosing a targeting method is to clearly define the
objective of the program and its corresponding welfare benchmark. If the program objective
is to reach the chronically poor, a PMT formula that approximates consumption may be better
suited. If the objective is to reach temporarily food insecure households, however, a HEA,
linear regression model or PCA-based approach is likely to yield better results. Consistence in
the selection of welfare measures is necessary, because, as illustrated in this paper, they are
not always correlated with each other.

Finally, a prospective study in Niger testing the efficiency, acceptability and impact of three
different targeting methods is currently being implemented. This prospective study will allow
learning about the actual targeting efficiency of combining the PMT with other targeting
approaches such as the HEA, PCA or a formula estimating food insecurity, on the basis of
different welfare measures including consumption per capita and malnutrition.




                                               33
References

Alatas, V., A. Banerjee, R. Hanna, B. A. Olken, and J. Tobias. 2012. “Targeting the Poor:
     Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.” The American Economic Review 102(4):
     1206–40.

Albarran, P., & Attanasio, O. P. 2002. “Do Public Transfers Crowd out Private Transfers?
     Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Mexico (No. 2002/06).” WIDER Discussion
     Papers, World Institute for Development Economics (UNU-WIDER).

Bourahla, L., Evrard-Diakite, M., Malam, A., Boulinaud, M. 2014. “Guide Méthodologique de
     Ciblage Basé sur la Méthode HEA, ” Alliance Sécurité Alimentaire au Niger.

Chaudhuri, S., & Ravallion, M. 1994. “How well do static indicators identify the chronically
     poor?” Journal of Public Economics, 53(3): 367-394.

Coudouel, A., Hentschel, J. S., & Wodon, Q. T. 2002. “Poverty Measurement and Analysis.” A
     Sourcebook for Poverty Reduction Strategies 1: 27-74.

Davies, M., Béné, C., Arnall, A., Tanner, T., Newsham, A., Coirolo, C. 2013. “Promoting
     Resilient Livelihoods through Adaptive Social Protection: Lessons from 124 Programmes
     in South Asia.” Development Policy Review 31(1):27-58.

Del Ninno, C., & Mills, B. (2015). Safety Nets in Africa: Effective Mechanisms to Reach the
     Poor and Most Vulnerable. World Bank Publications.

ECHO Factsheet. 2015. “Sahel: Food & Nutrition Crisis”, May.

Ellis, F. 1998. “Household Strategies and Rural Livelihood Diversification.” The Journal of
     Development Studies 35(1): 1-38.

Hallegatte, S., Bangalore, M., Bonzanigo, L., Fay, M., Kane, T., Narloch, U. & Vogt-Schilb, A.
     2015. Shock Waves: Managing the impacts of climate change on Poverty. Washington,
     DC: World Bank.



                                             34
Filmer, D., & Pritchett, L. H. 2001. “Estimating Wealth Effects without Expenditure Data—or
     Tears: An Application to Educational Enrollments in States of india*.” Demography
     38(1): 115-132.

Grosh, M., & Baker, J. L. 1995. “Proxy Means Tests For Targeting Social Programs,” Working
     Paper, Living Standards Measurement Study, 118: 1-49.

Haughton, J. H., & Khandker, S. R. 2009. Handbook on Poverty and Inequality. Washington,
     DC: World Bank.

Hoddinott, John, Mark Rosegrant, and Maximo Torero. 2012. Hunger and Malnutrition.
     Copenhagen: Copenhagen Consensus Center.

Holzmann, P., Boudreau, T., Holt, J., Lawrence, M. 2008. “The Household Economy Approach:
     a Guide for Programme Planners and Policy-Makers.” Save the Children, London.

Institut National de la Statistique du Niger (INS) and World Bank. 2013. “Profil et
     Déterminants de la Pauvreté au Niger en 2011 : Premiers Résultats de l’Enquête
     Nationale sur les Conditions de Vie des Ménages et l’Agriculture au Niger (ECVMA) ”.

Karlan, D. and Thuysbaert, B. 2013. “Targeting Ultra-Poor Households in Honduras and Peru.”
     NBER Working Paper 19646, November.

McBride, L. 2015. “Evaluation of Targeting Methods and Impact of the Cash Transfer Pilot in
     Niger.”

McCord, A. 2012. “Community Based Targeting: A Review.” Overseas Development Institute,
     London.

Pop, L. B. 2015. “Options for Improving the Targeting of Safety Nets in Ghana.” World Bank,
     Washington, DC.

Stoeffler, Quentin, Bradford Mills, and Carlo del Ninno. 2016. "Reaching the Poor: Cash
     Transfer Program Targeting in Cameroon." World Development, Vol. 83.




                                            35
Tesliuc, Emil, Lucian Pop, Margaret Grosh, and Ruslan Yemtsov. 2014. Income Support for the
     Poorest: A Review of the Experience in Eastern Europe and Central Asia. Washington,
     DC: World Bank.

Vyas, S., & Kumaranayake, L. 2006. “Constructing Socio-Economic Status Indices: How to Use
     Principal Components Analysis.” Health Policy and Planning 21(6): 459-468.

World Bank. 2014. The State of Social Safety Nets 2014. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Wiesmann, D., Bassett, L., Benson, T., & Hoddinott, J. 2009. “Validation of the World Food
     Programmes Food Consumption Score and Alternative Indicators of Household Food
     Security.”   IFPRI Discussion Paper, International Food Policy Research Institute,
     Washington, DC.

WFP (World Food Program). 2008. “Food Consumption Analysis: Calculation and Use of the
     Food Consumption Score in Food Security Analysis.” Technical Guidance Sheet, WFP,
     Geneva.




                                            36
Annex 1: Comparability 13 of ECVM/A data with the HEA variables used for targeting

HEA variables           HEA survey instrument                           ECVM/A survey instrument
Household size          It asks the respondent to report its            It asks the name of each household member and then adds up each
                        “household size”. Normally NGOs use the         member to get the total household size. The survey defines household as
                        following definition of household: group        a group of persons, related or otherwise, living habitually in the same
                        of people living under the same roof and        dwelling, pooling their resources, sharing their meals, and recognizing the
                                                                        authority of the same person known as the household head. This question
                        sharing the same pot of food.
                                                                        is asked in both the first and the second visit. The average household size
                                                                        of the two rounds is used.
Marital status of       It asks the marital status of the household     It asks for the marital status of the household head. Household head is
household head          head. Household head is defined by the          defined as the person who is accepted as such by the other household
                        household, commonly the male/husband            members. S/he generally exercises authority as the economic provider for
                        of the family or a women when she is a          the household. This question is asked during the first visit.
                        widow or divorced.
The number of           It asks for the number of “poultry” owned It asks separately how many chicken, guinea fowl, and « other birds » the
poultry owned by the    by the household.                           household owns. The number of animals under these different categories
household                                                           are added up to construct the corresponding HEA variable. This
                                                                    information was only collected during the second visit only.
Number of small         It asks for the number of “small It asks three different questions on the number of goats, sheep and
ruminants owned by      ruminants” the household owns. This donkeys owned by the household respectively. The number of animals
the household           includes goats, sheep and donkeys.          from the three different questions are added up to construct the
                                                                    corresponding HEA variable. This information was only collected during the
                                                                    second visit.
Number of big           It asks for the number of “big ruminants” It asks three different questions on the number of cattle, camels and horses
ruminants owned by      the household owns. This includes cattle, owned by the household respectively. The number of animals from the
the household           camels and horses.                          three different questions are added up to construct the corresponding HEA
                                                                    variable. This information was only collected during the second visit.


13
  HEA information used in the table is based on the HEA methodological guide developed by the alliance (Bourahla 2014). The way HEA questions are
framed may slightly vary between different NGOs using HEA.



                                                                         37
Land surface           It asks one question on the “the total land It asks for the area cultivated for each different crop. The area cultivated
cultivated by          surface cultivated by household” (in from each different crop is added to construct the corresponding HEA
household (in          hectares).                                  variable. This information was only collected during the first visit.
hectares)
The duration of food   It asks one question on the duration of The instrument has a detailed food consumption module that asks for the
coverage using own     food coverage using own agricultural consumption of different items during the past 7 days indicating whether
agricultural           production (in months).                     the food consumed was bought or self-produced. In order to construct the
production (in                                                     corresponding HEA variable, two variables constructed from the
                                                                   consumption module are used in the following way: (food consumption
months)
                                                                   resulting from consumption of home production / total food
                                                                   consumption)*12. Questions related to this indicator were asked in both
                                                                   the first and the second visit. The average of the indicator between the two
                                                                   rounds is used.
Average monthly        It asks one question on the average The instrument has a detailed modules to capture different sources of
household revenue      monthly household revenue (without income with different timeframes depending on the question. Income
                       specifying a timeframe). This is defined as from the following three sources are added up in order to construct the
                       money earned (in cash only) by household HEA variable: (1) employment income for each household member; (2)
                       members.                                    income from household enterprises; (3) non-employment income. This
                                                                   information was only collected during the first visit.




                                                                     38
Annex 2: Tables 14
Table A1: Food insecurity by season
 Food insecurity lean season                        Food insecurity harvest season
 (June-August)                                          (October-December)
                                                                                                   Total
                                                  Food secure         Food insecure
 Food secure                             #           501                   97                       598
                                         %           57%                  10%                      66%
 Food insecure                           #           201                   68                       269
                                         %           25%                   8%                      34%
 Total                                   #           702                  165                       867
                                         %           82%                  18%                      100%
Note: Food insecure is defined as having a FCS that is lower than the food insecurity threshold.

Table A2: Poverty by season
      Poverty lean season                              Poverty harvest season                      Total
         (June-August)                                  (October-December)
                                                   Non-poor             Poor
 Non-poor                       #                    289                 89                         378
                                %                    32%                10%                         42%
 Poor                           #                    168                321                         489
                                %                    21%                37%                         58%
 Total                          #                    457                410                         867
                                %                    53%                47%                        100%
Note: Poor is defined as having a consumption per capita that is lower than the national poverty line.




14
     # indicates the number of observations and % indicates the population weighted shares.



                                                                             39
Table A3: Percentage change in welfare measures between the lean and harvest season

                                                       Food
                          Consumption                               Non-food consumption   Energy consumption
 Expenditure quintiles                   FCS      consumption per
                           per capita                                     per capita            per capita
                                                       capita
          1                   0.81       3.24           1.70                 0.42                1.23
          2                   0.63       1.55           0.82                 0.26                0.43
          3                   0.61       0.72           0.58                 0.26                0.18
          4                   0.32       0.66           0.56                 0.19                0.11
          5                   0.20       0.32           0.20                 0.29                -0.07
          6                   0.12       0.10           0.13                 0.26                -0.16
          7                   0.11       0.02           0.18                 0.12                -0.13
          8                   0.02      -0.06           -0.07                0.18                -0.13
          9                   0.05      -0.07           -0.03                0.07                -0.13
          10                 -0.07      -0.16           -0.19                0.02                -0.14


Table A4: Correlations between welfare measures

                   fcs1          fcs2    pcexp1       pcexp2
 fcs1                1
 fcs2              0.22            1
 pcexp1            0.20          0.17        1
 pcexp2            0.13          0.45      0.67          1




                                                             40
Table A5: Overlap between beneficiaries when selecting different shares of households

                                                Beneficiary overlap with         Beneficiary overlap with        #
 Share of PMT households selected                         HEA                       random method
 10%                                                      10%                              10%                  83
 20%                                                      14%                              20%                  162
 30%                                                      24%                              30%                  243
 40%                                                      39%                              40%                  329
 50%                                                      51%                              50%                  410


Table A6: PMT and HEA inclusion errors based on different welfare measures

                                       (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)             (6)          (7)
                                    Random          Perfect                                difference      difference   difference
 Welfare measure                                                   PMT          HEA
                                    selection      targeting                                 (3) - (4)      (1) - (3)    (1) - (4)
 Cons. pc R1                          70%             0%           50%          72%         -23%***         20%***          -2%
 Cons. pc R2                          70%             0%           44%          71%         -27%***         26%***          -1%
 Cons. pc avg. R1&R2                  70%             0%           43%          72%         -29%***         27%***          -2%
 FCS R1                               70%             0%           70%          52%          18%***             0%       18%***
 FCS R2                               70%             0%           65%          61%             4%             5%*        9%***
 Land                                 70%             0%           78%          33%          44%***         -8%***       37%***
 Livestock                            70%             0%           71%          40%          31%***            -1%       30%***
 Asset                                70%             0%           57%          65%           -8%*          13%***         5%**
 Income per capita                    70%             0%           61%          62%            -1%            9%**          8%*
Note: Statistical significance of the test of differences in means is denoted as * = 10%, ** = 5%, *** = 1 %




                                                                               41
Table A7: PMT performance based on temporary and chronic poverty and food insecurity
                                                                          PMT
                                                           non-beneficiary      beneficiary    Total
                         #                                      131                 37          168
 Seasonal poor
                         % among all HHs                        15.8                4.8        20.6
 households
                         % among seasonal poor HHs              76.9               23.1        100.0
                         #                                      151                 50          201
 Seasonal food ins.
                         % among all HHs                        19.4                6.0        25.4
 households
                         % among seasonal food ins. HHs         76.3               23.8        100.0
                         #                                      161                160          321
 Chronic poor HHs        % among all HHs                        17.7               19.3        37.0
                         % among chronic poor HHs               47.8               52.2        100.0
                         #                                       42                 26          68
 Chronic food ins. HHs   % among all HHs                        4.7                 3.6         8.3
                         % among chronic food ins. HHs          57.2               42.8        100.0

Table A8: HEA performance based on temporary and chronic poverty and food insecurity
                                                                             HEA
                                                                non-beneficiary  beneficiary   Total
                          #                                          122             46         168
 Seasonal poor
                          % among all HHs                            15.1           5.4        20.6
 households
                          % among seasonal poor HHs                  73.6           26.4       100.0
                          #                                          115             86         201
 Seasonal food ins.
                          % among all HHs                            14.0           11.4       25.4
 households
                          % among seasonal food ins. HHs             55.3           44.8       100.0
                          #                                          240             81         321
 Chronic poor HHs         % among all HHs                            27.1           9.9        37.1
                          % among chronic poor HHs                   73.2           26.8       100.0
                          #                                           29             39         68
 Chronic food ins. HHs    % among all HHs                             3.4           4.9         8.3
                          % among chronic food ins. HHs              40.8           59.3       100.0



                                                               42
Table A9: Share of targeted households that are “deprived” based on different welfare measures

                                          (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)               (5)                   (6)
                                                                                                    difference (1) -      Difference (1)
 Welfare measures                      Random          Perfect          PMT             HEA
                                                                                                           (3)                  - (4)
 Income per capita                       30%            100%            38%             38%             8%     **              8%   ***
 Non-productive assets index             30%            100%            43%             35%            13%     **              5%
 Consumption per capita                  30%            100%            57%             28%            27%     ***            -2%
 Total cultivated land                   30%            100%            22%             67%            -8%     ***            37%   ***
 FCS (R1)                                30%            100%            30%             48%             0%                    18%   ***
 Livestock index                         30%            100%            29%             60%            -1%                    30%   ***
Note: This table shows “deprivation” rates among targeted households for each of the targeting methods (column) based on different welfare measures
(rows). Since both the PMT and HEA method identified roughly 30% of the population, a household is considered “deprived” according to each welfare
measure if it ranks among the 30% lowest scoring household on the welfare measure. Statistical significance of the ttest of differences in means is denoted
as * = 10%, ** = 5%, *** = 1 %

Table A10: Differences in livelihood diversification between PMT and HEA households

                                                                        PMT            HEA             PMT-HEA         p-value

                                                                        2.5            1.9             0.64            0.00
 Number of sectors in which the household is engaged
     Participation rate:
 Participation - Agriculture & Fishing Wage Employment                  0.12           0.05            0.07            0.00
 Participation - Crop - Own Cons from Production Section                0.96           0.85            0.11            0.00
 Participation - Livestock Production                                   0.75           0.48            0.27            0.00
 Participation - Non-Ag Self Employment                                 0.64           0.45            0.19            0.00
 Participation - Non-Ag Wage Employment                                 0.05           0.05            -0.00           0.86
 Participation - Private Transfer                                       0.56           0.61            -0.05           0.22




                                                                               43
Table A11: Differences in livelihoods between PMT and HEA households

                                                   PMT            HEA      PMT-HEA
 Share of total income (share of means)
 Share - Agriculture & Fishing Wage Employment         4.2           2.6       1.6
 Share - Crop - Own Cons from Production Section      14.2          12.1       2.1
 Share - Livestock Prod. - Food Section               24.1          14.0     10.1
 Share - Non-Ag Self Emp                              43.2          42.5       0.7
 Share - Non-Ag Wage Employment                        5.1           7.7      -2.6
 Share - Private Transfer                              9.2          21.1     -11.9




                                                             44
               Social Protection & Labor Discussion Paper Series Titles
                                     2014-2016

No.    Title

1612   How to Target Households in Adaptive Social Protection Systems? Relative Efficiency of Proxy
       Means Test and Household Economy Analysis in Niger
       by Pascale Schnitzer, October 2016

1611   Pensions for Public-Sector Employees: Lessons from OECD Countries’ Experience
       by Edward Whitehouse, October 2016

1610   Pension Systems in Sub-Saharan Africa: Brief Review of Design Parameters and Key Performance
       Indicators
       by Miglena Abels and Melis U. Guven, October 2016

1609   Household Enterprises in Fragile and Conflict-Affected States: Results from a Qualitative Toolkit
       Piloted in Liberia, Volume 2 – Annexes
       by Emily Weedon and Gwendolyn Heaner, August 2016

1608   Household Enterprises in Fragile and Conflict-Affected States: Results from a Qualitative Toolkit
       Piloted in Liberia, Volume 1 – Report
       by Emily Weedon and Gwendolyn Heaner, August 2016

1607   Benefits and Costs of Social Pensions in Sub-Saharan Africa
       by Melis U. Guven and Phillippe G. Leite, June 2016

1606   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Germany-
       Turkey Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Michael Fuchs, Seçil Paçacı Elitok and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1605   Do Bilateral Social Security Agreements Deliver on the Portability of Pensions and Health Care
       Benefits? A Summary Policy Paper on Four Migration Corridors Between EU and Non-EU Member
       States
       by Robert Holzmann, May 2016

1604   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the France-Morocco
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Florence Legro and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1603   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Belgium-Morocco
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Jacques Wels and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1602   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Austria-Turkey
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Michael Fuchs, Seçil Paçaci Elitok and Pamela Dale, May 2016
1601   The Greek Pension Reform Strategy 2010-2016
       by Georgios Symeonidis, July 2016

1507   Integrating Disaster Response and Climate Resilience in Social Protection Programs in the Pacific
       Island Countries
       by Cecilia Costella and Oleksiy Ivaschenko, September 2015

1506   Effectiveness of Targeting Mechanisms Utilized in Social Protection Programs in Bolivia
       by Ignacio Apella and Gastón Blanco, September 2015

1505   Kyrgyz Republic: Social Sectors at a Glance
       by João Pedro Azevedo, Paula Calvo, Minh Nguyen and Josefina Posadas, August 2015

1504   Entering the City: Emerging Evidence and Practices with Safety Nets in Urban Areas
       by Ugo Gentilini, July 2015

1503   Pension Patterns in Sub-Saharan Africa
       by Mark Dorfman, July 2015

1502   Social Protection in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries: Trends and Challenges
       by Mirey Ovadiya, Adea Kryeziu, Syeda Masood and Eric Zapatero, April 2015

1501   Defining, Measuring, and Benchmarking Administrative Expenditures of Mandatory Social Security
       Programs
       by Oleksiy Sluchynsky, February 2015

1425   Old-Age Financial Protection in Malaysia: Challenges and Options
       by Robert Holzmann, November 2014

1424   Profiling the Unemployed: A Review of OECD Experiences and Implications for Emerging Economies
       by Artan Loxha and Matteo Morgandi, August 2014

1423   Any Guarantees? An Analysis of China’s Rural Minimum Living Standard Guarantee Program
       by Jennifer Golan, Terry Sicular and Nithin Umapathi, August 2014

1422   World Bank Support for Social Safety Nets 2007-2013: A Review of Financing, Knowledge Services
       and Results
       by Colin Andrews, Adea Kryeziu and Dahye Seo, June 2014

1421   STEP Skills Measurement Surveys: Innovative Tools for Assessing Skills
       by Gaëlle Pierre, Maria Laura Sanchez Puerta, Alexandria Valerio and Tania Rajadel, July 2014

1420   Our Daily Bread: What is the Evidence on Comparing Cash versus Food Transfers?
       by Ugo Gentilini, July 2014

1419   Rwanda: Social Safety Net Assessment
       by Alex Kamurase, Emily Wylde, Stephen Hitimana and Anka Kitunzi, July 2012
1418   Niger: Food Security and Safety Nets
       by Jenny C. Aker, Carlo del Ninno, Paul A. Dorosh, Menno Mulder-Sibanda and Setareh Razmara,
       February 2009

1417   Benin: Les Filets Sociaux au Bénin Outil de Réduction de la Pauvreté
       par Andrea Borgarello et Damien Mededji, Mai 2011

1416   Madagascar Three Years into the Crisis: An Assessment of Vulnerability and Social Policies and
       Prospects for the Future
       by Philippe Auffret, May 2012

1415   Sudan Social Safety Net Assessment
       by Annika Kjellgren, Christina Jones-Pauly, Hadyiat El-Tayeb Alyn, Endashaw Tadesse and Andrea
       Vermehren, May 2014

1414   Tanzania Poverty, Growth, and Public Transfers: Options for a National Productive Safety Net
       Program
       by W. James Smith, September 2011

1413   Zambia: Using Social Safety Nets to Accelerate Poverty Reduction and Share Prosperity
       by Cornelia Tesliuc, W. James Smith and Musonda Rosemary Sunkutu, March 2013

1412   Mali Social Safety Nets
       by Cécile Cherrier, Carlo del Ninno and Setareh Razmara, January 2011

1411   Swaziland: Using Public Transfers to Reduce Extreme Poverty
       by Lorraine Blank, Emma Mistiaen and Jeanine Braithwaite, November 2012

1410   Togo: Towards a National Social Protection Policy and Strategy
       by Julie van Domelen, June 2012

1409   Lesotho: A Safety Net to End Extreme Poverty
       by W. James Smith, Emma Mistiaen, Melis Guven and Morabo Morojele, June 2013

1408   Mozambique Social Protection Assessment: Review of Social Assistance Programs and Social
       Protection Expenditures
       by Jose Silveiro Marques, October 2012

1407   Liberia: A Diagnostic of Social Protection
       by Andrea Borgarello, Laura Figazzolo and Emily Weedon, December 2011

1406   Sierra Leone Social Protection Assessment
       by José Silvério Marques, John Van Dyck, Suleiman Namara, Rita Costa and Sybil Bailor, June 2013

1405   Botswana Social Protection
       by Cornelia Tesliuc, José Silvério Marques, Lillian Mookodi, Jeanine Braithwaite, Siddarth Sharma
       and Dolly Ntseane, December 2013
1404        Cameroon Social Safety Nets
            by Carlo del Ninno and Kaleb Tamiru, June 2012

1403        Burkina Faso Social Safety Nets
            by Cécile Cherrier, Carlo del Ninno and Setareh Razmara, January 2011

1402        Social Insurance Reform in Jordan: Awareness and Perceptions of Employment Opportunities for
            Women
            by Stefanie Brodmann, Irene Jillson and Nahla Hassan, June 2014

1401        Social Assistance and Labor Market Programs in Latin America: Methodology and Key Findings from
            the Social Protection Database
            by Paula Cerutti, Anna Fruttero, Margaret Grosh, Silvana Kostenbaum, Maria Laura Oliveri, Claudia
            Rodriguez-Alas, Victoria Strokova, June 2014


To view Social Protection & Labor Discussion papers published prior to 2013, please visit www.worldbank.org/spl.
Abstract

Proxy Means Test (PMT) and the Household Economy Analysis (HEA) are widely used methods to
target chronically poor households and those suffering from food crises respectively. Using panel
data from Niger, this study provides the first empirical evidence on the relative efficiency of these
methods in identifying households suffering from permanent or seasonal deprivations. Results
show limited overlap between households selected by each method. The PMT performs better
in targeting chronically poor households, while HEA performs better in targeting seasonal food
insecure households. The study also explores the extent to which these methods can be improved,
used and potentially combined to target households as part of ASP systems. Results show that the
HEA formula could be further improved to target seasonally food insecure households, including
through a regression model estimating food insecurity, and a principal component analysis (PCA)
model. Combinations of PMT with methods such as HEA, PCA, or a food insecurity formula may
be considered to identify households suffering from chronic poverty and seasonal food insecurity
as part of an efficient and scalable ASP system. Harmonizing data collection tools of PMT and
HEA users would serve as a crucial building block towards a unified registry and play a key role in
improving the efficiency of ASP systems.




About this series

Social Protection & Labor Discussion Papers are published to communicate the results of The World Bank’s
work to the development community with the least possible delay. This paper therefore has not been
prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate for formally edited texts.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s), and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank
and its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments
they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgement on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.
For more information, please contact the Social Protection Advisory Service, The World Bank, 1818 H Street,
N.W., Room G7-803, Washington, DC 20433 USA. Telephone: (202) 458-5267, Fax: (202) 614-0471, E-mail:
socialprotection@worldbank.org or visit us on-line at www.worldbank.org/spl.

                                  © 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
