CASE STUDY


Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology
Alliar: A Highly Productive Business Model Benefits
Millions of Patients in Brazil

July 2016
ABOUT IFC
IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global development institution focused exclusively on leveraging
the power of the private sector to tackle the world’s most pressing development challenges. Working with private
enterprises in more than 100 countries, IFC uses its capital, expertise and influence to help eliminate extreme poverty
and promote shared prosperity.

ABOUT THE CASE STUDY
Expanding access to quality and affordable health care is a central element to eliminating extreme poverty and
promoting shared prosperity. The World Bank Group has a goal to end preventable deaths and disability through
Universal Health Coverage (UHC). In many developing countries, governments do not have the capacity to service the
entire population and private health care providers often play a critical role in meeting societal needs.

IFC’s health practice is developing case studies that demonstrate the ability of the private sector towards achieving
global and national health care goals. Through a focus on efficiency and innovation, certain business models can
provide better outcomes at a lower overall cost to society.

WRITTEN BY
This case study was authored by Ann M. Casanova with valuable inputs from IFC colleagues Ioan Cleaton-Jones,
Leticia Crentsil, Charles Dalton, Erika Kanashiro Tugumi, Chris McCahan, and Elena Sterlin.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
A special note of appreciation is extended to Alliar, especially Fernando Terni, Dr. Juan Cevasco, Fernando Pereira,
Fernando Trancanella, Marcos Cominato, Cibele Carvalho, Roberto Kalil and Patricia Vieira for sharing their
experience and data with us. The author is grateful for the many insights provided by IFC colleagues. Special thanks to
Elizabeth Price for communications advice, and Irina Sarchenko and Borys Mar for the creative design. 

DISCLAIMER
The findings, interpretations, views and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation or of the World Bank or the
governments they represent. While IFC believes that the information provided is accurate, the information is provided
on a strictly “as-is” basis, without assurance or representation of any kind. IFC may not require all or any of the
described practices in its own investments, and in its sole discretion may not agree to finance or assist companies or
projects that adhere to those practices. Any such practices or proposed practices would be evaluated by IFC on a case-
by-case basis with due regard for the particular circumstances of the project.

COVER PHOTO
© Alliar

RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
© International Finance Corporation 2015. All rights reserved.

The material in this work is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law.
                                                                            Photo © Alliar
Table of Contents
  Accelerating Diagnosis and Treatment for Thousands of Patients				    1

  The Business Model Targets Pent-Up Demand				                         5

  Maximizing Productivity Through Innovation				                        9

  Obsessed with Operational Efficiencies				                           13

  The Role of IFC				                                                  17

  Conclusion				17
                                                                                                                                          Photo ©Pan American Health Organization




The PPP has had a positive impact on Bahia’s public health system and is a game changer for patients who have been enduring long waits.
ACCELERATING DIAGNOSIS AND
TREATMENT FOR THOUSANDS OF
PATIENTS

Adeni Almeida was 57 years old and had a history of suspicious nodes in her left
breast. Eight years ago, the nodes had been surgically removed at the State Center
of Oncology (Cican) in Salvador, Bahia, but in 2015 new nodes appeared that
could be potentially cancerous and her doctor ordered a stereotactic biopsy.1 The
difficulty was that the Cican did not have the equipment to perform the test and
there was a long wait at the hospital for surgery.

For a year and a half, Adeni appealed to three hospitals in Salvador—without
success. She approached the private health system, but couldn’t afford the amount
charged, of about R$1,400 (US$415).2 She did not have private health insurance
and was reliant on the public health system, just like 75 percent of all Brazilians.
She lamented, “I felt abandoned, suffering from a problem that could not wait
that long. I would leave early in the morning, crying, trying to get this exam while
fearing that the disease was getting worse.”




                                                                                                                                                                  Photo © Alliar
It was mid-2016 when Adeni was finally able to have the procedure performed—
after Alliar, through its subsidiary, the Brazilian Diagnostic Network (RBD), had
established a new diagnostic imaging center at the Cican. The new center was
made possible through the first ever Public Private Partnership (PPP) for diagnostic                                         “For several
imaging services in Brazil. In February 2015, Alliar’s consortium established an
                                                                                                                             months now,
11.5 year PPP with the State of Bahia to build, operate, and staff new diagnostic
imaging centers in 11 hospitals across the state and establish one tele-radiology                                            things have
center. The PPP allows Alliar to provide quality diagnostic services to low-income                                           evolved, the
patients covered by the Sistema Único de Saúde (SUS), the universal healthcare                                               equipment is
system in Brazil. The PPP has already had a huge positive impact on Bahia’s public
                                                                                                                             better, the tests
healthcare system. It was a game changer for patients who had experienced a lot of
stress while enduring long waits.                                                                                            are fast. I felt real
                                                                                                                             changes in patient
Following the PPP investments, Adeni noticed improvements in services. “For
                                                                                                                             care—greater
several months now, things have evolved, the equipment is better, the tests are
fast. I felt real changes in patient care—greater patient care. It is wonderful!”                                            patient care. It is
                                                                                                                             wonderful!” Adeni
  1	 The procedure is preferred over full surgery because it is a minimally invasive technique performed on an outpatient    Almeida
     basis, with low risk of complications. The procedure relies on mammography to locate and guide the collection of
     tissue samples of abnormal growth.
  2	 The foreign exchange rate was USD1 to BRL3.37 on June 10, 2015. www.oanda.com




                                                                                                             Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology | 1
                                                                 Emphasizing the importance of access to advanced diagnostic methods in
                                                                 the public sector, she exclaimed, “This is very important for those of us who
                                                                 cannot afford it! I won my life back!”

                                                                 Fernando Terni, President and CEO of Alliar explained, “We expanded
                                                                 care, reduced costs to the state and improved the service with more precise
                                                                 diagnostics that enables us to produce rapid results.” This modernization
                                                                 strategy has resulted in a seismic shift in increasing access for patients. Dr.
                                                                 Juan Cevasco, the Chief Medical Officer illustrated, “Prior to the PPP, a simple
                                                                 cholecystectomy (surgical removal of the gallbladder) procedure would take
                                                                 about 35 days to turnover hospital beds, in large measure because the hospital
Photo © Alliar




                                                                 did not have access to imaging. Now with imaging services, it was reduced
                                                                 to five days, just as it is supposed to be everywhere else in the world.” The
                                                                 ability to rapidly turnover beds has shortened waiting time for patients like
                                                                 Adeni and increased access to healthcare for thousands of patients. A year
                     “We expanded
                                                                 into the PPP, Alliar has conducted 183,000 exams for Bahia’s network of
                     care, reduced                               public hospitals. Once fully implemented, it should serve about 6 million SUS-
                     costs to the state                          dependent patients over 11 years.
                     and improved
                                                                 Alliar Centro de Imagem Diagnosticos, SA is among the three largest
                     the service with                            diagnostic imaging companies in Brazil. The company promotes access to
                     more precise                                better quality healthcare through two main business lines (1) diagnostic
                                                                 imaging, and (2) on-site medical laboratory testing. For radiology, Alliar
                     diagnostics that
                                                                 offers a broad array of modern diagnostic imaging exams and tests including
                     enables us to                               Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Computed Tomography (CT) scans,
                     produce rapid re-                           ultrasound, mammography, and X-Rays.3 In addition, the company has
                     sults.” Fernando                            recently begun to co-locate laboratories at its centers, thereby promoting
                                                                 greater convenience for its patients.
                     Terni, President
                     and CEO of Alliar             Alliar is a privately held, for-profit, holding company that was established
                                                   in 2011 with the merger of four leading diagnostic companies from Bello
                                                   Horizonte, Campo Grande, Juiz de Fora and São José dos Campos. The
             company expanded rapidly through a series of mergers and acquisitions that led to an increase in revenues
             of about 40 percent per year. In only five years, it has established a network by acquiring 24 companies, and
             managing 1 PPP, all of which are operating under 25 different, established brands. As a result of the company’s
             growth trajectory, it currently has 125 MRI scanners in 117 Patient Service Centers (PSCs) in 41 cities and in 10
             states. It even has a PSC in Para in the Amazon—a three-hour flight from the nearest big city.

             In 2012, IFC played a catalytic role in the growth of Alliar by providing a US$50 million loan for expansion
             through organic growth and acquisitions. Additionally, IFC’s funding was used to make existing centers
             more efficient. Alliar has successfully expanded to underserved regions and contributed to the increase of the
             availability of MRI exams in Brazil by opening 30 new PSCs and installing 42 new MRI scanners in five years,

                 3	 Alliar’s services include Arterial Blood Pressure Monitoring (M.A.P.A.), Biopsies (including diagnostic guided biopsies especially of the breast, prostate, and
                   thyroid), Bone Density, Cardiotocography, Coronary Angiotomography, CT Scans, Doppler Echocardiography, Echo Doppler, Electrocardiograms, Ergometrics,
                   Ergospirometry, Fetal Medicine, Flexible Sigmoidoscopies, Holter, Mammograms, Mammotomies, Medical Laboratory Testing, MRI, Nuclear Medicine,
                   Pathological Anatomy Exams, Pet-CT, Ultrasounds, Upper Digestive Video Endoscopy, Vaccines, and Video Colonoscopy.




             2 | Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology
particularly targeting cities or areas that lacked access to MRI. The growth of the network has enabled it to
serve 4.3 million patients since it was founded in 2011. Alliar’s growth has been good news for women, who
represented 67 percent of Alliar’s patient population in 2015. Expansion has generated new jobs and by mid-
2016, the company had 5,200 employees, of which 75 percent were female. It has about 1,000 medical doctors,
of which about 60 percent are female. The increase in capacity and the number of patients served has led Alliar to
generate revenues of over R$1 billion (US$296 million) in 2015.



     KEY SUCCESS FACTORS
     The key factors that have contributed to the company’s success are a focus on high productivity through
     innovation, excellence in quality, and partnerships.


       HIGH PRODUCTIVITY THROUGH                              Doctors at the Forefront” emphasizes that doctors
       INNOVATION                                             are in charge of the company. Alliar ensures
       Alliar is a company that is driven by increasing the   excellence by acquiring the leading radiology
       number of patients that have access to diagnostic      companies in the local market. Then, it leverages
       imaging services. It achieves this by constantly       the local brand to open new PSCs in nearby
       reviewing and reducing costs, and increasing           cities. It invests in state-of-the-art equipment that
       productivity, largely through technology. The          is appropriate to the disease profile, utilization
       company has digitized all its operations enabling      and affordability for its new PSCs. The latest
       diagnostic images to be easily transmittable across    technology produces high-quality images that
       the country in real time. This has permitted Alliar    allows radiologists to provide a more accurate
       to implement its tele-medicine strategy which          analysis of an image and provides faster results.
       helps to tackle the radiologist shortage in Brazil
                                                              PARTNERSHIPS
       because radiologists do not need to be located
                                                              Partnerships have been fundamental to Alliar’s
       in the same city as the patient. By eliminating
                                                              success, especially the partnerships forged with
       the need of the radiologist to travel to multiple
                                                              the doctors of the acquired companies and the
       clinics, cities that lack radiologists can also be
                                                              equipment suppliers. Firstly, as a rule, the doctors
       served. This approach has helped to triple the
                                                              who owned the acquired companies continue to
       number of patients a radiologist can serve. Alliar
                                                              be shareholders in Alliar. They play a fundamental
       also leveraged technology to pioneer the world’s
                                                              role in medical decisions taken by the company
       first MRI “Command Center” where its most
                                                              and ensure that medical quality is of paramount
       experienced technicians remotely operate multiple
                                                              importance. This is critical to Alliar because it
       MRI scanners in different cities. Technicians are
                                                              wants to continue to acquire the top radiology
       very productive and can operate multiple MRI
                                                              practices and is a distinguishing feature when
       scanners at a time. Each Command Center runs
                                                              compared to the competition. Secondly, equipment
       about 55,000 scans a month. The overall increase
                                                              suppliers are essential for innovation. Without
       in productivity dramatically increases patient
                                                              them, it would not have been possible to establish
       access to scarce specialist medical skills.
                                                              the Command Center where it operates MRI
       EXCELLENCE IN QUALITY                                  scanners centrally. Thirdly, the company has
       Alliar places great importance in cultivating a        been able to reduce capital expenditure (capex)
       culture of medical excellence. The company’s logo      costs through volume discounts with partnering
       “Alliar – Médicos à Frente,” meaning “Alliar—          suppliers.




                                                                               Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology | 3
                                                                                                                                              Photo © Adam Jones | Elderly Women Take a Stroll, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil




By 2033 Brazil’s population over 65 years of age is projected to reach 24 million, increasing the need for medical and diagnostic services.




4 | Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology
THE BUSINESS MODEL TARGETS PENT-UP
DEMAND

In 2013, the segment of Brazil’s population over 65 years of age was roughly 14 million and growing rapidly. By
2033, it is projected to increase to 24 million people. This population segment typically has a greater need for
medical and diagnostic services. The disease profile in Brazil is similar to many other parts of the world, with an
increasing incidence of cancer and heart disease. As medicine continues to evolve toward more ambulatory care
and less invasive procedures, medical diagnostic services will continue to play an important role for individual
patients who need personalized care.

The diagnostic imaging market in Brazil is a very fragmented industry with more than 5,000 small providers
spread out across the country. The five largest players have less than a third of the market. Further, the availability
of equipment is limited. For instance, in 2011, Brazil had 1,060 MRI scanners with nearly 700 concentrated in
the largest cities with over 400,000 people. These circumstances limited patient access and many were not served
at all.

The substantive investments needed in state-of-the-art equipment that is appropriate to service the local disease
profile makes it difficult for small providers in distant parts of Brazil to remain competitive. This led several local
diagnostic imaging companies to join forces and purchase equipment together to obtain better pricing. In 2011,
four companies decided to merge. The founders decided to name the new company “Alliar,” roughly meaning
“alliance” in Portuguese. Alliar’s mission is to combine human capital with technology and entrepreneurship to
bring quality diagnostic medicine to every region of Brazil.

The founders selected Patria Investimentos, a private-equity firm, to provide advisory services and capital. Alliar
chose Patria because it agreed to give doctors a key role in decisions related to medical services. It backed this
promise up by keeping the doctor as a shareholder of Alliar to ensure continuity of quality. Today, Patria owns
about 25 percent of Alliar and has about 51 percent of the voting shares while doctors own about 70 percent of
the company and have about 44 percent of the voting shares.


FROM SOLE PROPRIETOR TO NETWORK
Alliar adopted an accelerated growth strategy where it seeks to consolidate the market. It created a network
through a “hub and spoke” model. Hubs were targeted through mergers and acquisitions of leading companies
in midsize cities where there was pent-up demand, or in cities where patients had to travel more than 200 km to
have access to services. Hubs were typically identified as the leading provider of quality and revenues in the local
market, and who also had expansion plans.

Spokes were cultivated organically as a natural extension of the brands of the hubs. They expanded into frontier
regions that had a population of more than 200,000 inhabitants and did not have an MRI. With this strategy, in
the first four years, Alliar opened up more than 30 greenfield PSCs in smaller cities.




                                                                               Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology | 5
                                   FIGURE 1: FOOTPRINT OF ALLIAR’S NETWORK IN BRAZIL

            Mato Grosso do Sul                                                                   Pará




                                                                                          Rio Grande do Norte




                 São Paulo                                                                      Paraíba



                                                                                                Bahia




                                                                                             Minas Gerais
               Rio de Janeiro



                   Paraná                                       Espírito Santo




At the outset, they deliberately avoided the largest cities, such as Rio, where there was greater competition from
the top two providers. It was in 2015 that Alliar expanded its footprint into primary cities, with the acquisition of
CDB, and began working in São Paulo.


BRANDING
Alliar recognized that the established reputations of the local brands bring
tremendous value. As a result, Alliar decided to keep the local brand names.
In the future, it expects to begin to co-brand the local brands alongside that of
                                                                                      Alliar places great
Alliar.
                                                                                      importance in
MANAGEMENT STRATEGY PROMOTES EFFICIENCY AND                                           cultivating a culture
HIGH QUALITY                                                                          of medical excellence.
When Alliar established the network, it created a management structure                The company’s logo
to allow management to concentrate on its area of expertise. The doctor               “Alliar – Médicos à
is responsible for the medical side of the business and remains clinically
                                                                                      Frente,” meaning
in charge of each PSC. A medical committee comprised of 6 doctors and 1
                                                                                      “Alliar—Doctors at the
finance professional from Patria takes medical decisions over the selection
of new equipment. Alliar’s CEO is responsible for the day-to-day running of           Forefront” emphasizes
the business as well as innovating, benchmarking, proposing new ideas, and            that doctors are
promulgating efficiencies across the network. Patria retains decision-making          in charge of the
authority over financial matters. Important decisions are taken by consensus.
                                                                                      company.




6 | Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology
TARGET MARKET

Alliar’s aggressive growth strategy requires high capex investments. Each newly established PSC is equipped with
a minimum package of basic equipment that includes one MRI, one CT scanner, and three ultrasounds. Due to
the large capex investments, the company works hard to establish a reliable revenue stream to help it reach the
breakeven point faster.

Alliar found a steady revenue stream in the private health insurance market in Brazil. Roughly 25 percent of the
population has private health insurance and in 2015, 87 percent of Alliar’s revenues were from patients with
private health insurance. With the conclusion of the PPP with the State of Bahia in 2015, Alliar began to diversify
the revenue streams and pursue the 75 percent of the market with government health insurance, but through a
more reliable payment mechanism. Under the PPP, Alliar agrees to serve a target number of patients and the state
pays a monthly fee. In 2015, roughly 9 percent of revenues were from the PPP. In contrast, in 2014, 2.5 percent of
revenues were from public health insurance.


REVENUES
In 2015, about 90 percent of revenues were generated from diagnostic imaging, of which MRI represented the
largest share with 41 percent of the overall revenues for the company. Medical laboratory testing was recently
introduced and this represented 10 percent of revenues.




                              FIGURE 2: REVENUE BREAKDOWN BY EXAM TYPE (2015)



                                                    Others 16%

                                                                                Medical
                          US                                                    Laboratory Testing
                          (Ultrasound)
                                                                                12%
                          17%




                      CT
                      (Computed
                      Tamagrophy)
                      14%
                                                                              MRI (Magnetic
                                                                              Resonance Imaging)
                                                                              41%




                                                                            Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology | 7
                                                                                                                                                                     Photo © Alliar




The Command Center expands Alliar’s capabilities to provide top technicians to remote or underserved locations, where qualified technicians are difficult to find.




8 | Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology
MAXIMIZING PRODUCTIVITY THROUGH
INNOVATION


THE COMMAND CENTER—A GLOBAL FIRST
By mid-2014, after a new PSC in a distant location began operating, a technician had a family emergency and
could not go to work. He was the only technitian on staff at the time. The problem was that a patient was waiting
for an MRI exam. A technician in another city connected remotely to the MRI scanner’s computer and coached
the nurse on the steps to conduct the procedure at a distance. The second time it happened, Alliar realized that
it could build upon the existing technology to expand routine service delivery to patients. The discovery led to
the establishment of Alliar’s Command Center and made Alliar an innovator on a global level. The concept is
revolutionary because it removes the technician from the exam room and relocates a group of top technicians to
one of the five centralized Command Centers located across Brazil.4

The Command Center was a global first.5 It was made a reality through a partnership between Alliar and
SIEMENS to develop the next generation communications platform for screen sharing and Voice over Internet
Protocol (VoIP) for the MRI scanners. As a result, technicians can connect remotely to the MRI scanners in the
PSCs and can control the scanners from the Command Center. They can see what is going on in the room through
TV cameras that have been set up in the exam room and can speak with the nurse who is physically present
attending to the patient.

The Command Center was an important innovation for Alliar that increased quality and productivity because
the technician plays a key role in capturing the highest quality image possible. Furthermore, the Command
Center expands Alliar’s capabilities to provide top technicians to remote or underserved locations, where it is
more difficult to find qualified technicians. Fernando Terni, explains, “The Command Center gives us a huge
improvement in quality because I have the best technicians running the machines. We had a heart attack patient in
the middle of the Amazon, but the local technicians were not specialized to run a heart exam. By centralizing the
technicians, we can do any type of exam on any of our machines. Those are the best technicians on staff, so the
quality of the images is much higher.”

Technicians are able to operate between two and three MRI scanners simultaneously, thereby increasing
productivity and reducing personnel costs. By centralizing the technicians, their time is optimized because they
can advance to the next patient in “PSC-A” while the room is being prepared for the next patient in “PSC-B.”
Traditionally, three patients could be screened in an hour, but with the Command Center, one technician can
typically screen six patients per hour for the most common studies. Dr. Cevasco believes this could be streamlined
even further, “In the next five to seven years, we could go much faster, maybe 10 patients an hour by using
optimized protocols and processes.”


  4	 The Command Centers are located in São Paulo, Belo Horizonte, Campo Grande, Juiz de Flora, and São José dos Campos.
  5	 “Siemens Healthcare introduced the first remote control room for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) equipment. The room, which uses Siemens’ Expert-I
    medical equipment remote connection, was developed for Alliar, one of the biggest diagnostic medicine chains in Brazil.” http://www.siemens.com/about/pool/
    worldwide/siemens_brazil_en.pdf




                                                                                                        Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology | 9
Today, 60 MRI scanners from across Alliar’s network are connected to one of its Command Centers. Each
Command Center is staffed with about 20 technicians who are running about 55,000 MR scans a month,
significantly higher than in any single center.

The result is a win-win for everybody involved. The patient gets a higher-quality exam performed in a more
efficient timetable. The technicians are developing a more sophisticated skill set and gaining a broader depth of
expertise because they are dealing with a larger population and see a greater variety of conditions. The Command
Center technicians are better compensated because of increased expertise and volumes and the company’s bottom
line benefits from more efficient practices. Given the success of the initiative, Alliar plans to connect nearly 70
more PSCs to the Command Centers in the future.




      Alliar leverages technology to pioneer
      the world’s first MRI “Command Center”
      where its most experienced technicians
      remotely operate multiple MRI scanners
      in different cities.




                                                                                                                      Photos © Alliar
MORE PRODUCTIVE RADIOLOGISTS
In 2014, there were about 9,700 board certified radiologists in Brazil,6 which is inadequate for a country
with 206 million inhabitants and an aging population. To complicate matters further, the radiologists are
disproportionally concentrated—about 50 percent of radiologists are located in São Paulo and Rio. This leaves
secondary and tertiary cities significantly underserved, creates bottlenecks in areas that have large numbers of
patients, and even leads to idle radiologists at other locations.
Alliar decided to better manage the capacity of the radiologists by encouraging a small group of doctors to team
up and leverage Alliar’s tele-medicine capabilities. Radiologists can view the records of all patients through
Alliar’s Picture Archiving and Control System (PACS). All patient records are securely uploaded to the cloud and
can be accessed remotely at any time by the radiologists. Radiologists can interpret the diagnostic images and
write the reports remotely. This paradigm shift allows radiologists to break free from traditional geographical
constraints and provide diagnostic services without having to be physically present at the PSC.



  6	http://www.sbpc.org.br/upload/conteudo/demografia_medica2015.pdf




10 | Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology
Even though not every center will have a radiologist present to read the
images, a doctor will be available on a 24-hour basis through tele-medicine.
Significant time is saved since the radiologist no longer needs to drive to
multiple clinics in distant cities. This increases the radiologist’s productivity
by a factor of three. Prior to leveraging Alliar’s tele-medicine capabilities,
radiologists could interpret two to three images per hour, but now they can
report 10 studies per hour.

Patients benefit from getting imaging study results much faster. Alliar’s
typical turnaround for a study report is two days and this can be done faster
upon special request. The increased productivity of the radiologists allows




                                                                                                                                      Photo © Alliar
Alliar to provide services to more patients in smaller cities and benefit from
highly experienced radiologist in bigger cities. It also helps expand Alliar’s
capabilities and makes it possible for radiologists in the better-supplied South
of Brazil to serve patients in the poorly-supplied North of the country.                    “Tele-radiology
Alliar’s enhanced productivity means that the company can address the lack                  makes it possible
of radiologists even as the number of patients served expands. The increase                 for radiologists in
in efficiencies also allows the radiologist to increase earning capacity since
                                                                                            the better-sup-
they are compensated according to the number of reports produced. This in
turn attracts more radiologists to work with Alliar or to sell their practices
                                                                                            plied South of
to Alliar. In addition, as an incentive to retain its best radiologists, Alliar             Brazil to serve pa-
invites 2 percent of its best performing doctors to become shareholders. This               tients in the poor-
succession planning ensures that Alliar will not encounter a gap in expertise
                                                                                            ly-supplied North
when the first generation owners begin to retire.
                                                                                            of the country.” Dr.
MODERNIZATION OF PROTOCOLS                                                                  Cevasco, Alliar

The company is working to improve medicine as a whole by modernizing
protocols. Traditionally, a patient had to fit into a predetermined protocol;
however, there have been instances where the technician has escalated unusual findings to the radiologist and
obtained specific guidance to modify a particular sequence. The technician recommended an imaging sequence
that was not in the routine protocol, but that was tailored to the immediate findings, while the patient was still in
the scanner. Through this approach, Alliar has been able to deliver customized, personalized medicine that is more
effective.
Dr. Cevasco expects that it can formally continue to streamline sequences for more optimal results. “What
happened historically is that we had major technological advances in the last 20 years. We keep adding to
our protocols but we never cut anything. We are very fat in protocols. It costs a lot of money and is not very
beneficial.” He adds, “Sometimes, you don’t need a R$500 (US$150) study, you can get what you need for under
R$200 (US$60).”

The company is in the midst of discussions with its 1,000 doctors to identify areas that can be modernized. He
explains, “The Command Center helps spread effective and efficient techniques and protocols across all our MRI
scanners. We are now in a constant process of discussing and implementing newer, quicker and more focused
protocols throughout our installed base.” They hope to conduct a pilot later this year to test their thesis.




                                                                                Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology | 11
                                                                                                                                                            Photo © Alliar




Within six months of acquisition, a company transitions to Alliar’s IT platforms which promotes operational efficiencies and allows management to monitor
operations across its 10 state network.




12 | Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology
OBSESSED WITH OPERATIONAL
EFFICIENCIES


STRONG PURCHASING POWER
An MRI scanner typically costs about US$1.4 million, making it cost prohibitive for many small radiology centers
to obtain one because it is difficult to raise the capital to finance it. A key benefit of Alliar’s network is its strong
purchasing power, which has enabled it to get much better pricing. Twelve months after the establishment of
the company, Alliar placed an order for medical imaging equipment from Siemens. At that time, it was Siemens’
largest order in Latin America. Under the agreement, Alliar would obtain 60 highly innovative imaging systems
over three years.7 That deal and others like it translated into significant savings for the company. Beneficial pricing
has been a key factor to successfully implement the company’s aggressive expansion strategy.


EXTENDED OPERATING HOURS CONTRIBUTES
TO HIGH VOLUMES
Given the high demand and the backlog of patients to be seen,
many of Alliar’s PSCs are open for screenings 18 hours a day. In
cities where demand is high, Alliar is running the scanners from 6
a.m. to midnight. In some cases, they can even do overnight routine




                                                                                                                                                       Photo © Alliar
outpatient scheduling. Some PSCs are open shorter hours given
the cultural sensitivities in a given location, but the PSCs with the
shortest operating hours are still operating the scanners for 12
hours a day. This translates into a higher number of patients that
can be seen and also allows Alliar to breakeven on an investment
                                                                                               Beneficial pricing has been
in an MRI scanner in about two years.                                                          a key factor to opening
                                                                                               30 new PSCs in cities that
COST-EFFECTIVE IT PLATFORMS                                                                    lacked access to MRI. The
Alliar’s drive for increased productivity and operational                                      rapid expansion allowed
efficiencies has led to the creation of several harmonized IT
                                                                                               more patients in frontier
platforms for radiology, accounting, and a call center. Within
six months of acquisition, a company transitions into Alliar’s IT                              regions to access technol-
platforms. The company estimates that the network synergies                                    ogy that accelerated diag-
generate savings of 25 percent of the cost of each acquired                                    nosis and treatment.
company.8


  7	 “Siemens Healthcare wins largest imaging equipment order in Latin America.”   Press Release. December 8, 2011. http://www.siemens.com/press/en/
    pressrelease/?press=/en/pressrelease/2011/healthcare/h201112009.htm
  8	 Setenta e Demais?, Exame, March 2, 2016. pg 50.




                                                                                                Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology | 13
PACS
Alliar makes very intensive usage of tele-medicine technology to boost productivity. PACS enables Alliar to make
diagnostic images portable and transmit them to locations where they can be studied by the country’s leading
physicians, according to their specialty. PACS is the technology that has allowed Alliar to expand into smaller
cities, while relying on access to radiologists in bigger cities. The referring doctor also has access to the system
and can view the images and consult Alliar’s experts even before the report is ready. Dr. Cevasco pointed out,
“Using this technology, we empower medical offices with all the diagnostic power that a major hospital would
have.”




      “Using this technology, we empower
      medical offices with all the diagnostic
      power that a major hospital would
      have.” Dr. Cevasco




                                                                                                                          Photos © Alliar and National Cancer Institute
RIS
In addition to PACS, Alliar has been working on a Radiology Information System (RIS) that is customized to
the needs of Alliar. The software has some intelligence built into it to increase doctor productivity. Through a
dashboard format, the doctor can quickly see the relevant results rather than having to search through several
pages of reports to search for specific results. For instance, if the patient came for a liver study, RIS will populate
only the dashboard with the imaging and lab studies of the abdomen. For lab test results, the dashboard
first displays results that are abnormal, followed by the complete lab record. By simply presenting relevant
information quickly and minimizing search time for doctors, Alliar can provide relevant, personalized radiology
results to doctors and patients faster.




14 | Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology
SHARED SERVICE CENTER ENABLES AN EFFICIENT BACK OFFICE
By consolidating the back-office functions in a Shared Services Center, the fixed costs are diluted across all the
brands, and the company promotes economies of scale. Financial functions and human resources are centralized
with very high efficiencies. The budget is managed on a zero-based budget methodology, which relies on a
minimum structure that is necessary to provide the service.

The full integration of PACS, RIS, and the shared services center enables the seamless integration and a
substantial improvement of the company’s operations.


OPERATIONS DASHBOARD ENABLES REAL TIME MONITORING
Company executives are keen to monitor key indicators on a daily basis, particularly given the dispersed
geographical footprint. The company does this through six large TV screens that are prominently located in
a hallway at the home office in São Paulo. The screens track several key performance indicators, including
equipment function, production, customer satisfaction, and call center performance. If an indicator goes red,
executives follow up quickly.




                                                                                                                                                             Photo © Exame




The Operations Dashboard tracks several performance indicators and flags trouble spots in real time for quick follow up by management.




                                                                                                       Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology | 15
                                                                                                                                              Photo © Alliar




In only five years, the quality of Alliar’s work has led it to become recognized as one of the best diagnostic imaging companies in Brazil.




16 | Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology
THE ROLE OF IFC

Since the company was founded in January 2011, Alliar adopted an aggressive growth strategy to consolidate the
market. It approached IFC in mid-2011 in the early stages of a major expansion. Patria Investimentos, had an
established relationship with IFC through another client and brought Alliar to partner with IFC. IFC was an attractive
partner for Alliar because of the global credibility and the international links to the industry it brought to the company.
In addition, IFC’s ability to provide longer-term funding, with an unusual equity-convertibility feature, which were
not otherwise available in the local market, were also appealing. Patria knew the relevance of having a partner like
IFC to support Alliar not only with a loan, but also to encourage the company to meet the best practices of corporate
governance and environmental and social standards. IFC support for sustainable growth would prepare the company
for an eventual Initial Public Offering (IPO).

IFC was interested in doing business with Alliar, even though it was a very new company with limited history, mainly
because of Patria’s proven track record. IFC was interested in Alliar’s strategic space in the diagnostic imaging sector
as well as the innovations that Alliar was developing. The company’s objectives were aligned with IFC’s industry and
country strategies to increase access to healthcare in urban populations by bringing diagnostic services of good quality
to underserved regions. In 2012, IFC provided Alliar with the local currency equivalent of a US$50 million loan, a
portion of which is convertible.

As the company continues to consolidate the market, it anticipates a future IPO. IFC has helped make it possible for
Alliar to achieve scale and to develop a significant track record that will be important for an IPO. Fernando Terni
reflects, “Without IFC, we would not have been able to grow at the same speed.” Besides the funding, IFC credentials
and worldwide recognition are very important for the IPO process.




CONCLUSION

In only five years, the quality of Alliar’s work has led it to become recognized as one of the best diagnostic imaging
companies in Brazil. It is exponentially increasing the number of patients—with both public and private health
insurance—that now have access to diagnostic services. By addressing pent-up demand in previously underserved
areas, patients are spending less time waiting for a diagnostic exam that will determine the course of their treatment.
Through the Command Center, it is revolutionizing the delivery of tele-radiology that ensures high-quality imaging and
enables radiologists to provide more accurate interpretations. Alliar has proved that the private sector is a key partner
to provide high-quality diagnostic imaging, while reducing costs, increasing productivity, increasing access to care and
accelerating results for doctors and patients.




                                                                                 Detecting Diseases with Personalized Radiology | 17
STAY CONNECTED

WEB: www.ifc.org/health

LINKEDIN: www.linkedin.com/company/ifc-health

TWITTER: #ifchealth
For more information about IFC’s investments in health please contact:

Elena Sterlin                                    Chris McCahan
Global Manager, Health and Education             Global Lead, Health Care
Email: Esterlin@ifc.org                          E-mail: cmccahan@ifc.org
Washington, D.C., USA                            Washington, D.C., USA
www.ifc.org/education                            www.ifc.org/health
www.ifc.org/health




2121 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20433
Tel. 1-202-473-1000
