    Main Results of the Survey on the Impact of Counseling
    on Knowledge, Feelings and Actions of Over-Indebted
    Borrowers




in partnership:
Executive Summary

A growing body of empirical work suggests that personalized, just-in-time consultation about financial decision-
making, with an emphasis on goal-setting, may be more effective to bring about improvements in financial consumer
behavior than generalized, classroom-style education. With this in mind, IFC piloted two campaigns to provide free,
neutral, on-the-street financial counseling services to consumers in two provincial capitals of Kyrgyzstan – Naryn and
Talas – in October and November 2015. In order to assess the impact of these counseling campaigns on consumers’
knowledge about their financial standing, feelings of readiness and capability to make good decisions, and actions to
better balance income and expenses, maintain a household budget, IFC carried out an impact assessment of participants
and control groups from Talas and Naryn at 0-, 3- and 6-months from the time of the counseling campaigns. The results
provide valuable insights into the ways in which counseling can prove effective, and unexpected findings about what
drives financial consumers to change their behavior. The financial counseling campaigns demonstrated significant
positive impacts on planning, budgeting, and even income-generation. Counseling was not a magic bullet, however.
Ambitious intentions and behavior improvements were seen mostly in the first three months, and then were muted or
disappeared after 6 months. An unexpected result was improvements in planning and income generation among the
control group (while in Kyrgyzstan generally, the economy grew more slowly and microfinance portfolios deteriorated);
the findings suggest that the survey process itself motivated behavior changes, that the effect of nudging, reminding,
or creating social pressure turned out to be a very powerful tool, even in the absence of counseling. The study also
suggests that consumers’ feelings of self-confidence and optimism correlate with proactive financial decision-making,
as evidenced by stark differences in behavior and feelings between the two provinces.
Overview
A growing body of empirical work suggests that personalized, just-in-time consultation about financial decision-making,
with an emphasis on goal-setting, may be more effective to bring about improvements in financial consumer behavior
than generalized, classroom-style education. With this in mind, IFC piloted two campaigns to provide free, neutral, on-the-
street financial counseling services to consumers in two provincial capitals of Kyrgyzstan – Naryn and Talas – in October
and November 2015. The two provinces were selected as extreme cases of both household over-indebtedness (parallel
credits, high repayments relative to income) and loan arrears, according to credit bureau data. With the cooperation of
National Bank of Kyrgyz Republic and provincial and municipal governments, IFC carried out two, week-long campaigns
in these cities, attracting more than one thousand adult financial consumers to each location, to participate in private,
confidential counseling sessions of about 30-40 minutes duration per person, which included identification of personal
financial goals, mapping out of major upcoming expenses and income, identification of risks, and opportunities for
savings. Each campaign culminated with a day-long festival based on the “edu-tainment” model, that is, combining
local cultural attractions and entertainment with educational sessions about financial decision-making, and counseling.
In order to assess the impact of these counseling campaigns on consumers’ knowledge about their financial standing,
feelings of readiness and capability to make good decisions, and actions to better balance income and expenses,
maintain a household budget, IFC carried out an impact assessment of participants and control groups from Talas and
Naryn at 0-, 3- and 6-months from the time of the counseling campaigns. The results provide valuable insights into
the ways in which counseling can prove effective, and unexpected findings about what drives financial consumers to
change their behavior.
Participants’ immediate responses were very positive, with most rating the quality and usefulness of consultations at
4 or 5, on a scale from 0(not useful) to 5(extremely useful). Participants’ feedback indicates that they would like more
counseling, more often, more accessibly, preferably with visual materials that would make complicated concepts easier
to understand. Participants also demand “real help”, meaning interventions that would concretely change their debt
exposures; by this, the team infers that participants would benefit from counseling that financial institutions might
provide at the time of credit prolongation and/or restructuring. That would be a critical “teachable moment”, when
clients and credit officers could benefit tremendously from an in-depth discussion of the borrower’s income and
expenses, financial goals, and steps which he might take to put himself on track to a manageable debt profile.
The financial counseling campaigns also demonstrated significant positive impacts on planning, budgeting, and even
income-generation. At baseline, the target audience showed 65% of borrowers did not expect that their repayments
would be as large as they are, and only 26% of participants could identify their monthly income and expenses with
certainty. Following counseling, there was a 15% increase in those who had made a family budget. The proportion of
respondents who could identify their incomes and expenses with certainty doubled after counseling. Eighty percent
of participants indicated they could find ways to make savings, reduce expenditures. The percentage of respondents
who were surprised by the size of their monthly repayments fell, among those who participated in counseling, from
65 to 41%. Counseling had impacts on consumers’ outlook, too. Among those who participated in counseling, there
was a 43% increase in those who said they felt they could get advice and guidance from their financial institutions;
there was also a significant increase in feelings of self-confidence about financial planning. Interestingly, counseling
showed impacts on debt exposure and income generation. Half of respondents who participated in counseling showed
reductions in the ratio of repayments to monthly income over the six-month period. The most vulnerable group—for
whom debt repayments represented more than monthly income—declined by 9% in numbers after counseling. Both
the intervention and the control groups showed reduction in the number of outstanding credits, and increase in income
over the study period.
Counseling was not a magic bullet, however. Ambitious intentions and behavior improvements were seen mostly in
the first three months; for example, the intervention group that took new credits in the 3 months after counseling
shifted toward credit for long-term goals (compared to the control group that continued borrowing for short-term
goals during that period), and there was a significant increase in family budgeting and planning. However, many of
                                                                                                                          3
the impacts that seemed strong at 3-months following consultation were muted or disappeared after 6 months. For
example, there was a decline in planning and budgeting activity among the intervention group by 6 months. At 6
months, many more respondents said they needed “real help”, and counseling didn’t appear to improve borrowers’
repayment status (indeed, Naryn showed a 41% reduction in borrowers indicating that they were making on-time
repayments at 6-months following baseline).
The study revealed an unexpected impact of the survey itself on the control group. It should be noted that the control
group was drawn from the same locations as the intervention group, and likewise expressed difficulty in making debt
repayments at baseline, although the control group answered basic financial literacy questions correctly twice as
frequently as the intervention group at baseline, a possible bias in the selection. Perhaps it is not surprising, then, that
the control group showed higher percentage of respondents making family budgets initially compared to intervention
group (they may have been better planners in the first place, or participants seeking counseling may have had greater
concerns that their finances were out of control). It is noteworthy that the study revealed increasing incomes over the
6-month period, and decreasing repayment-to-income ratios among both the intervention and the control groups,
while the trend in Kyrgyzstan generally over the past year has been toward stalling economic growth and deteriorating
microfinance loan portfolios, particularly in the two targeted provinces. What would have caused both groups to
improve performance? Perhaps the survey process itself motivated behavior changes, including greater attention
to household budgeting, and more diligent efforts to increase income (or self-consciousness that motivated over-
reporting of household income growth). By setting up predictable, quarterly interviews in the respondents’ homes,
the researchers may have had the effect of nudging, reminding, or creating social pressure toward improved financial
behavior. The results suggest that these “nudges” may have been unexpectedly powerful tools to motivate respondents
to make household budgets, seek additional income sources and limit further borrowing.
The study also suggests that consumers’ feelings of self-confidence and optimism correlate with proactive financial
decision-making. The people of Talas and Naryn differed greatly in this respect. Residents of Talas showed significantly
more optimism (in response to questions about whether they expected to be better-off next year than this year) and
certainty about their financial estimations throughout the study period (although both provinces showed severe arrears
and parallel credits). At the 6-month interview, 68% of Naryn residents indicated pessimistic outlooks on their financial
future, as compared to 11% of Talas residents. Respondents in Talas seemed to get more out of financial counseling
than their peers in Naryn; participants in Talas showed greater propensity to make a family budget, greater propensity
to discuss finances with family, greater confidence in estimating household income and expenses, and the percentage
who said they “spent enough on basic household needs—food, clothing, transport” increased from 77 to 92% over the
6-month study period. By contrast, their peers in Naryn not only fared worse in planning, budgeting, communication,
and confidence, but the number responding that they “spend enough” on household basics declined from 70% to 51%
over the 6-month period. Part of the differences between provinces may be accounted by their income sources (Talas is
home to bean-growers, who saw a four-fold decline in bean prices, while Naryn is home to shepherds, who saw a collapse
of mutton prices), geographical and trade constraints. But mentality does seem to play an important role. Do difficult
debt situations drive introverted, shamed or secretive behavior, which in turn inhibit family discussion of income and
expenses, and therefore family budgeting? Or do feelings of hopelessness cause the borrower to shut-down, and give
up on measures that might be helpful to ease his situation? It’s difficult to say, but the stark contrast of Talas and Naryn
illustrate a problem which financial institutions might find elsewhere, that suggests serious challenges for building
financial capability in some populations. A combination of social and cultural nudges, together with counseling, might
be a start.
The pilot campaigns are another step toward building financial capability at the grassroots level, and the effort is
being expanded and adapted. Learning from these early experiments may help to inform broader and more impactful
interventions in the future.




4	
Content
GLOSSARY............................................................................................................................................................................................. 6
FOREWORD........................................................................................................................................................................................... 8
METHODOLOGY.................................................................................................................................................................................. 9
SURVEY SUMMARY............................................................................................................................................................................ 14
MAIN RESULTS..................................................................................................................................................................................... 18
LEVEL OF OVER-INDEBTEDNESS................................................................................................................................................... 18
EVALUATION OF CONSULTATIONS................................................................................................................................................ 27
KNOWLEDGE........................................................................................................................................................................................ 32
PERCEPTION......................................................................................................................................................................................... 51
ACTIONS................................................................................................................................................................................................ 64

APPENDIXES......................................................................................................................................................................................... 73
APPENDIX 1. DEGREE OF OVER-INDEBTEDNESS..................................................................................................................... 73
APPENDIX 2. DETERMINING INCOMES AND EXPENSES........................................................................................................ 75
APPENDIX 3. PERCEPTIONS............................................................................................................................................................ 77
APPENDIX 4. ACTIONS...................................................................................................................................................................... 84




                                                                                                                                                                                                             5
1. Glossary
CA – consulting agency;

Interviewer – a specialist conducting a survey;

KR –Kyrgyz Republic;

MCC – microcredit companies;

MCO – microcredit organizations;

MM – mass media;

Multiple choice – a question that allows selecting multiple answers;

N – the sample size of population pooled by specific signs / relevant to the parameters in question, namely – the total number of
respondents subject to consideration in this particular case;

n – the number of respondents representing a specific sign/matching parameter N. (Example: number of respondents N=1002,
males - 47,6% (n=477), females – 52,4% (n=525));

NBKR – National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic;

NSC – National Statistical Committee;

Respondent – a person being interviewed;

TA – target audience;




6	
Report Structure
This report describes the following work of the specialists of M-Vector Consulting Agency: fieldwork to collect baseline data, control
and analyze them, and define main results of the survey.



The report contains:

   •	   The glossary;

   •	   The survey methodology containing the description of the sampled population, methods and tools of the survey;

   •	   The summary of the survey containing information on the main conclusions, main results of the survey;

   •	    he findings of the survey representing the main results and main findings acquired during the survey and analysis.
        T
        Information reflected in the report is based on the baseline survey findings and two follow-up quantitative surveys;

   •	   Annexes.




                                                                                                                                    7
2.	Foreword

According to the NBKR data as of March 31, 2016, the Kyrgyz Republic has 25 commercial banks, 323 branches of commercial banks,
and 103 microcredit companies, 6 microcredit companies, 56 microcredit agencies and 118 credit unions1.


As of January 1, 2016, the number of active borrowers in Kyrgyzstan is 536 thousand 662 people. Out of them 376,428 people are
borrowers of commercial banks, 194 thousand are borrowers of microfinance organizations.


At the beginning of 2016, 15% of active borrowers have had delay in payments for 30 days. The total number of loans with delays in
payment was 471,8652. As compared to 2014, the percentage of overdue loans in 2015 increased from 8.6% to 18.6%.


The number of borrowers having two or more loans across the country is 77 thousand people. As compared to 2014, their number
has decreased by 14 thousand. Out of 77 thousand, 91% have 2 loans, 8% have 3 loans, and only 1% has 4 or more loans.


Despite the increasing number of people using services of MFOs/MCCs, not all borrowers stay satisfied and benefit from the loan as
expected. This situation is related to multiple factors, one of which is the insufficient financial literacy and irrational financial budget
planning by borrowers, which causes further repayment difficulties.


 Based on the similar surveys carried out by M-Vector, and also in the opinion of many financial experts, in order to decrease the
level of over-indebtedness in the country it is necessary to work with the population with regard to financial literacy and budget
planning. This survey was carried out to evaluate and monitor the results of financial consultations provided to the population. In
order to evaluate the effectiveness of the impact of consultations on the knowledge, feelings and actions of borrowers regarding
financial planning, the survey was organized in 3 stages:


     1.	Baseline survey was carried out to evaluate the initial level of knowledge of borrowers about the rights, options for
         improving their financial situation; feelings about financial control and readiness for future; actions to improve financial
         planning before consultations.


     2.	   Interim survey was carried out to evaluate the level after financial planning consultations.


     3.	   Final survey was carried out to evaluate the impact of consultations in the long run.




1. http://www.nbkr.kg/index1.jsp?item=69&lang=RUS
2. Review of the loan market in 2015. https://www.akchabar.kg/article/loans/loan-market-review-2015/
8	
3.	Methodology

Objective of the survey:
As part of the survey, it was necessary to monitor and evaluate the impact of financial planning consultations on borrowers with
difficulties to repay debts, namely on their:



    •   knowledge about rights and options for improving their financial situation;

    •   feelings about financial control and readiness for the future;

    •   actions to improve the sustainability of their financial position.



Locations:
The survey covered two locations – the cities of Naryn and Talas. The surveyed cities were identified on the basis of statistical data
of the level of over-indebtedness of local people in the city with the highest level of people having parallel loans and arrears in
monthly repayments.


Target audience:
The target audience of the survey was borrowers3 who self-identified themselves as "with difficulties to repay debts"4.

Two targets groups of borrowers were identified to meet the objective of the survey:

1) Intervention group – borrowers with difficulties to repay any debts (loans, debts, borrowings from relatives, friends), who
participated in the consultations.

2) Control group – borrowers with difficulties to repay any debts (loans, debts, borrowings from relatives, friends), who did not
participate in the consultations.


The social-demographic profile of the target audience:

- Gender: Males and females

- Age: 18 years and older;

- Income level: all levels;

- Education level: all levels.




 



3. Borrowers: borrowers from any types of financial institutions (banks, MFOs, credit unions, etc.), as well as from relatives, acquaintances, friends, etc.
4. “With difficulties to repay debts” - 1) Several parallel loans (when one loan is taken to pay off the previous loan); 2) Delays in payments to pay off a loan.
                                                                                                                                                                    9
Survey Methodology:

In Talas and Naryn, IFC in cooperation with mayors and governors held a week-long campaign to offer free-of-charge counseling
on financial planning in tents on the street. Consultations were provided by independent consultants, who did not represent any
financial institution in the form of private, personal interviews. The duration of each consultation was approximately 35 minutes. As
a result, about 1,000 personal consultations were provided for consumers of financial services in each of the cities.

The survey was arranged in 3 stages: baseline, interim and final surveys. Baseline survey was carried out to document the level of
knowledge, feelings, financial activity (actions) regarding financial planning of the surveyed TA before the impact of consultations
on the intervention group. Interim and final surveys were carried out to evaluate the level after the consultations. The results
obtained during the interim and final surveys were to be compared with the baseline survey results, i.e. to evaluate the impact of
financial planning consultations on borrowers with difficulties to repay debts. Thus, the comparison of the results of evaluation
of control and intervention groups aimed to produces a “purer” evaluation of the impact of consultations on intervention group.
Nevertheless, as shown by the survey results, the control group respondents were also motivated to change their financial behavior.
They did not receive any professional financial advice, but took part in a series of personal interviews about their financial situation.
It is likely that these interviews served as reminders or social pressure on respondents to improve their financial situation. Despite
the slowdown in overall economic growth in Kyrgyzstan and the deterioration of microfinance portfolios observed over the period
of study, participants in both interventional and control groups showed progress against several indicators.



A financial planning community fair was organized for a simplified selection of respondents to intervention group in every surveyed
city. The fairs were held in October 2015. The fair was held by the IFC in association with M-Vector CA and leading MFOs, such
as Kompanion and Finca. The people that identified themselves as “with difficulties to repay debts”5 were invited to the event
in response to advertisement (radio, print media, or in response to SMS sent to their financial institutions). Financial planning
consultations and entertainment program were provided as part of the fair. The fair made it possible to select respondents to
intervention group, initially evaluate their knowledge, feelings and actions, and then to provide consultations to them. A more
detailed baseline survey chart is as follows:




5. “With difficulties to repay debts” - 1) Several parallel loans (when one loan is taken to pay off the previous loan); 2) Delays in payments to pay off a loan.
10	
1.	 Baseline survey:
• Intervention group survey
1.1. Registration of fair visitors:
Target audience: all fair visitors above 18 years.

Approach: The survey was carried out as a face-to-face interview using a specific questionnaire for the registration of fair visitors. All
visitors above 18 were registered by interviewers-registrars.

Interviewers provided bracelets with identification numbers to visitors who said they had difficulties to repay debts, loans and other
types of debts, and referred them to M-Vector tents, where they were asked to fill out the main questionnaire. When some people
entered the community fair premises unregistered, 6 interviewers-controllers “circulated” the community fair area and identified
them visually (visitors without bracelets) and registered.


Interviewers’ location scheme during the fair for the registration of visitors:

                                                                                                 - interviewers-registrars

                                                                                                 - interviewers-controllers



                                                                                                 - tents with consultants

                                                                                                 	

                                                                                                 - interview tent



1.2. Main survey after registration
Target audience: visitors that claimed they had difficulties to repay debts, loans and other kinds of debts.

Approach: The survey was carried out as a face-to-face interview. Visitors filled out the main questionnaire. If necessary, interviewers
worked in tents to explain the questions arising in respondents regarding the questionnaire.

A little reward (a chocolate bar) was given to visitors taking part in the main questionnaire survey. After the survey, respondents
were asked to visit other tents for 7-minute financial planning consultation.



1.3. Consultations and offer of follow-up consultations and
participation in the forthcoming survey
Target audience: visitors who claimed they had difficulties to repay debts, loans and other types of debts that filled out the main
questionnaire.

Approach: Опрос The survey was carried out as a face-to-face interview. After the consultations, consultants offered participation in
the forthcoming consultations and survey and entered their responses into a special form.

                                                                                                                                        11
1.4. Evaluation of consultations and events
MFO consultants provided every visitor, after consultation, with a consultation and community fair evaluation questionnaire.

The evaluation was carried out anonymously. Every visitor put the filled out evaluation questionnaire into the general evaluation
box.



• Control group survey
Target audience: borrowers with difficulties to repay debts that did not take part in the community fair and consultations.

Approach: The survey was carried out as a face-to-face interview. Respondents were selected from households by the snowball
method, i.e. every selected respondent was asked to recommend one or several borrowers that are in the target group of the survey.
Respondents filled out the questionnaire and could ask follow-up questions to the interviewer, when necessary.

For intervention group, IFC organized additional consultations via phone calls, SMS, personal meetings with consultants, self-help
groups during the baseline and interim surveys. These consultations were mainly intended to remind the borrowers of the need of
budget financial planning rather than to improve their financial literacy.


The questionnaire for the borrowers of control group consisted of 2 sections:

      1. Main section containing questions identical to the main questionnaire for intervention group;

      2. Offer to participate in the subsequent survey.


2. Interim survey
3 months after the baseline survey, interviewers contacted the respondents of intervention and control groups for the interim
survey (follow-up survey No. 1).

The place of the survey was agreed with respondents and was mainly the place of residence or place of work of respondents. During
the survey, there were respondents that did not reside in the surveyed cities. In these cases, interviewers visited villages where those
respondents resided.

Interviewers tried to convince respondents to take part in the similar survey in 3 months (for extra compensation in the form of top
up scratch cards).

Approach: The survey was carried out as a face-to-face interview. Respondents filled out the questionnaire and could ask follow-up
questions to the interviewer, when necessary.




12	
3.	 Final survey
3 months after the interim survey, the final survey was organized for respondents from intervention group and control group.

The survey procedure and toolkit were identical to the ones applied in the interim survey.

Extra compensation was also provided for respondents for their participation in the survey.



Sampling
Table 1 shows the sample size in every survey:


TABLE 1. SAMPLE SIZE, NUMBER OF PEOPLE

                                           Intervention group                                        Control group
                             Naryn                                 Talas                          Naryn          Talas
  1st survey            Registered -1062                     Registered -1112
                      Surveyed under main                  Surveyed under main                       45                  45
                       questionnaire - 200                  questionnaire - 200
  2nd survey                  110                                   111                              45                  36
  3rd survey                  108                                   103                              45                  34


1. QUALITY CONTROL OF INTERVIEWERS
20% control of randomly selected questionnaires of every interviewer was conducted. Control was carried out by a phone call.

Control of interviewers was conducted throughout the fieldwork. The agency developed specific control-questionnaire containing
a list of main questions and characteristics, such as the fact of interview, length of interview, and several questions from the main
questionnaire. Experienced controllers of the company conducted quality control.



2. DATA PROCESSING, ANALYSIS AND SUBMISSION

After the quality control, the questionnaire data were encoded and entered into the electronic database. Further statistical data
manipulation was performed via SPSS and Microsoft Excel.

Descriptive statistics cross analysis methods were used to process and analyze data.




                                                                                                                                   13
4. Survey Summary
The survey was carried out by order of IFC. The objective of the survey was to obtain data on existing knowledge about rights, feelings
and practices of financial planning, control of funds, as well as on the changes in this level after financial planning consultations. The
results provide valuable insights into the ways in which counseling can prove effective, and unexpected findings about what drives
financial consumers to change their behavior. The financial counseling campaigns demonstrated significant positive impacts on
planning, budgeting, and even income-generation. Counseling was not a magic bullet, however. Ambitious intentions and behavior
improvements were seen mostly in the first three months, and then were muted or disappeared after 6 months. An unexpected
result was improvements in planning and income generation among the control group (while in Kyrgyzstan generally, the economy
grew more slowly and microfinance portfolios deteriorated); the findings suggest that the survey process itself motivated behavior
changes, that the effect of nudging, reminding, or creating social pressure turned out to be a very powerful tool, even in the absence
of counseling. The study also suggests that consumers’ feelings of self-confidence and optimism correlate with proactive financial
decision-making, as evidenced by stark differences in behavior and feelings between the two provinces.



Findings as to the level of over-indebtedness of respondents:
      •   Results of the survey showed that intervention group and control group had a decrease in the percentage of people with
      debts. The decrease in the percentage of borrowers was caused more by the objective fact – the time between the surveys: e.g.,
      people had paid back their short-term loans for they have almost repaid their loans in full by the time of the 1st survey.

      •   Half of respondents from intervention group that paid back their loans by the time of the 3rd survey mentioned in the baseline
      survey that their payments were equal to or exceeded their income. Thus, those borrowers found options to pay back their loans
      despite the fact that their payments exceeded their income. In control group, this ratio did not exceed 30% of all respondents
      that paid back their loans.

      •   Delays in payments to pay back loans, borrowings occur not only among respondents whose payments exceed their monthly
      income, but also among borrowers with income exceeding their payments. Thus, more than 50% of borrowers had to make
      payments that were lower than their monthly income by the time of final survey.



Findings as to the evaluation of financial planning consultations:
      •    Results of evaluation of consultations carried out for intervention group showed that consultations were generally taken
      positively by borrowers. The majority of respondents mentioned that consultations were mostly useful for them and they would
      want similar consultations to be regular. However, the evaluation of consultations tended to decrease during the 2nd and 3rd
      surveys as compared to the evaluation made by respondents right after the consultations. This situation can be explained by the
      diminished impact of consultations with time.

      •    Consultations in the form of phone calls and SMS are less popular among respondents. Over a half of respondents that
      received such types of consultations for various reasons stated they did not receive them.




14	
Findings as to the evaluation of financial literacy of borrowers and
level of knowledge about their rights before credit institutions, and
also option of improvement of their financial situation:
 •   According to the results of evaluation of financial literacy levels in borrowers during the baseline survey in intervention group,
 the percentage of respondents with high level of financial literacy was fairly low (26%). In control group, the percentage was
 higher (50%). The results of evaluation indicate the general increase in the level of financial literacy in respondents of intervention
 and control groups. A more significant growth of literacy is typical for intervention group (+52%), than for control group (+24%).
 Talas-based respondents initially have higher level of financial literacy and more significant growth of this level, compared to
 Naryn-based respondents.

 •   Generally, there is a growth of the percentage of respondents who can calculate their income and expenses.

 •   Respondents see the main source of consultations on coping with repayment difficulties in a bank, MCO, where they took
 out their loans. The percentage of respondents that consider the bank, MCO as their assistant in this issue tends to decline. In
 intervention group, the percentage increased by 43% by the time of the 3rd survey, if compared with the baseline survey. 11% of
 respondents considered International Financial Corporation that held the financial planning fair as the service.

 •   The answers by respondents thinking they have the right to request rescheduling of payments and thinking otherwise divided
 almost equally in the baseline survey. The percentage of respondents thinking they have the right to request rescheduling of
 payments has increased by 11% in intervention group, and by 5% in control group by the time of the 3rd survey as compared
 with the baseline survey.

 •   The percentage of respondents thinking they have the right to request restructuring of debt varied slightly between the two
 groups and was about 50% in intervention group and 40% in control group.



Findings as to the evaluation of feelings about financial control and
readiness for future:
 •   Analysis of feelings of borrowers about the amount of debt showed that the majority of borrowers (about 65%) with problem
 loans in both groups did not expect that the loan amount would be as large as it is. According to the final survey, this percentage
 decreased to 41% in both groups. This decrease could be caused by the heightened attention of borrowers to the terms and
 conditions of loan.

 •   Analysis of the changes in the income level of respondents showed the increase of the percentage of respondents that increased
 their income level as compared to the income reported during the baseline survey. The increase is higher in intervention group
 than in control group.

 •    In general, the analysis of feelings of respondents shows improvements. More significant positive changes are seen in
 intervention group than in control group.

 •   The majority of respondents think loan improves their lifestyle (answers: “strongly agree” and “sometime agree”). By results of
 the 3rd survey (+5% as compared to baseline level), intervention group encounters the increase in the percentage of respondents
 that don’t think that loan improve their lifestyle. In control group, this percentage decreased (-8% as compared to baseline level).

 •   About 90% of respondents feel confident about financial planning.  If compared to baseline level, the level of respondents in
 intervention group that feel absolutely confident about financial planning has increased after consultations: by 5% in the 2nd
 survey, by 13% in the 3rd survey.

 •   In control group, this indicator decreased by 5% as compared to baseline level by the time of the 3rd survey.

                                                                                                                                      15
      •   The majority of respondents (about 80%) are sure they can be more cost efficient.

      •   The majority of respondents think they have no major difficulties to repay debts. Thus, only 15-20% in both groups said they
      had difficulties to repay debts. Less than 20% of respondents in intervention group think they have no difficulties to repay debts;
      however, they have arrears in payments. This level is higher (28-36%) in control group. Thus, despite the fact that some borrowers
      can repay debts without delays, they do have payment arrears.

      •   In intervention group in Naryn, the percentage of respondents that are sure they can keep the collateral property; control their
      financial situation; become more cost efficient; improve their financial situation in the following year is significantly lower than
      in Talas.

      •   The aggregate indicator of respondents’ feelings about their financial situation, and their readiness for future shows a higher
      percentage of optimistic respondents in Talas, than in Naryn. The level of pessimistic respondents is very high in Naryn and
      equals to 68% in the 3rd survey, whereas in Talas it equals to 11%. The situation is otherwise in control group – in Naryn there
      are more optimists than in Talas.

      •   In intervention group of Naryn, the 2nd survey shows the increased percentage of positive and neutral respondents after
      consultations, but it decreases in the 3rd survey with the growing number of pessimistic respondents. In Talas, the percentage
      of respondents feeling neutral and positive about their financial future is constantly increasing.



Findings as to the analysis of actions committed in regard to financial
planning.
      •    After consultations, intervention group encounters a minor increase in the percentage of respondents that made family
      budget (+15%) as compared to the decrease in control group (-5%) during the 2nd survey. There is a growing trend in Talas in
      making family budget, its discussion with the family, whereas in Naryn this percentage increases steeply by the time of the 2nd
      survey than in Talas, and then decreases.

      •   Baseline survey showed that intervention group had about 60% of respondents that made financial plans, whereas in control
      group this percentage was higher – 76%. In intervention group the percentage of respondents that made financial plans by
      the time of the 2nd survey increased sharply in Naryn (+20%) and remained almost at the same level in Talas. However, in the 3rd
      survey, Naryn showed the decrease in this level by 19%, and Talas showed the increase by 18%. In control group, the percentage
      of people that made financial plans tends to decline in Naryn, and grow in Talas..

      •   The percentage of respondents that discussed their income and expenses with the families is higher in Talas than in Naryn.
      This level in intervention group increased by 4% by the time of the 2nd survey in Naryn and remained almost the same in Talas.
      However, by the time of the 3rd survey, it decreased by 8% in Naryn and increased by 8% in Talas. In control group, this indicator
      in Naryn decreased by 5%, and in Talas decreased by 26% prior to the 2nd survey, and during the 3rd survey it reached the recent
      level in Naryn (56%), and increased by 20% in Talas as compared to the 2nd survey.

      •   The majority of respondents spend enough money to keep their families well: food, clothing, transport, etc. In intervention
      group, the percentage of respondents with improved lifestyle in this regard increased from 77% in baseline survey to 92% in the
      3rd survey in Talas; whereas in Naryn this indicator decreased from 70% to 51%. In control group, this indicator tends to decline
      in two cities.

      •   Therefore, it may be concluded that in intervention group there is an upward trend in the actions of respondents regarding the
      issues of making and discussion of family budget, sufficiency of money to keep the family well, setting financial goals in Talas,
      whereas in Naryn the level of financial activity increases sharply prior to the 2nd survey, unlike Talas, and then decreases. These
      differences imply that consultations had a longer-term impact on Talas-based respondents, than on Naryn-based respondents.

16	
•   There are no significant differences in the preferences to save or borrow money. More than a half of respondents prefer to save
money in advance than to borrow.



•    Analysis of the aggregate indicator describing the general financial activity of respondents showed that Talas has higher
activity than Naryn. Respondents from Naryn usually have more passive behavior. By the end of survey and after consultations
on intervention group, the level of respondents in Talas, whose financial activity increased compared to baseline level, increased
by 22%, and in Naryn – decreased by 12%.

•   The results of the study showed that participants in the control group also demonstrated some progress in terms of planning,
budgeting and income generation. It could be that interviews conducted every 3 months during personal meetings with the
control group served as a reminder motivating interviewees to pay more attention to planning, budgeting, and improve their
financial situation. Due to the unfeasibility of direct comparison between “control for the control group” and the control group,
we could only compare the results of the control group with the general trends observed among over-indebted borrowers in
Kyrgyzstan. Thus, improvements can be observed in terms of financial behavior in the control group as compared to borrowers
who were not involved in this study.




                                                                                                                                 17
5. MaIn results
5.1. LEvEL
5.1.       Of OvEr-indEbtEdnESS
     LEvEL Of OvEr-indEbtEdnESS
the problem
the problem of  over-indebtedness of
             of over-indebtedness     people means
                                   of people  means signifi      excess of
                                                            cant excess
                                                     significant
                                                     significant        of borrower’s debt payments
                                                                           borrower’s debt payments over  their income,
                                                                                                    over their           which makes
                                                                                                                income, which    makes
borrowers economize on their basic needs (food, clothing, transport), and also delay in payments. this problem is still relevant in
borrowers  economize   on their basic needs (food, clothing, transport), and also delay in payments. this problem   is still relevant in
the Kyrgyz Republic.
the Kyrgyz Republic.
this section discusses
this section discusses the
                       the change
                            change in   the number
                                     in the number of
                                                   of loans
                                                      loans of
                                                            of borrowers of intervention
                                                               borrowers of              and control
                                                                            intervention and         groups. this
                                                                                             control groups.      evaluation allows
                                                                                                             this evaluation allows
seeing the changes  in the level of over-indebted respondents.
seeing the changes in the level of over-indebted respondents.
For 6
for
for 6 months, both intervention
      months, both              and control
                   intervention and          groups have
                                                     have encountered
                                    control groups                     the general
                                                          encountered the  general decrease
                                                                                   decrease in the percentage
                                                                                            in the percentage of   people with
                                                                                                                of people with loans,
                                                                                                                               loans,
borrowings and  other types of debts. By
                                      by the time of the 3rd survey, about 20% of respondents   paid back their loans.
borrowings and other types of debts. by the time of the 3rd survey, about 20% of respondents paid back their loans.


FIGURe
figuRe 5.1.1.
figuRe        “do YOU
       5.1.1. “DO
              “do you CURRentLY
                  you cuRRently hAVe
                      cuRRently have A
                                have a LOAn?”
                                     a loan?”
                                       loan?”
InteRVentIOn (n=211)
inteRvention
inteRvention (n=211)                                                    contRol (n=79)
                                                                        COntROL
                                                                        contRol (n=79)




In naryn,
in
in naryn, control group has
          control group     more active
                        has more         decrease in
                                                  in the
                                  active decrease        number of
                                                     the number of borrowers
                                                                   borrowers compared to intervention
                                                                             compared to intervention group. In talas,
                                                                                                                talas, intervention
                                                                                                      group. in
                                                                                                             in        intervention
group  has more  active decrease compared   to control group.
group has more active decrease compared to control group.


FIGURe
figuRe 5.1.2.
figuRe        “do YOU
       5.1.2. “DO
              “do you CURRentLY
                  you           have A
                      cuRRently hAVe
                      cuRRently have a LOAn?”
                                     a loan?”. nARYn
                                       loan?”. naRyn
                                               naRyn
InteRVentIOn(n=108)
inteRvention(n=108)
inteRvention(n=108)                                                     COntROL (n=45)
                                                                        contRol
                                                                        contRol (n=45)




18                                                                                                                                    19
                                                                                                                                      19
FIGURe 5.1.3. “DO YOU CURRentLY hAVe A LOAn?» tALAS
figuRe 5.1.3. “do
InteRVentIOn       you cuRRently have a loan?». talas
               (n=103)                                               COntROL (n=34)
inteRvention (n=103)                                                 contRol (n=34)




A more detailed analysis of the change in the number of parallel loans in respondents allows to see the behavior of respondents
a
regarding taking of new loans, borrowings after the repayment of existing loans.

According to table 5.1.1, almost all (99%) borrowers that paid off their loans by the time of the 2nd survey never took new loans,
according
borrowings or took short-term ones and repaid them in between the surveys. this situation is typical for control group and
intervention group.

tABLe 5.1.1. “do
table             you CURRentLY
             “DO YOU  cuRRently hAVe a LOAn?”BY
                                have A loan?”by the nUMBeR of LOAnS
                                                    nuMbeR OF loans AVAILABLe in ReSpOnDentS
                                                                    available In             by the
                                                                                 Respondents BY
tIMe of
tiMe OF the 1stSt suRvey
                  SURVeY
   number                            intervention                                                control
  of loans,
 borrowings
 in baseline         n        1st
                               st survey       nd survey
                                              2nd         rd survey
                                                         3rd                  n       1st
                                                                                       st survey      nd survey 3rd
                                                                                                     2nd         rd survey


    survey
                                                             Yes; 79%
                                                             yes;                                                    Yes; 82%
                                                                                                                     yes;
                                               Yes 94%
                                               yes                                                     Yes 97%
                                                                                                       yes
       1                                                     no; 15%                                                 no; 15%
                   102        Yes 100%
                              yes                                            34       Yes 100%
                                                                                      yes
                                                              Yes; 0%
                                                              yes;                                                    Yes; 0%
                                                                                                                      yes;
                                                no 6%                                                   no 3%
                                                              no; 6%                                                  no; 3%
                                                             Yes; 88%
                                                             yes;                                                    Yes; 84%
                                                                                                                     yes;
                                               Yes 98%
                                               yes                                                    Yes 100%
                                                                                                      yes
                                                             no; 10%                                                 no; 16%
       2            52        yes100%
                              Yes100%                                        19       Yes 100%
                                                                                      yes
                                                              Yes; 0%
                                                              yes;                                                    Yes; 0%
                                                                                                                      yes;
                                                no 2%                                                   no 0%
                                                              no; 2%                                                  no; 0%
                                                             Yes; 77%
                                                             yes;                                                    Yes; 53%
                                                                                                                     yes;
                                               Yes 92%
                                               yes                                                    Yes 100%
                                                                                                      yes
                                                             no; 15%                                                 no; 47%
       3            13        Yes 100%
                              yes                                            15       Yes 100%
                                                                                      yes
                                                              Yes; 0%
                                                              yes;                                                    Yes; 0%
                                                                                                                      yes;
                                                no 8%                                                   no 0%
                                                              no; 8%                                                  no; 0%
                                                             Yes; 82%
                                                             yes;                                                    Yes; 72%
                                                                                                                     yes;
                                              Yes 100%
                                              yes                                                      Yes 86%
                                                                                                       yes
                                                             no; 18%                                                 no; 14%
       4            11        Yes 100%
                              yes                                             7       Yes 100%
                                                                                      yes
                                                              Yes; 0%
                                                              yes;                                                    Yes; 0%
                                                                                                                      yes;
                                                no 0%                                                  no 14%
                                                              no; 0%                                                 no; 14%


20                                                                                                                              19
                                                              Yes; 70%                                                 Yes; 75%
                                                Yes 80%                                                Yes 100%
                                                              No; 10%                                                  No; 25%
      5 и более         10     Yes 100%                                        4       Yes 100%
                                                              Yes; 20%                                                  Yes; 0%
                                                No 20%                                                   No 0%
                                                               No; 0%                                                   No; 0%
                                                              Yes; 83%                      TOTAL                        N=79
      Затрудня-                                 Yes 96%
                                                              No; 13%
      юсь отве-         23     Yes 100%
         тить                                                  Yes; 0%
                                                 No 4%
                                                               No; 4%
                             TOTAL                             N=211

According to table 5.1.2and figure 5.1.4, we can keep track of the behavior of respondents regarding the number of loans existing
at the baseline and changed behavior 3 and 6 months later.

Figure 5.1.4 shows that the majority of borrowers (up to 80% of respondents in intervention group and up to 76% in control group)
had the same number of loans by the time of the 3rd survey, and about 20% of respondents repaid their loans.

In control group, 10 respondents with one loan reported at the baseline survey (30%) increased the number of loans to two loans;
4 borrowers with 2 loans each reported at the baseline survey increased the number of loans to 3 each by the time of the 3rd survey.

The percentage of respondents with the increased number of loans per results of the 3rd survey decreased in intervention group
compared to control group. Thus, 18% of respondents with 1loan, borrowing (19 persons) increased the number of loans to two by
the time of final survey.

This difference may have been caused by the impact of consultations on borrowers that could evaluate their financial capacities and
decided either not to take loans, or to pay them off within a short time.


TABLE 5.1.2. LOAN STATUS

                       Intervention                                             Control
 1 survey
      st
                  2 survey
                   nd
                                3rd survey             %        1 survey 2 survey
                                                                 st             nd
                                                                                    3rd survey                       %
                   No loan       No loan               6%                   1        No loan                        15%
                      1          No loan              10%                   2            1                          15%
                      1              1                34%                   3            1                           6%
                      2              1                10%                   1            1                          26%
      1 loan                                                     1 loan
                      1              2                10%                   2            2                          9%
                      2              2                8%                    1            2                         21%
                           Other                     23%                         Other                              9%
                   TOTAL          N=102              100%                 TOTAL        N=34                        100%




20	
              Intervention                                    Control
1 survey 2 survey 3rd survey
 st        nd
                                       %      1 survey 2 survey
                                               st       nd
                                                                  3rd survey    %
            2         No loan          6%                 1        No loan      5%
            1            1            21%                 2        No loan     11%
            2            1            17%                 3        No loan      5%
 2 loans    2            2            17%                 1            1       16%
            1            2            17%                 2            1        5%
                  Other               21%                 3            1       11%
                                               2 loans
          TOTAL         N=52          100%                2            2       11%
                                                          3            2       16%
                                                          2            3        5%
                                                          3            3        5%
                                                               Other           11%
                                                        TOTAL        N=19      100%
                Intervention                                   Control
1 survey
 st
           2 survey
            nd
                         3rd survey      %    1 survey 2 survey 3rd survey
                                                st       nd
                                                                                 %
            No loan       No loan        8%                1        No loan     13%
               1          No loan       15%                2        No loan     20%
               1              1         15%                3        No loan      7%
               2              1         23%                5        No loan      7%
               3              1          8%                1            1       13%
 3 loans
               2              2          8%    3 loans     3            1       13%
               3              3         15%                2            2       13%
               4              2          8%                5            2       7%
                    Other               21%                3            3       0%
            TOTAL           N=13       100%                     Other           7%
                                                         TOTAL        N=15     100%
               Intervention                                    Control
1 survey
 st
           2 survey
            nd
                        3rd survey      %     1 survey 2 survey 3rd survey
                                               st       nd
                                                                                %
              1          No loan       18%                 2        No loan    14%
              1              1         18%                 1            1      14%
              2              1         18%                 3            1      14%
              1              2         18%              No loan         2      14%
                                               4 loans
 4 loans      3              1          9%                 1            2      14%
              2              2          9%                 1            3      14%
              4              4          0%                 4            3      14%
                   Other                9%               TOTAL         N=7     100%
            TOTAL          N=11        100%


                                                                                      21
                           intervention                                                         control group
 1 survey
   st                      intervention
                     2 survey
                      nd
                                    3rd survey
                           intervention                           %           1 survey 2 survey
                                                                                st              control
                                                                                                control group
                                                                                                  nd
                                                                                                        3rd survey
                                                                                                        group          %
 1st survey
 1                   2nd survey
                     2              3rd survey                    %           1
                                                                              1st survey  2nd survey
                                                                                   survey 2             3rd survey     %
  st                  nd             rd                                         st         nd            rd
     survey               1
                         survey     3no  loan
                                        survey                   10%
                                                                  %                            2
                                                                                              survey    3no  loan
                                                                                                            survey    25%
                                                                                                                       %
                      no 11
                          loan       no 1
                                     no  loan
                                         loan                    10%
                                                                 20%
                                                                 10%          5+ loans         2
                                                                                               2         no 2
                                                                                                         no  loan
                                                                                                             loan     25%
                                                                                                                      25%
                      no
                      no 1loan
                          loan           1
                                         1                       20%
                                                                 30%
                                                                 20%          5+
                                                                              5+ loans
                                                                                    loans      2
                                                                                               2             2
                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                             2        25%
                                                                                                                      25%
  5+ loans                1
                          2
                          1              1
                                         1                       30%
                                                                 20%
                                                                 30%                           2
                                                                                               1
                                                                                               2             3
                                                                                                             5
                                                                                                             3        25%
                                                                                                                      25%
  5+
  5+ loans
     loans                2
                          2              1
                                         2
                                         1                       20%
                                                                 10%
                                                                 20%                           1
                                                                                            tOtAL
                                                                                               1             5
                                                                                                            n=4
                                                                                                             5        25%
                                                                                                                     100%
                                                                                                                      25%
                          2
                          5
                          2              2
                                         5
                                         2                       10%                        total
                                                                                            total           n=4
                                                                                                            n=4      100%
                                                                                                                     100%
                          5
                       tOtAL
                          5              5
                                       n=10
                                         5                       10%
                                                                100%
                                                                 10%
                       total
                       total           n=10
                                       n=10                     100%
                                                                100%
FIGURe 5.1.4.
figuRe
figuRe 5.1.4. ChAnGe
              change In
              change in the
                     in the nUMBeR
                            nuMbeR of LOAnS
                                      loans In
                            nuMbeR OF
                                   of loans in BORROWeRS
                                            in boRRoweRs          to the
                                                         coMpaRed tO
                                               boRRoweRs COMpAReD
                                                         coMpaRed to     initial nUMBeR
                                                                     the InItIAL nuMbeR OF
                                                                         initial nuMbeR of LOAnS
                                                                                        of loans
                                                                                           loans6
                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                 6

InteRVentIOn (n=188)
inteRvention
inteRvention (n=188)                                                                 contRol (n=79)
                                                                                     COntROL
                                                                                     contRol (n=79)




In intervention
in
in                     and control
   intervention group
                group and          group there’s
                           control group         a reduction
                                         there’s a              the percentage
                                                             of the
                                                   reduction of     percentage of  people with
                                                                                of people             in payments
                                                                                          with delays
                                                                                               delays in             naryn. In
                                                                                                                  in naryn.
                                                                                                         payments in        in talas,
                                                                                                                            in talas,
the number
the  number of  people with
             of people      delays in
                       with delays in payments  remained unchanged
                                                           unchanged in
                                      payments remained                   intervention group.
                                                                       in intervention group.

When comparing
when
when                    percentage of
       comparing the
                   the percentage   of respondents that paid
                                       respondents that          their loans,
                                                             off their
                                                        paid off              the intervention
                                                                                  intervention group
                                                                       loans, the                     has more
                                                                                                group has        borrowers that
                                                                                                          more borrowers   that repaid
                                                                                                                                repaid
their debts in talas than in naryn. Control
their debts in talas than in naryn. control group has more borrowers    that repaid their debts in naryn than in talas.
                                    control group has more borrowers that repaid their debts in naryn than in talas.

FIGURe
figuRe 5.1.5.
figuRe 5.1.5. “DO
              “do YOU
              “do you hAVe
                  you have ARReARS
                      have aRReaRs In
                                   in LOAn
                           aRReaRs in loan RepAYMent?”
                                      loan RepayMent?”. nARYn
                                           RepayMent?”. naRyn
                                                        naRyn
InteRVentIOn (n=108)
inteRvention
inteRvention (n=108)                                                                 contRol (n=45)
                                                                                     COntROL
                                                                                     contRol (n=45)




6. Analysis excludes answers of respondents that refused to answer a given question during the baseline survey
22
6. analysis excludes
6. analysis          answers of
            excludes answers    respondents that
                             of respondents that refused
                                                 refused to
                                                         to answer
                                                            answer a given question
                                                                   a given          during the
                                                                           question during     baseline survey
                                                                                           the baseline survey
                                                                                                                                    23
                                                                                                                                    23
FIGURe 5.1.6. “DO
figuRe            you hAVe
              “do YOU have ARReARS
                           aRReaRs In
                                   in LOAn
                                      loan RepAYMent?”  tALAS
                                           RepayMent?”. talas
InteRVentIOn (n=103)
inteRvention                                                           contRol (n=34)
                                                                       COntROL




One of the active causes of difficulties
one                          difficulties to repay debts is the payment to family income ratio. According
                                                                                                according to the results of baseline
survey, borrowers with payments that are lower than a monthly income comprise 47% in intervention group and 63% in control
group. thus, only a half of respondents can repay their debts depending on their income. By                  final survey, about 40%
                                                                                              by the time of final
of respondents from intervention and control groups have their loan payments either equal to or exceeding the aggregate family
income. this percentage decreased in intervention group by 9% compared to the figure                                        in control
                                                                                    figure reported at the baseline survey. In
group the decrease is minor – 2%. the total decrease of the number of borrowers whose loan payments increase monthly income
in intervention group is 12%, in control group – 3%.


FIGURe 5.1.7. CAn
figuRe            YOU calculate
              can you           youR LOAn
                      CALCULAte YOUR loan AnD
                                          and DeBt
                                              debt pAYMentS
                                                   payMents AnD also YOUR
                                                            and ALSO      household’s LOAn
                                                                     youR hOUSehOLD’S loan AnD
                                                                                           and
debt pAYMentS
DeBt payMents peR MOnth?
                    Month?
InteRVentIOn (n=211)
inteRvention                                                           contRol (n=79)
                                                                       COntROL




     number of
the number   ofrespondents
                 respondentswhose
                              whosepayments
                                      payments     signifi
                                              areare       cantly lower than the family’s monthly income reduced by the time of the
                                                      significantly
3rd survey
lower thancompared   tomonthly
           the family’s the baseline survey
                                income      in intervention
                                         reduced   by the timegroup   and
                                                                  of the  remained
                                                                         3rd survey at
                                                                                    compared
                                                                                       the sameto
                                                                                                level
                                                                                                  thein control survey
                                                                                                      baseline  group. in intervention
group and remained at the same level in control group.




24                                                                                                                                  23
     Report on Main Results of the Survey on the Impact of Counseling on Knowledge, Feelings     Actions of Over-
                                                                                             and Borrowers,
                                                                                       Indebted             2016
                                                                                       Indebted Borrowers, 2016
     The number of respondents whose payments are significantly lower than the family’s monthly
     The  number
     income          respondents
                 of by
            reduced     the time ofwhose
                                    the 3rd  payments  are significantly
                                              survey compared            lower survey
                                                              to the baseline   than the   family’s monthly
                                                                                      in intervention group
                                          rd
     income reduced by  the time of the 3     survey
     and remained at the same level in control group.compared to  the baseline survey in intervention group
     and remained at the same level in control group.
FIGURe 5.1.8. “CAn YOU CALCULAte YOUR LOAn AnD DeBt pAYMentS AnD YOUR hOUSehOLD’S LOAn AnD DeBt
                FIGURE 5.1.8.
pAYMentS peR MOnth?”          “CAN YOU
                        InteRVentIOn.  CALCULATE YOUR LOAN AND DEBT PAYMENTS AND YOUR
                                      n=211
                    FIGURE 5.1.8. “CAN
                     HOUSEHOLD’S   LOANYOU
                                        ANDCALCULATE YOUR LOAN
                                            DEBT PAYMENTS       AND DEBT
                                                           PER MONTH?”   PAYMENTS AND
                                                                       INTERVENTION.  YOUR
                                                                                     N=211
                     HOUSEHOLD’S LOAN AND DEBT PAYMENTS PER MONTH?” INTERVENTION. N=211
                                                         Baseline                           Interim                            Final
                                                         Baseline                           Interim                            Final
     Significantly lower than the family’s
     Significantly
     monthly       lower than the family’s
               income
     monthly   income
     Slightly lower than the family’s monthly
     Slightly lower than the family’s monthly
     income
     income
     Equal to the family’s monthly income
     Equal to the family’s monthly income
     Slightly exceeding the family’s monthly
     Slightly exceeding the family’s monthly
     income
     income
     Significantly exceeding the family’s
     Significantly
     monthly       exceeding the family’s
               income
     monthly income
     No loan
     No loan
     Refused to answer
     Refused to answer



                FIGURE
FIGURe 5.1.9. “CAn      5.1.9. “CAN
                   YOU CALCULAte    YOU
                                  YOUR  CALCULATE
                                       LOAn       YOUR
                                            AnD DeBt    LOAN AND
                                                     pAYMentS AnDDEBT
                                                                 YOUR PAYMENTS AND
                                                                      hOUSehOLD’S   YOUR
                                                                                  LOAn AnD DeBt
                FIGURE  5.1.9.
                    HOUSEHOLD’S“CAN YOU CALCULATE YOUR  LOAN AND DEBT PAYMENTS AND  YOUR
pAYMentS peR MOnth?”               n=89 AND DEBT PAYMENTS PER MONTH?” CONTROL. N=89
                         COntROL. LOAN
                         HOUSEHOLD’S LOAN AND DEBT PAYMENTS PER MONTH?” CONTROL. N=89
                                                     Baseline                          Interim                            Final
                                                     Baseline                          Interim                            Final
     Significantly lower than the family’s
     Significantly
     monthly incomelower than the family’s
     monthly   income
     Slightly lower than the family’s monthly
     Slightly
     income lower than the family’s monthly
     income
     Equal to the family’s monthly income
     Equal to the family’s monthly income
     Slightly exceeding the family’s monthly
     Slightly
     income exceeding the family’s monthly
     income
     Significantly exceeding the family’s
     Significantly
     monthly incomeexceeding the family’s
     monthly income
     No loan
     No loan


   Figure 5.1.10 shows respondents that repaid their loans by the time of final survey in terms of loan
   Figure
Figure  5.1.10
   payments   5.1.10
               shows
                   and  shows   respondents
                      respondents
                         incomes.                thatloans
                                     that repaid their repaid   their
                                                            by the     loans
                                                                    time         by
                                                                          of final   the time
                                                                                   survey        of of
                                                                                          in terms   final
                                                                                                       loan survey
                                                                                                            payments     terms
                                                                                                                      inand       of loan
                                                                                                                             incomes.
   payments
   About           and   incomes.
About   50% 50%      of respondents
              of respondents              of intervention
                               of intervention               group
                                                group that repaid     that
                                                                   their      repaid
                                                                         loans,        their
                                                                                 credits by theloans,
                                                                                                 time of credits  by the
                                                                                                          the 3rd survey    time
                                                                                                                          said     of baseline
                                                                                                                               at the  the
   About
     rd       50%
         survey      of  respondents
                   said at the    baselineof intervention
                                              that their loangroup    that    repaid   their   loans,    credits  by   the  time   of  the
   3their
that        loan payments     were  equal to or exceeding  theirpayments        were equal
                                                                 income. In control     group tothisor  exceeding
                                                                                                     percentage       their
                                                                                                                   doesn’t   income.
                                                                                                                           exceed   30%Inof all
   3rd survey
   control         said
               group      at the
                        this      baseline doesn’t
                              percentage      that their loan payments
                                                       exceed    30%     of  allwere   equal to that
                                                                                  respondents       or exceeding
                                                                                                          repaid      their
                                                                                                                    their    income.
                                                                                                                           debts.       In
                                                                                                                                    Thus,
respondents that repaid their debts. thus, these borrowers found either alternative sources of income, or found ways to save on a
   control     group this
   these borrowers            percentage
                           found             doesn’t exceed
                                   either alternative    sources 30%     of all respondents
                                                                     of income,      or found ways thatto repaid
                                                                                                            save their     debts. Thus,
                                                                                                                    on a budget.
budget.
   these borrowers found either alternative sources of income, or found ways to save on a budget.




24
figuRe 5.1.10. CAn
FIGURe 5.1.10. can you
                   YOU calculate      loan AnD
                                 youR LOAn
                       CALCULAte YOUR               payMents AnD
                                               debt pAYMentS
                                           and DeBt           and YOUR   household’s loan
                                                                    youR hOUSehOLD’S      AnD debt
                                                                                     LOAn and DeBt
figuRe 5.1.10.
payMents   peR can     calculate youR loan and debt payMents and youR household’s loan and debt
                   you 7
                Month?
pAYMentS peR MOnth?7   7
payMents peR
inteRvention    Month?
             (n=37)                                  contRol (n=18)
InteRVentIOn (n=37)                                                                      COntROL (n=18)
inteRvention (n=37)                                                                      contRol (n=18)




figure 5.1.11shows the structure of respondents with delays in payments in terms of the loan payments and their incomes. it is
Figure 5.1.11shows the structure of respondents with delays in payments in terms of the loan payments and their incomes. It is
figure 5.1.11shows
important            the
           to note that instructure
                           45%-69%   ofrespondents
                                    of  respondentswith
                                                    with delays
                                                         delays in          in terms
                                                                   payments have
                                                                in payments          of thelower
                                                                                 payments   loan payments   and their
                                                                                                 than the family’s    incomes.
                                                                                                                   monthly     it is
                                                                                                                           income.
important to note that in 45%-69% of respondents with delays in payments have payments lower than the family’s monthly income.
important  to note that in 45%-69%   of respondents with delays in payments have payments  lower than the family’s
thus, these respondents are capable of repaying the loans on time, yet they have other reasons for doing otherwise.monthly income.
thus, these respondents are capable of repaying the loans on time, yet they have other reasons for doing otherwise.
thus, these respondents are capable of repaying the loans on time, yet they have other reasons for doing otherwise.

figuRe  5.1.11. can
FIGURe 5.1.11.      YOU calculate
                CAn you CALCULAte youR LOAn and
                                  YOUR loan     DeBt payMents
                                            AnD debt pAYMentS and YOU’Re youR
                                                              AnD you’Re      hOUSehOLD’S loan
                                                                         YOUR household’s LOAn
figuRe
and     5.1.11.
     debt       can you
           payMents  peR        8 youR loan and debt payMents and you’Re youR household’s loan
                        calculate
                         Month?
AnD DeBt pAYMentS peR MOnth?8   8
and debt payMents peR Month?
inteRvention                                  contRol
InteRVentIOn                                                                  COntROL
inteRvention                                                                  contRol




7.   analysis of answers only by respondents that repaid loans by the time of final survey
8.
7.   analysis of answers only by respondents that have   loansin
                                                       delays
                                                  repaid       byloan
                                                                  the payments
                                                                      time of final survey
7.
8.
26                                                repaid
     Analysis of answers only by respondents that have
     analysis                                                  by
                                                         loansin
                                                       delays     the payments
                                                                 loan time of final survey
8.   Analysis of answers only by respondents that have delays in loan payments
26
                                                                                                                                  25
Findings of chapter 5.1:
      •   For six months there has been a general decrease in the percentage of people with debts. This outcome has been seen both
      in intervention group and in control group. The decrease in the percentage of borrowers has been caused by the objective fact
      – the time between the surveys: e.g., people have paid back their short-terms loans because at the baseline survey they have
      repaid their loans almost in full.

      •   Analysis of changes in the number of loans available to respondents showed that 80% of respondents from intervention group
      didn’t increase the initial number of their loans. This number is lower in control group (78%).

      •   The number of respondents with delays has also decreased.

      •   The comparison of loan payments and incomes of respondents showed that about 40% of respondents had to make loan
      payments equal to or exceeding the aggregate family income. If compared to the baseline survey, this percentage decreased in
      intervention group by 9%, in control group by 2%.

      •   Half of respondents from intervention group that repaid their loans by the time of the 3rd survey noted at the baseline survey
      that their payments were equal to or exceeded their income. Thus, these borrowers found ways to pay back their loans despite
      the fact that their payments exceeded their incomes. In control group this percentage was below 30% of all respondents that
      paid back their loans.

      •    Not only respondents whose payments exceed monthly income, but also respondents with income exceeding their loan
      payments have delays in loan, credit payments. Thus, over 50% of borrowers had to make payments that were lower than their
      monthly income by the time of final survey.




 




26	
    Report on Main Results of the Survey on the Impact of Counseling on Knowledge, Feelings and Actions of Over-
                                                                                      Indebted Borrowers, 2016


5.2. evaluatIon oF ConsultatIons
   5.2. Evaluation of Consultations
During the survey, respondents were asked a series of questions intended to evaluate consultations, and the community fair. the
results served
    During         improve the
                to survey,
              the               quality of future
                            respondents      were consultations.
                                                     asked a series of questions intended to evaluate consultations,
    and the community fair. The results served to improve the quality of future consultations.
In the baseline survey, consultations were evaluated anonymously. Respondents filled out the evaluation questionnaire and put it
into general evaluation boxes. Sometime after the first evaluation of consultations respondents were asked to evaluate the same
    In the baseline survey, consultations were evaluated anonymously. Respondents filled out the
consultations
    evaluation  once again (in 2nd and
                    questionnaire      3rd surveys).
                                      and    put ittable  5.2.1
                                                       into     shows results
                                                             general          of evaluation
                                                                        evaluation          of consultations
                                                                                       boxes.    Sometimeheld     at the
                                                                                                               after     community
                                                                                                                       the  first    fair.
the  average score
    evaluation    ofdecreased   as more
                      consultations      time passed after
                                       respondents      wereconsultations. however, the
                                                               asked to evaluate      the  samescore
                                                                                         general       of the impact
                                                                                                  consultations       of consultations
                                                                                                                    once   again       is
    (in high.
rather     nd          rd
         2 and 3 surveys). Table 5.2.1 shows results of evaluation of consultations held at the
  community
tABLe5.2.1.    fair. The
            “pLeASe      average
                     eVALUAte    score
                               FROM “1”decreased  as more timeOF
                                       tO “5” the USeFULneSS   passed after consultations.
                                                                 thIS COnSULtAtIOn         However, the
                                                                                      FOR YOU”
   general score of the impact of consultations is rather high.

                          EVALUATE
     TABLE 5.2.1. “PLEASE 1 st
                                                        2ndUSEFULNESS
                               survey FROM “1” TO “5” THE   survey                3rd survey FOR
                                                                      OF THIS CONSULTATION
                                                                                           YOU”
                         naryn                talas              naryn          talas           naryn                       talas
                                       1st survey                 2nd survey           3rd survey
         1                  0%                 0%                  2%            7%                4%                        0%
                                   Naryn        Talas         Naryn       Talas    Naryn       Talas
         2                  1%                 0%                  0%            5%               11%                        0%
                         1          0%            0%            2%         7%        4%          0%
         3               2
                            2%      1%
                                               1% 0%            0%
                                                                  21%      5%
                                                                                 7% 11%
                                                                                                  21%
                                                                                                 0%
                                                                                                                            10%
         4               3 4%       2%         8% 1%           21%33%      7%   26% 21%           33%
                                                                                                10%                         72%
         5               4 93%      4%        91% 8%           33%44%     26%   54% 33%           31%
                                                                                                72%                         18%
         n               5 123      93%        116
                                                 91%           44%108     54%    10331%           108
                                                                                                18%                          103
                         n 4,9      123          116
                                               4,9             108 4,2     103   4,2108         1033,8                       4,1
    Average
                     Average        4.9           4.9          4.2         4.2      3.8         4.1
     score                           4,9                                   4,2                                      3,9
                      score                4.9                        4.2                        3.9

At every survey, respondents were asked:
   At every survey, respondents were asked:
“What are your suggestions to improve consultations in the future?”
   “What are your suggestions to improve consultations in the future?”
   Below
Below       are
       are the    the
               main    main of
                     answers answers     of respondents.
                               respondents.                  The majority
                                            the majority of suggestions      of suggestions
                                                                        on improvement        on improvement
                                                                                       of consultations            of in the
                                                                                                        were the same
   consultations
three surveys.      were the  same   in the three surveys.

  Naryn
nARYn
  Positive
pOSItIVe    feedback:
         FeeDBACK:
              General words of gratitude such as “Thank you”, “It was useful” – about 60 people;
              Wish to have more similar consultations - 40 people:
                    We need to have more similar consultations;
                    Visit us more often;
                    You should broadcast such consultations via TV, other media sources, newspapers, radio;
                    You should spread this information at the national level;
                    Farmers need information about drop in prices, sales, seed prices;
                    We need similar consultations at schools – grades 10-11;
                    You should open offices in communities and provide similar consultations on a regular
                     basis;
                    We need such consultations in rural areas;
                    Many people that really need these consultations failed to receive them. We need more
                     consultations;
                    We need consultations on other topics such as agriculture, upbringing of children, etc.

                                                                                                                                        27
     Report on Main
     Report on Main Results
                    Results of
                            of the Survey on
                               the Survey on the
                                             the Impact
                                                 Impact of
                                                        of Counseling on Knowledge,
                                                           Counseling on            Feelings and
                                                                         Knowledge, Feelings     Actions of
                                                                                             and Actions of Over-
                                                                                                            Over-
                                                                                       Indebted
                                                                                       Indebted  Borrowers, 2016
     Report on Main Results of the Survey on the Impact of Counseling on Knowledge, Feelings and Borrowers, 2016
                                                                                                 Actions of Over-
                                                                                              Indebted Borrowers, 2016
 Negative
neGAtIVe
 Negative  feedback
         FeeDBACK:
           feedback
     Negative feedback business consultations;
           I
            I expected
               expected business consultations;
          
           IWe
             We  need visual
                 need
               expected      information
                        business
                      visual             materials;
                                  consultations;
                             information materials;
                need visual
             We need
           We        educational  materials;
                             information materials;
                      educational materials;
           
               need educational
             We need
             We      real
                     real help;
                          help; materials;
           
            Banks
             We
             Banks should
                need
                   should         – if
                          control –
                          control
                     real help;     if a
                                       a person has a
                                         person has a loan,
                                                      loan, banks shouldn’t extend
                                                            banks shouldn’t extend second
                                                                                   second loan.
                                                                                          loan.
            Banks should control – if a person has a loan, banks shouldn’t extend second loan.
 Talas
tALAS
 Talas
 Positive
pOSItIVe
 Talas
 Positive  feedback:
           feedback
         FeeDBACK:  :
     Positive feedback:
           General
             General words   of gratitude
                       words of  gratitude such    as “Thank
                                                      “Thank you”,
                                             such as                 “It was
                                                               you”, “It  was useful”  – about
                                                                               useful” –        401 people;
                                                                                         about 401   people;
             Wish to
              General
           Wish      have more
                       words
                   to have more    similar
                              of gratitude  consultations
                                             such as “Thank
                                   similar consultations   -  75
                                                           - 75  people:
                                                               you”, “It was useful” – about 401 people;
                                                                 people:
              
           Wish We
               We    need
                   to need such
                           moreconsultations
                      have such   consultations   in rural
                                   similar consultations   areas,
                                                           - 75 people:
                                                  in rural areas, villages –
                                                                  villages  – over
                                                                               over 20
                                                                                     20 people;
                                                                                        people;
                     need similar
                 We need
               We         similar  consultations
                           such consultations
                                    consultations    on
                                                  in on agriculture
                                                     rural
                                                        agriculture  –  how –
                                                                     – how
                                                           areas, villages   and  at 20
                                                                               over
                                                                             and  at what  price
                                                                                           price should
                                                                                        people;
                                                                                     what        should we
                                                                                                        we sell  our
                                                                                                            sell our
                 crops,
               We      agricultural
                      need
                 crops,               forecasts,
                           similar consultations
                        agricultural               legal matters,
                                                     on agriculture
                                      forecasts, legal             business
                                                                     – how and
                                                         matters, business    development,
                                                                                  at what price
                                                                              development,    mortgages,
                                                                                                 should we
                                                                                              mortgages,   etc.;
                                                                                                            sell our
                                                                                                           etc.;
                You  should
                 crops,       spread
                        agricultural   this information
                                      forecasts,   legal  via mass
                                                         matters,    media
                                                                   business  (television,
                                                                              development,radio, newspapers);
                                                                                              mortgages,
               You should spread this information via mass media (television, radio, newspapers);         etc.;
                 You need
               You
                     should
                      need  to open
                               open your
                            tospread your   office
                                            office with
                                                   with consultants
                                       this information   via mass media
                                                         consultants   in
                                                                       in Talas
                                                                          Talas so that we
                                                                                so that
                                                                             (television, radio,
                                                                                         we could
                                                                                            could  receive
                                                                                                   receive more
                                                                                                 newspapers);
                                                                                                           more
                 consultations;
                 You need to open your office with consultants in Talas so that we could receive more
               consultations;
            You should
             You        provide this
                 should provide
           consultations;      this information at schools.
                                     information at schools.
 Negative  You should provide this information at schools.
 Negative feedback:
           feedback:
neGAtIVe FeeDBACK:
 Negative feedback:
              We need
            We
                 need subsidies;
                       subsidies;
              We  need real
            We need
                           help;
                       subsidies;
                       real help;
             We  need lower
            We need lower   interest
                             interest rates;
                       real help;     rates;
                
                  You   should
                   We need
                   You          provide
                              lower
                         should provide     this information in
                                                 information
                                      interest
                                            this rates;            a more
                                                                in a more understandable
                                                                             understandable form.
                                                                                                form.
  Respondents     You   should provide
                   evaluated consultations
                                consultations in
  Respondents evaluated                     this information
                                                    in terms    in
                                                         terms of  a more
                                                                  of the     understandable
                                                                            usefulness of
                                                                       the usefulness           form.
                                                                                           of information
                                                                                               information   on finance
                                                                                                             on   finance
  management
  Respondents
  management and  and  planning
                   evaluated
                       planning   almost
                                consultationsat the
                                  almost at the in   same
                                                     same   level
                                                            levelof
                                                         terms     as the  usefulness
                                                                            usefulness
                                                                   as the usefulness    of  consultations
                                                                                        of of  information
                                                                                            consultations in general.
                                                                                                             on finance
                                                                                                          in general.
  management
Respondents       and  planning   almost
              evaluated consultations        at the  same   level
                                        in terms of the usefulness as the  usefulness   of  consultations
                                                                    of information on finance management  in general.
                                                                                                           and planning almost
         TABLE   5.2.2. “PLEASE
         TABLE 5.2.2.               EVALUATE HOW
                          “PLEASE EVALUATE        HOW USEFUL
                                                          USEFUL WERE
                                                                    WERE CONSULTATIONS
                                                                            CONSULTATIONS FOR         YOU IN
                                                                                                  FOR YOU     TERMS OF
                                                                                                           IN TERMS    OF
at the same level as the usefulness of  consultations
         TABLE 5.2.2. “PLEASE EVALUATE HOW             in general.
                                                    INFORMATION
                                                          USEFUL WERE
                                                    INFORMATION         ON  FINANCE
                                                                            FINANCE MANAGEMENT
                                                                        ON CONSULTATIONS
                                                                                       MANAGEMENT      AND
                                                                                                  FOR YOU
                                                                                                       AND INPLANNING”
                                                                                                              TERMS OF
                                                                                                             PLANNING”
                                       st                      nd                         rd
                                     1st survey
                                     1    survey INFORMATION  2
                                                              2nd survey
                                                                   survey               3
                                                                                        3rd survey
                                                                        ON FINANCE MANAGEMENTsurvey    AND PLANNING”
                                 Naryn
                                 Naryn      Talas
                                    1st survey
                                            Talas       Naryn    Talas
                                                          2nd survey
                                                        Naryn    Talas          Naryn        Talas
                                                                                    3rd survey
                                                                                Naryn        Talas
                        1
                        1         2%
                                 Naryn
                                  2%         0%
                                            Talas
                                             0%          3%
                                                        Naryn
                                                         3%       6%
                                                                 Talas
                                                                  6%              4%
                                                                                Naryn
                                                                                  4%          0%
                                                                                             Talas
                                                                                              0%
                        2
                        1
                        2         2%
                                  2%         0%
                                             0%           2%
                                                          3%
                                                          2%         5%
                                                                     6%
                                                                     5%          10%
                                                                                  4%
                                                                                 10%          1%
                                                                                              0%
                                                                                              1%
                        3
                        2
                        3         6%
                                  2%
                                  6%           0%
                                               0%        15%
                                                          2%
                                                         15%         8%
                                                                     5%
                                                                     8%          21%
                                                                                 10%
                                                                                 21%             9%
                                                                                                 1%
                                                                                                 9%
                        4
                        3
                        4         7%
                                  6%
                                  7%          25%
                                               0%
                                              25%        36%
                                                         15%
                                                         36%         23%
                                                                      8%
                                                                     23%         31%
                                                                                 21%
                                                                                 31%            68%
                                                                                                 9%
                                                                                                68%
                        5
                        4
                        5         83%
                                   7%
                                  83%         75%
                                              25%
                                              75%        44%
                                                         36%
                                                         44%         44%
                                                                     23%
                                                                     44%         33%
                                                                                 31%
                                                                                 33%            22%
                                                                                                68%
                                                                                                22%
                        n
                        5
                        n         123
                                  83%
                                  123          4
                                              75%
                                               4         108
                                                         44%
                                                         108         103
                                                                     44%
                                                                     103         108
                                                                                 33%
                                                                                 108            103
                                                                                                22%
                                                                                                103
                       n
                    Average       4.7
                                  123
                                  4.7         4.8
                                               4
                                              4.8        4.2
                                                         108
                                                         4.2         4.1
                                                                     103
                                                                     4.1         3.8
                                                                                 108
                                                                                 3.8            4.1
                                                                                                103
                                                                                                4.1
                    Average
                     score
                     score        4.7   4.7   4.8        4.2 4.1                        4.0
                    Average             4.7                  4.1 4.1              3.8   4.0     4.1
                     score              4.7                    4.1                      4.0


           are main
     Below
     Below are       answers of
               main answers   of respondents to the
                                 respondents to     question: “Any
                                                              “Any suggestions
                                                the question:      suggestions to
                                                                               to improve
                                                                                   improve such
                                                                                           such
     consultations
     consultations
     Below are mainin future
                   inanswers in
                              ofterms
                      future in terms of information
                                      of information
                                 respondents         on  finance
                                                     on finance
                                             to the question:    management
                                                              “Any suggestions
                                                                 management  and
                                                                               to planning?”
                                                                             and  planning?”
                                                                                   improve such
     consultations in future in terms of information on finance management and planning?”

28
     Summary of
     Summary of comments:
                comments:
     Summary of comments:
tABLe5.2.2. “pLeASe eVALUAte hOW USeFUL WeRe COnSULtAtIOnS FOR YOU In teRMS OF InFORMAtIOn On
FInAnCe MAnAGeMent AnD pLAnnInG”
                            1st survey                         2nd survey                         3rd survey
                      naryn            talas             naryn           talas              naryn            talas
       1                2%              0%                 3%              6%                 4%              0%
       2                2%              0%                 2%              5%                10%              1%
       3                6%              0%                15%              8%                21%              9%
       4                7%             25%                36%             23%                31%             68%
       5               83%             75%                44%             44%                33%             22%
       n               123               4                108             103                108              103
    Average             4,7             4,8                4,2             4,1                3,8             4,1
     score                       4,7                               4,1                                4,0

Below are main answers of respondents to the question: Any suggestions to improve such consultations in future in terms of
information
   Report onon finance
             Main      management
                   Results         and planning?”
                           of the Survey on the Impact of Counseling on Knowledge, Feelings and Actions of Over-
  Report on Main Results of the Survey on the Impact of Counseling on Knowledge, Feelings and Actions of Over-
                                                                                    Indebted Borrowers, 2016
                                                                                    Indebted Borrowers, 2016

 Naryn: OF COMMentS:
SUMMARY
 Naryn:
nARYn:
           General words of gratitude such as “Thank you”, “It was useful” – 14 people;
           General words of gratitude such as “Thank you”, “It was useful” – 14 people;
           Wish to have more similar consultations - 18 people:
           Wish to have more similar consultations - 18 people:
             You need to open a permanent office so that we could have more consultations
             You need to open a permanent office so that we could have more consultations
             You should provide consultations throughout Kyrgyzstan
             You should provide consultations throughout Kyrgyzstan
             You should teach people using these consultations via mass media – television etc.
             You should teach people using these consultations via mass media – television etc.


 Talas:
tALAS:
 Talas:
           General words of gratitude such as “Thank you”, “It was useful” – 7 people.
           General words of gratitude such as “Thank you”, “It was useful” – 7 people.
           Wish to have more similar consultations - 10 people.
           Wish to have more similar consultations - 10 people.

tABLe 5.2.3. GeneRAL eVALUAtIOn OF COnSULtAtIOnS DURInG COMMUnItY FAIR AnD OtheR DAYS
    TABLE 5.2.3. GENERAL EVALUATION OF CONSULTATIONS DURING COMMUNITY FAIR AND OTHER
    TABLE 5.2.3. GENERAL EVALUATION OF CONSULTATIONS DURING COMMUNITY FAIR AND OTHER
                                              consultations                     DAYS
       city        consultant’s id                                        average score
                                                                                DAYS
                                                      n Consultations % of total number
                                     Consultant’s          Consultations        Average
                           City1     Consultant’s     30 N      % of total     4Average                    4,8
                           City          ID                     %  of total       score
                                         ID                      number
                            2                         30 N
                                                                 number        4 score                     4,7
                                           1            30           4             4.8
                            3              1          6330           4         9 4.8                       4,9
       naryn                               2            30           4             4.7
                            4              2
                                           3
                                                      6830
                                                        63
                                                                     4
                                                                     9
                                                                              10 4.7
                                                                                   4.9
                                                                                                            5
                        Naryn
                            5              3          5363           9         8   4.9                     4,9
                        Naryn              4            68          10              5
                                           4            68          10              5
                            6              5          6253           8         9 4.9                        5
                                           5            53           8             4.9
            total in naryn                 6
                                           6
                                                     30662
                                                        62
                                                                     9
                                                                     9
                                                                              45 5  5
                                                                                                           4,9
                         Total in Naryn                306            45             4.9
                         Total in Naryn                306            45             4.9
                                           1            84            12             4.9
                                           1            84            12             4.9
                                           2            74            11             4.9
                                           2            74            11             4.9
                                           3            60             9             4.8
                           Talas           3            60             9             4.8                                29
                           Talas           4            41             6             4.9
                                           4            41             6             4.9
                                           5            52             8              5
                                  1                  84                         12                        4,9
                                  2                  74                         11                        4,9
                                  3                  60                          9                        4,8
         talas
                                  4                  41                          6                        4,9
                                  5                  52                          8                         5
                                  6                  63                          9                        4,9
                 total in talas                     374                         55                        4,9
                    total                           680                        100                        4,9


tABLe 5.2.4. pLeASe eVALUAte FROM “1” tO “5” hOW MUCh YOU LIKeD ORGAnIZAtIOn OF the COMMUnItY FAIR
(enteRtAInMent,   FOOD,of
  Report on Main Results DAnCe, etC.)on the Impact of Counseling on Knowledge, Feelings and Actions of Over-
                          the Survey
  Report on Main Results of the Survey on the Impact of Counseling                        and Borrowers,
                                                                                     Indebted
                                                                   on Knowledge, Feelings                 2016
                                                                                              Actions of Over-
                                                             consultations
         city             consultant’s id                                                                 score
                                                                                               average 2016
                                                                                     Indebted Borrowers,
                                        ID              n                        number
                                                                      % of totalscore
                                                              % of total
                                                      N
                                  1     ID             16       number
                                                              % of total
                                                                               7score                 4,8
                                                      N
                                  2      1           1612       number
                                                                    7          5 4.8                  4,8
                                      3    2
                                           1           12
                                                        25
                                                       16             5
                                                                      7             4.8
                                                                                 10 4.8                   4,6
         naryn                             3
                                           2           25
                                                       12             10
                                                                      5             4.6
                             Naryn    4                   24                     10 4.8                   4,7
                                           4
                                           3           24
                                                       25             10
                                                                      10            4.7
                                                                                    4.6
                             Naryn    5    5
                                                        20
                                                       20              8
                                                                                  8 4.4                   4,4
                                           4           24             10            4.7
                                      6    6
                                           5            26
                                                        20
                                                          26          11
                                                                       8
                                                                                 11 4.4
                                                                                    3.4                   3,4
                total in naryn
                         Total in Naryn    6             123
                                                       123
                                                        26            51
                                                                      11         51 3.4
                                                                                    4.4                   4,4
                                    1
                         Total in Naryn    1            32
                                                       12332          13
                                                                      51         13 4.9
                                                                                    4.4                   4,9
                                           2
                                           1            27
                                                        32            11
                                                                      13            4.9
                                    2                     27                     11 4.9                   4,9
                                           3
                                           2            14
                                                        27             6
                                                                      11            5.0
                          Talas     3                     14                      6 4.9                   5,0
          talas                            4
                                           3            14
                                                        14            6
                                                                      6             4.9
                                                                                    5.0
                          Talas     4      5            15
                                                          14          6
                                                                                  6 4.9                   4,9
                                           4            14            6             4.9
                                    5      6
                                           5            14
                                                        1515          6
                                                                      6           6 4.9
                                                                                    4.7                   4,9
                                    6
                         Total in Talas    6           116
                                                        1414          49
                                                                      6           6 4.7
                                                                                    4.9                   4,7
                         TOTAL
                         talasin Talas
                 total inTotal                         239
                                                         116
                                                       116          100
                                                                     49             4.6
                                                                                 49 4.9                   4,9
                    totalTOTAL                         239
                                                         239        100         100 4.6                   4,6
 Below are main answers to the question: “Any suggestions to improve event organization in
 the  future?”                                     “Any tosuggestions
 Below
Below areare main
          main     answers
               answers         to the question:
                       to the question: :“Any suggestions  improve event to improve
                                                                         organization in event   organization in
                                                                                         the future?”
 the future?”
 Summary
SUMMARY    OF of comments:
               COMMentS:
 Naryn:
 Summary of comments:
nARYn:
 Naryn:
          The music was too loud - 5 people;
          The
                event should
           The music   was toobe advertised
                               loud         because many people didn’t know about the community
                                    - 5 people;
           fair. event should be advertised because many people didn’t know about the community
          The
           fair.
tALAS:
          Generally, words of gratitude and wishes to have more consultations.
       Generally, words of gratitude and wishes to have more consultations.
 Talas:
 Talas:
30Between the baseline and interim surveys, intervention group had additional consultations via
 telephone the
 Between    calls, SMS, personal
                 baseline        meetings
                          and interim     with consultants,
                                      surveys,  interventionself-help groups.
                                                              group had   additional consultations via
 telephone calls, SMS, personal meetings with consultants, self-help groups.
Between the baseline and interim surveys, intervention group had additional consultations via telephone calls, SMS, personal
meetings with consultants, self-help groups.



Respondents were asked at the interim survey about the ways of additional consultations. The following inconsistencies have
been identified when comparing the survey results and actual IFC data on the number of respondents that received any type of
consultation:


    1. During the 2nd survey, 71 of 126 respondents that received additional consultations said they received consultation only
    during the community fair.

    2. 10 respondents said they received additional consultations, although, according to IFC, they never did.

This situation can be explained by the fact that some people, by the time of the second survey, mayhave forgotten they did receive
such consultations; some respondents mayhave taken phone calls and SMS not as consultations since they didn’t exceed 5 minutes;
telephone consultations may have been provided not to the borrower, but to his/her family members; respondents may have paid
no attention to consultations via SMS, etc.




Findings of chapter 5.2:
    •   Generally, borrowers took consultations positively. The majority of respondents noted that consultations were very useful for
    them and would like to receive similar consultations on a regular basis.

    •   The average score of usefulness of consultation carried out during the community fair among respondents of intervention
    group was very high (4.7 out of 5). However, the evaluation of consultations during 2nd and 3rd sureys tends to decline. This
    situation can be explained by the weakened effect of consultations over time.

    •   Consultations via phone calls and SMS are less popular among respondents. More than a half of respondents that received
    such types of consultations for various reasons said they never received them.

 




                                                                                                                                   31
       Report on Main Results of the Survey on the Impact of Counseling on Knowledge, Feelings and Actions of Over-
                                                                                         Indebted Borrowers, 2016




       5.3.Knowledge:
5.3.		            Knowledge:
                       5.3.1. Financial Literacy
5.3.1.       literacy isLiteracy
       Financial
   Financial             one of the most important factors of successful budget management and rational
    distribution of financial incomes and expenses.
Financial literacy is one of the most important factors of successful budget management and rational distribution of financial
    This and
incomes        expenses.
          chapter     analyzes the level of financial literacy about various issues on the way to receive a
Thisloan,  and
      chapter     also the
               analyzes       aggregate
                        the level           indicator
                                  of financial           of financial
                                               literacy about           literacy.
                                                              various issues on the way to receive a loan, and also the aggregate indicator
of financial literacy.
     To find out the level of financial literacy of respondents, a series of checking questions were asked in
     theout
To find      the level of financial literacy of respondents, a series of checking questions were asked in the questionnaire:
         questionnaire:
          1. “What do you think the term “Principal” means in a loan agreement?”

          2. “Is it necessary to do the following prior to signing the loan agreement:
                 1) Read the loan payment schedule;
                 2) Seek explanation from officers of credit institutions;
                 3) Study the loan agreement thoroughly;
                 4) Take more time to make a final decision;
                 5) Read the terms and conditions of other microcredit institutions and choose the most
                     preferred one”.

          3. “If you take a $1000 loan at 15 per cent annual interest, how much will you owe to the bank
             in 2 years?”


   Only one answer was correct in each of two questions.
Only one answer was correct in each of two questions.

    As Table
As Table            5.3.1 shows,
          5.3.1 shows,at              at the
                            the baseline        baseline
                                           survey  only 61%survey     only 61%
                                                            of respondents   from of  respondents
                                                                                  intervention group from
                                                                                                     and 49%intervention    group
                                                                                                               from control group   and
                                                                                                                                   managed
    49% from
to answer            control
             first question    group managed
                             correctly.               to answer
                                         After consultations,       first question
                                                              intervention           correctly.
                                                                             group shows         Afterin
                                                                                          the increase consultations,
                                                                                                         this level by 14%intervention
                                                                                                                           at the 2 survey,
                                                                                                                                   nd

    group      shows     the  increase   rd in this level by 14% at the 2nd survey, and then a minor decrease at the
and then a minor decrease at the 3 survey (-7%). This indicator behaves similarly in control group. The number of respondents that
      rd
find3    survey
     it difficult  to (-7%).   This
                      answer the      indicator
                                  first question in behaves    similarly
                                                     intervention          in control
                                                                   group decreases  withgroup.  The
                                                                                         every new    number
                                                                                                    survey,      of respondents
                                                                                                            whereas                 that
                                                                                                                     in control group it only
    find
increases.  it difficult   to  answer     the   first question    in   intervention   group   decreases    with   every   new   survey,
    whereas in control group it only increases.
There are no significant variations in answers between sex and age.
       There are no significant variations in answers between sex and age.
TABLE5.3.1. WHAT DO YOU THINK THE TERM “PRINCIPAL” MEAN IN A LOAN AGREEMENT?
                 TABLE 5.3.1. WHAT DO YOU THINK THE TERM “PRINCIPAL” MEAN IN A LOAN AGREEMENT?
                                            Intervention
                                      Intervention  (N=211)(N=211)                                             (N=79)
                                                                                                      Control (N=79)
                                                                                                      Control
                                     st             nd
                                    1   survey    2    survey     3rd survey             1st survey     2 nd
                                                                                                             survey   3rdrd
                                                                                                                          survey
                            1st survey      2nd survey       3rd survey               1st survey        2nd survey     3 survey
       Loan amount                      61%            75%           68%                     49%             66%          47%
       Loan  amountplus
       Loan amount             61%                 75%                68%                49%               66%              47%
                                          6%               13%             18%              43%              28%              42%
       interest on
       Loan amount loan
       Loan
      plus   amount
           interest  plus
                    on          6%                 13%                18%                43%                28%                 42%
       interest on loan plus any          11%              3%               8%               8%               3%               5%
            loan
       amount of loan fee
       I don’t know                       22%              9%               7%               0%               4%               6%




32	
   Loan amount
  plus interest on
   loan plus any              11%                 3%                8%                 8%                3%                 5%
  amount of loan
         fee
    I don’t know              22%                 9%                7%                 0%                4%                 6%

If we look at the answers to the first question (Table 5.3.2) in terms of cities, we will see that the number of respondents who clearly
understand the meaning of the term “principal” in a loan agreement in Talas is much higher than in Naryn. If compared to the
identical level of those who answered correctly the question at the baseline survey, the number of respondents who answered
correctly is increasing faster at the 2nd survey (+22%) in Talas than in Naryn (+7%). In control group the percentage of respondents
who answered correctly is more in Talas (+16%) than in Naryn (+9%). At the final survey, in intervention group this indicator keeps on
increasing in Talas, whereas in Naryn it decreases. In control group, the percentage of respondents who answered the first question
correctly decreases in two cities at the 3rd survey compared to the 2nd survey.

TABLE5.3.2. WHAT DO YOU THINK DOES THE TERM “PRINCIPAL” MEAN IN A LOAN AGREEMENT?
                                                             Intervention                                Control
                                                    Naryn (n=108) Talas (n=103)                Naryn (n=45)    Talas (n=34)
                   Loan amount                          61%               61%                      38%             65%
            Loan amount plus interest
                                                           6%                   7%                   53%                  29%
                      on loan
 1st survey Loan amount plus interest
             on loan plus any amount                      12%                  10%                    9%                   6%
                     of loan fee
                   I don’t know                           21%                  22%                    0%                   0%
                   Loan amount                            69%                  83%                   47%                  91%
            Loan amount plus interest
                                                          19%                   7%                   47%                   3%
                      on loan
 2 survey Loan amount plus interest
  nd

             on loan plus any amount                       5%                   1%                    4%                   0%
                     of loan fee
                   I don’t know                            8%                  10%                   2%                   6%
                   Loan amount                            47%                  90%                   29%                  71%
            Loan amount plus interest
                                                          29%                   6%                   60%                  18%
                      on loan
 3 survey Loan amount plus interest
  rd

             on loan plus any amount                      13%                   2%                    9%                   0%
                     of loan fee
                   I don’t know                           11%                   2%                    2%                  12%

In the second question, respondents should have checked all 5 answers as correct. In this question, respondents were divided into
3 groups:



                                                                                                                                      33
      1. High level; checked 4-5 choices;

      2. Average level; checked 2-3 choices;

      3. Low level; checked 1 or none choices.

In general, many respondents answered this question correctly. The results of baseline survey showed that 85% of respondents in
intervention group and 75% of respondents in control group had this knowledge. After consultations, the percentage of respondents
who answered correctly remained almost at the same level in intervention group. At the 2nd survey, this indicator in control group
increased in Talas and decreased in Naryn. (Table 5.3.3)

As the results of all three surveys showed, the percentage of correct answers to the 2nd question is higher in Talas than in Naryn,
which is the evidence of a higher level of financial literacy in this city. There are no significant differences in the answers in terms of
age, sex and income level.


TABLE5.3.3. UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT TO DO BEFORE SIGNING A LOAN AGREEMENT, SPLIT BY CITIES
                                                Intervention                                           Control
                                         Naryn       Talas                             Naryn            Talas
                                                                        Total                                           Total
                                        (n=108)    (n=103)                             (n=45)          (n=34)
                       High               80%        90%                 85%            73%             77%              75%
                      Average              6%         5%                  5%             9%             12%              10%
  1st survey
                        Low                7%         5%                  6%            18%             12%              15%
                   I don’t know            7%         0%                  4%             0%              0%               0%
                       High               83%        93%                 88%            60%             82%              70%
                      Average             12%         5%                  9%            31%             15%              24%
 2nd survey
                        Low                4%         2%                  3%             9%              3%               6%
                   I don’t know            1%         0%                  1%             0%              0%               0%
                       High               79%        92%                 85%            67%             94%              79%
                      Average             16%         5%                 10%            31%              6%              20%
  3rd survey
                        Low               5%          3%                 4%              2%              0%               1%
                   I don’t know            1%         0%                  1%             0%              0%               0%
It was also important to understand which conditions were deemed obligatory by the majority of respondents before signing a loan
agreement. The following priority was determined after three surveys:

      1 – Read the loan payment schedule;

      2 – Seek explanation from officers of credit institutions;

      3 – Compare terms and conditions in other credit institutions and choose the best ones;

      4 – Read the loan agreement thoroughly.

It should be noted that the priority of conditions has not changed in all three surveys.

Depending on the selected answers to the third question, respondents were divided into 3 groups:

      1. Those who answered correctly (amount: $1150-$2000);

      2. Those who answered wrong (more or less than the correct amount);

      3. Those who found it difficult to answer.
34	
Based on the results, we can see that the level of correct answers to this question kept growing in both groups at every survey. Thus,
the percentage of respondents in intervention group who answered correctly increased from 25% to 80%, whereas in control group
this indicator also increased, but to a lesser extent – from 46% to 61%. (Table 5.3.4)


TABLE 5.3.4. “IF YOU TAKE A $1000 LOAN AT 15 PER CENT ANNUAL INTEREST, HOW MUCH WILL YOU OWE TO THE
BANK IN 2 YEARS?”
                                                                              Intervention                      Control
                                             Correct                              25%                            46%
          1st survey                         Wrong                                12%                            18%
                                          I don’t know                            63%                            37%
                                             Correct                              58%                            49%
          2nd survey                         Wrong                                12%                            19%
                                          I don’t know                            30%                            32%
                                             Correct                              79%                            61%
          3rd survey                         Wrong                                 3%                            20%
                                          I don’t know                            19%                            19%
                                N                                                 211                             79

The rate of increase of the percentage of correct answers to the third question (table 5.3.5) is higher in Talas than in Naryn (in
intervention group, the percentage of correct answered increased to +67% and +42%, respectively, at the final survey compared to
the baseline survey). This trend is maintained in control group (+23% и +9%).
TABLE5.3.5. IF YOU TAKE A $1000 LOAN AT 15 PER CENT ANNUAL INTEREST, HOW MUCH WILL YOU OWE TO THE BANK
IN 2 YEARS?
                                                         Intervention                                      Control
                                                    Naryn             Talas                     Naryn                  Talas
                            Correct                  20%              29%                        38%                   56%
     1st survey             Wrong                     9%              16%                        22%                   12%
                         I don’t know                70%              55%                        40%                   32%
                            Correct                  49%              68%                        42%                   59%
     2nd survey             Wrong                    17%               7%                        13%                   27%
                         I don’t know                34%              25%                        44%                   15%
                            Correct                  62%              96%                        47%                   79%
     3rd survey             Wrong                     5%               1%                        31%                    6%
                         I don’t know                33%               3%                        22%                   15%
                     n                               108              103                         45                    34
Based on the above questions, an aggregate indicator of financial literacy was calculated. By results of answers to 3 questions about
financial literacy, respondents were divided into 3 groups:

   1. High level of financial literacy (answered correctly to 3 questions);

   2. Average level of financial literacy (answered correctly to 2 questions);

   3. Low level of financial literacy (answered wrong to all questions/answered correctly to one question).

                                                                                                                                    35
The general level of financial literacy tends to grow throughout the whole survey period. In intervention group there is a more
active growth than in control group. In intervention group at the 3rd survey the level of financial literacy increased by 52% as
compared to the baseline survey, in control group – by 24% only.


TABLE5.3.6. LEVEL OF FINANCIAL LITERACY
                                                                           Intervention                        Control
                                             High                              26%                              43%
            1 survey
             st
                                            Average                            34%                              37%
                                              Low                              40%                              20%
                                             High                              58%                              49%
            2nd survey                      Average                            14%                              30%
                                              Low                              28%                              20%
                                             High                              78%                              67%
            3rd survey                      Average                            12%                              20%
                                              Low                              10%                              13%
                                N                                              211                               79

In general, respondents in Talas had higher initial level of financial literacy and more significant increase of this indicator than
respondents in Naryn. Thus, in intervention group the general level of financial literacy increased at the 3rd survey by 62% in Talas
and 43% in Naryn as compared to the baseline survey. In control group, by 32% and 18%, respectively.


TABLE5.3.7. LEVEL OF FINANCIAL LITERACY
                                                        Intervention                                     Control
                                                   Naryn            Talas                      Naryn                  Talas
                             High                   21%              31%                        38%                   50%
      1 survey
       st
                            Average                 37%              30%                        51%                   18%
                              Low                   42%              39%                        11%                   32%
                             High                   47%              69%                        44%                   56%
      2nd survey            Average                 20%               8%                        44%                   12%
                              Low                   32%              23%                        11%                   32%
                             High                   64%              93%                        56%                   82%
      3rd survey            Average                 19%               5%                        29%                    9%
                              Low                   18%               2%                        16%                    9%
                     N                              108              103                         45                    34




36	
                               5.3.2. Calculation of Income and Expenses
                               5.3.2. Calculation of Income and Expenses
        The ability to calculate own income and expenses is the integral part of budget planning. Therefore,
        The ability to calculate own income and expenses is the integral part of budget planning. Therefore,
        respondents were asked a series of questions about the level of their awareness of their monthly
        respondents were asked a series of questions about the level of their awareness of their monthly
5.3.2.  income,     expenses, loan
           caLcuLatiOn                      payments.and
                                     Of incOmE              The level       of knowledge of their rights before a credit institution;
                                                                     ExpEnSES
        income, expenses, loan payments. The level of knowledge of their rights before a credit institution;
        relation between the payments and real situation; changes in the feelings of their income level have
        relation between the payments and real situation; changes in the feelings of their income level have
        been
the ability      evaluated,
            to calculate         as well.
                         own income       andThese
                                               expenses aspects       allow
                                                          is the integral      toof
                                                                            part   see   how
                                                                                    budget         the respondents’
                                                                                              planning.                         financial
                                                                                                            therefore, respondents             behavior
                                                                                                                                            were              has
                                                                                                                                                   asked a series
        been evaluated, as well. These aspects allow to see how the respondents’ financial behavior has
        changed.
of questions about the level of their awareness of their monthly income, expenses, loan payments. the level of knowledge of their
        changed.
rights before   a credit
        According     toinstitution;
                          the results   relation  between
                                            of survey,       the payments
                                                           more      than a and halfreal  situation; changes
                                                                                      of respondents                 in thecalculate
                                                                                                                cannot       feelings of their
                                                                                                                                             their income
                                                                                                                                                     income   level
                                                                                                                                                                 or
        According
have been             toas
             evaluated,   the
                            well.results
                                   these    of survey,
                                           aspects  allow  more
                                                           to  see   than
                                                                   how   the arespondents’
                                                                                half of respondents
                                                                                               fi nancial       cannot
                                                                                                            behavior    has calculate
                                                                                                                             changed.       their income or
        can calculate it with some certainty. In intervention group there is a decrease in the percentage of
        can calculate it with some certainty. In intervention group there is a decrease in the percentage of
        respondents who cannot calculate their income. At the final survey, the percentage of respondents
According    to the results
        respondents       whoof survey,
                                  cannot  more    than a half
                                             calculate     theirof respondents
                                                                    income. Atcannot         calculate
                                                                                     the final             their the
                                                                                                     survey,      income     or can calculate
                                                                                                                         percentage                 it with some
                                                                                                                                            of respondents
        who couldn’t calculate their income decreased in intervention group (-6%), and remained the same
certainty. In intervention   group   there  is a decrease   in the percentage     of respondents
        who couldn’t calculate their income decreased in intervention group (-6%), and remained the    who    cannot    calculate   their  income.     At the  final
                                                                                                                                                            same
        in control group (3%) as compared to the baseline survey. About 40-50% of respondents were able
survey,inthe  percentage
            control   groupof respondents      who couldn’t
                                (3%) as compared             tocalculate    their income
                                                                 the baseline       survey.       About in
                                                                                            decreased          intervention
                                                                                                             40-50%             group (-6%), and
                                                                                                                           of respondents               remained
                                                                                                                                                     were    able
        to calculate their income with great certainty. In intervention group the percentage of people who
the same    calculate
        to in            their(3%)
               control group      income               to thecertainty.
                                              with great
                                       as compared                             In intervention
                                                                baseline survey.     About 40-50%       group      the percentage
                                                                                                          of respondents       were able of       people who
                                                                                                                                              to calculate    their
        could calculate their income with great certainty at the 3rd                        rd
                                                                                                survey increased by 4% compared to the
        could
incomebaseline   calculate
         with greatlevel.     their
                     certainty.       income       with  great    certainty      at the   3     survey       increased       by   4%     compared          to  the
                             In In  intervention
                                  control     group group
                                                       thisthe  percentage of
                                                              percentage          people who
                                                                                increased           littlecalculate
                                                                                                acould      more –     their
                                                                                                                         by income
                                                                                                                              6%. The   withpercentage
                                                                                                                                               great certaintyat of
     rd baseline level. In control group this percentage increased a little more – by 6%. The percentage of
the 3 survey    increased
        respondents        by
                          in   4% compared to
                              intervention          the baseline
                                                 group    who could level. In control group
                                                                           calculate    their   this  percentage
                                                                                                   income       withincreased      a little more
                                                                                                                        great certainty              – by 6%. the
                                                                                                                                                 increased       at
        respondents
percentage                in intervention        group who        could    calculate    their      income       with    great certainty          increased       at
        the of   respondents
               2nd
                nd
                    survey as        comparedgroup
                                in intervention      to the      could
                                                           who baseline  calculate  their
                                                                                survey,   income
                                                                                            and then   with great    certainty
                                                                                                               decreased         increased
                                                                                                                                 at   the 3    at
                                                                                                                                                rd
                                                                                                                                                rd
                                                                                                                                                   the  2nd survey
                                                                                                                                                    survey       as
        the 2
as compared         survey
               to the baseline as nd compared        to   the baseline          survey,     and then           decreased              the 3 can
                                                                                                                                 at situation       survey       as
        compared       to the survey,      and then
                                  2nd survey.         decreased
                                                    This           at the can
                                                            situation      3rd survey as compared
                                                                                 reflect   the positive  to the  2
                                                                                                                 impact
                                                                                                                   nd
                                                                                                                      survey.  this
                                                                                                                              of   consultations,           ect the
                                                                                                                                                       reflwhich
        compared       to  the    2     survey.     This    situation     can    reflect   the      positive     impact       of   consultations,          which
positivediminishes     by the time
          impact of consultations,        of the
                                       which        3rd survey.
                                               diminishes    by the time of the 3rd survey.
        diminishes by the time of the 3rd survey.
FIGURe 5.3.1. “CAn FIGUREYOU5.3.1.       “CAN YOU
                                 CALCULAte              CALCULATE
                                                   the InCOMe        YOU THE AnDINCOME          YOU AND YOUR
                                                                                   YOUR hOUSehOLD                 eXpeCt   HOUSEHOLD
                                                                                                                               tO MAKe thIS       EXPECT
                                                                                                                                                       MOnth?”TO
                   FIGURE 5.3.1. “CAN YOU CALCULATE THE INCOME YOU AND YOUR HOUSEHOLD EXPECT TO
InteRVentIOn. n=211                                  MAKE THIS MONTH?” INTERVENTION. N=211
                                                     MAKE THIS MONTH?” INTERVENTION. N=211
                                                              Baseline                               Interim                                 Final
                                                              Baseline                               Interim                                 Final

        Yes, with great certainty
        Yes, with great certainty


        With some certainty
        With some certainty


        No
        No


                    FIGURE 5.3.2. “CAN YOU CALCULATE THE INCOME YOU AND YOUR HOUSEHOLD EXPECT TO
                   YOU5.3.2.
               FIGURE
FIGURe 5.3.2. “CAn           “CAN YOU
                       CALCULAte       CALCULATE
                                  the InCOMe    YOU THE
                                                    AnD INCOME  YOU AND YOUR
                                                              hOUSehOLD
                                                         YOUR CONTROL.          HOUSEHOLD
                                                                           eXpeCt           EXPECT
                                                                                  tO MAKe thIS     TO
                                                                                               MOnth?”
                                        MAKE THIS    MONTH?”             N=89
COntROL. n=89                           MAKE   THIS  MONTH?”  CONTROL.   N=89
                                        Baseline                 Interim                 Final
                                        Baseline                 Interim                 Final

        Yes, with great certainty
        Yes, with great certainty


        With some certainty
        With some certainty


        No
        No



the structure of answers to the question of the ability to calculate income varies for naryn and talas.

                                                                                                                                                                37
                                                                                                                                                               33
                                                                                                                                                               33
in
In intervention groupin talas the percentage of respondents who cannot calculate their income decreased by the time of the fi      final
                                                                                                                                     nal
survey more (-11%) than in naryn (-3%). the changes in the percentage of respondents that can calculate their income with great
certainty tend to decline in naryn and to grow in talas. thus, at the 3rd survey the percentage of respondents that can calculate their
income with great certainty decreased in naryn by 6%, and increased in talas by 14% as compared to the baseline survey.
in                                                                                                        final
In control group the percentage of respondents that cannot calculate their income varied slightly at the fi nal survey compared
to the baseline level. the percentage of respondents who can calculate their income with great certainty changed slightly (2%) in
naryn and increased by 12% in talas.


FIGURe 5.3.3. “CAn
figuRe             you CALCULAte
              “can YOU               incoMe YOU
                       calculate the InCOMe you AnD
                                                and YOUR
                                                    youR hOUSehOLD eXpect tO
                                                         household eXpeCt    MaKe thIS
                                                                          to MAKe      Month?”.
                                                                                  this MOnth?”.
naRyn
nARYn
inteRvention
InteRVentIOn (n=108)                                                    contRol (n=45)
                                                                        COntROL




FIGURe 5.3.4. “CAn
figuRe             you CALCULAte
              “can YOU               incoMe YOU
                       calculate the InCOMe you AnD
                                                and YOUR
                                                    youR hOUSehOLD eXpect tO
                                                         household eXpeCt    MaKe thIS
                                                                          to MAKe      Month?”.
                                                                                  this MOnth?”.
talas
tALAS
inteRvention
InteRVentIOn (n=103)                                                    contRol (n=34)
                                                                        COntROL




Analysis of answers to the question “Can
analysis                                “can you calculate the income you and your household expect to make this month?” showed
there was no difference
                difference in terms of  the          financial literacy. it
                                            level of financial           It means that many people (about 40%), even with a low level of
financial literacy, tend to think that they can calculate their income with great certainty.
financial
the percentage of people who can calculate their expenses with great certainty increased both in intervention group (+4%) and in
                                                                                                  significant
control group (+12%) at the 3rd survey as compared to the baseline level. the increase was more signifi  cant in control group than in
                    Generally, the changes in the indicator showing the ability of respondents to calculate their expenses are similar
intervention group. generally,
to the changes in the income calculation indicator.




38                                                                                                                                    39
                                                                                                                      Indebted Borrowers, 2016




FIGURe 5.3.5. “CAn    CALCULAte
                   YOU5.3.5.
               FIGURE        “CAN the
                                   YOUeXpenSeS YOUTHE
                                       CALCULATE       YOUR hOUSehOLD
                                                   AnDEXPENSES YOU AND  YOURtO
                                                                      eXpeCt   pAY OUt thIS
                                                                             HOUSEHOLD      MOnth?”
                                                                                          EXPECT
InteRVentIOn. n=211              TO PAY OUT THIS MONTH?” INTERVENTION. N=211

                                                          Baseline                             Interim                              Final


      Yes, with great certainty



      With some certainty


      No


FIGURe 5.3.6. “CAn YOU CALCULAte the eXpenSeS YOU AnD YOUR hOUSehOLD eXpeCt tO pAY OUt thIS MOnth?”
               FIGURE 5.3.6. “CAN YOU CALCULATE THE EXPENSES YOU AND YOUR HOUSEHOLD EXPECT
COntROL. n=79
                                                   TO PAY OUT THIS MONTH?” CONTROL. N=79

                                                        Baseline                             Interim                               Final


      Yes, with great certainty



      With some certainty


      No


       The changes
the changes                        structure
                           in the of
                 in the structure     answers to of   question to
                                                    answers
                                                  the                 the
                                                                  of the    question
                                                                          ability        of the
                                                                                  to calculate    ability diff
                                                                                                expenses    to ercalculate
                                                                                                                   for naryn expenses
                                                                                                                               and talas anddiffer   for
                                                                                                                                               are similar
       Naryn and Talas and are similar to the changes in the structure of answers to the question about the
to the changes in the structure of answers to the question about the ability to calculate income.
       ability to calculate income.
In intervention     group, according
       In intervention        group, to    the results to
                                        according      of final survey,
                                                           the    results the percentage
                                                                             of              of respondents
                                                                                 final survey,                  that cannot
                                                                                                     the percentage         ofcalculate   their expenses
                                                                                                                                 respondents       that
       cannot
remained     at the  same leveltheir
                   calculate    in narynexpenses     remained at
                                           as before consultations,    andthe   same level
                                                                             decreased   in talasin   Naryn
                                                                                                  (-13%).  the as   before consultations,
                                                                                                                 percentage    of respondents who  andcan
       decreased
calculate              in Talas
            their expenses         (-13%).
                              with great        Thetends
                                          certainty    percentage
                                                             to declineof    respondents
                                                                         in naryn    and to growwho    can thus,
                                                                                                    in talas.        at the their
                                                                                                              calculate     3 survey
                                                                                                                              rd
                                                                                                                                    expenses       with
                                                                                                                                         the percentage
                                                                                                                                     rd
       great      certainty    tends     to  decline     in   Naryn      and    to   grow     in   Talas.     Thus,     at
of respondents who can calculate their expenses with great certainty declined by 3% in naryn and increased by 13% in talas  the    3     survey     theas
       percentage
compared                 of respondents
              to the baseline  level.         who can calculate their expenses with great certainty declined by 3% in
       Naryn and increased by 13% in Talas as compared to the baseline level.
In control groupat the final survey the percentage of respondents who can calculate expenses remained unchanged in naryn,
       In control group at the final survey the percentage of respondents who can calculate expenses
just like in intervention
       remained              group, and
                       unchanged       indeclined
                                            Naryn,  by  6% in
                                                      just      talasin
                                                              like    as compared
                                                                         intervention to the  baselineand
                                                                                            group,      survey.   the percentage
                                                                                                               declined     by 6%    of people
                                                                                                                                        in Talas whoascan
calculate  their   expenses   with great  certainty slightly  changed    in naryn   (2%)  and  increased
       compared to the baseline survey. The percentage of people who can calculate their expenses with     by  32%   in talas.
       great certainty slightly changed in Naryn (2%) and increased by 32% in Talas.




                                                                                                                                                         39


                                                                                                                                                    35
FIGURe 5.3.7.
figuRe
figuRe  5.3.7.
       5.3.7. “can
               “CAn
              “can you
                    YOU
                   you calculate
                         CALCULAte
                       calculate the
                                 the eXpenses
                                    the
                                     eXpenses you
                                        eXpenSeS  and youR
                                                  and
                                              you YOU      household
                                                      AnD YOUR
                                                      youR household eXpect
                                                                hOUSehOLD   to pay
                                                                            to pay out
                                                                     eXpecteXpeCt      this
                                                                                    tO pAY
                                                                                   out      Month?”.
                                                                                       this OUt thIS
                                                                                            Month?”.
naRyn
MOnth?”.
naRyn      nARYn
inteRvention
inteRvention (n=108)
InteRVentIOn (n=108)                                                        contRol
                                                                            COntROL (n=45)
                                                                            contRol (n=45)




FIGURe 5.3.8.
figuRe
figuRe  5.3.8.
       5.3.8. “can
               “CAn
              “can you
                    YOU
                   you calculate
                         CALCULAte
                       calculate the
                                 the eXpenses
                                    the
                                     eXpenses you
                                        eXpenSeS  and
                                                  and youR
                                                      AnD household
                                              you YOU youR YOUR hOUSehOLD
                                                           household eXpect to pay out
                                                                            to pay
                                                                     eXpecteXpeCt   tO this
                                                                                   out this Month?”.
                                                                                       pAY OUt thIS
                                                                                            Month?”.
talas
MOnth?”. tALAS
talas
inteRvention
inteRvention (n=103)
InteRVentIOn (n=103)                                                        contRol
                                                                            COntROL (n=34)
                                                                            contRol (n=34)




there are differences
there are differences in
          differences in answers  to the
                         answers to      question about
                                     the question         the ability
                                                   about the          to calculate
                                                              ability to calculate expenses
                                                                                   expenses depending
                                                                                               depending on    the level
                                                                                                            on the        of financial
                                                                                                                    level of financial literacy.
                                                                                                                             financial literacy.
thus, in
thus, in intervention         at the
                       group at
         intervention group           baseline survey
                                 the baseline  survey the  percentage of
                                                       the percentage    of respondents    with low
                                                                             respondents with     low level of fi
                                                                                                      level of financial
                                                                                                               financial           who could
                                                                                                                          literacy who
                                                                                                                  nancial literacy        could
calculate their
calculate their expenses  with great
                expenses with  great certainty was higher
                                                    higher than
                                     certainty was              in other
                                                           than in  other levels  of financial
                                                                           levels of financial literacy.
                                                                                     financial literacy.

At the
at
at     3rd survey
   the 3
         rd
            survey the
                   the percentage
                        percentage of     respondents with
                                       of respondents         low level
                                                        with low        of fi
                                                                  level of financial
                                                                           financial            who could
                                                                                      literacy who
                                                                              nancial literacy             calculate their
                                                                                                     could calculate their expenses
                                                                                                                           expenses with
                                                                                                                                     with great
                                                                                                                                           great
certainty   declined in intervention   group   (-17%)  as compared   to the baseline   survey  and  increased in control group
certainty declined in intervention group (-17%) as compared to the baseline survey and increased in control group (+25%). Among (+25%). among
                                                                                                                                        among
respondents    with  high  level of financial
                                    financial literacy this percentage increased both in intervention group (+19%) and in control group
                                              literacy this percentage   increased
respondents with high level of financial                                            both   in intervention group  (+19%)   and in control group
(14%).
(14%).
table
tABLe 5.3.8.
table  5.3.8. can
       5.3.8.CAn
              can  you
                 YOU
                   you  calculate
                      CALCULAte
                        calculatethe the
                                      eXpenSeS
                                     the eXpenses   AnD and
                                               YOUyou
                                         eXpenses  you  YOURyouR
                                                        and      household
                                                             hOUSehOLD
                                                            youR       eXpeCt
                                                                 household    tO pAY to
                                                                            eXpect
                                                                            eXpect   OUtpay
                                                                                     to     out
                                                                                         thIS
                                                                                        pay out this
                                                                                              MOnth?
                                                                                                this
Month?split    by the
SpLIt BY the LeVeLS
Month?split         OF
               by the levels
                      levels of financial
                        FInAnCIAL  LIteRACY
                             of financial  liteRacy
                                           liteRacy
                                                    intervention
                                                    Intervention
                                                    intervention                                             control
                                                                                                             Control
                                                                                                             control
                                             levels
                                             Levels    financial
                                                    of fi
                                             levels of   nancial literacy
                                                       financial literacy                          Levels of financial
                                                                                                   levels
                                                                                                   levels of financial literacy
                                                                                                             financial literacy
                                          high
                                          high         average
                                                       average          low
                                                                        low                     high
                                                                                                high         average
                                                                                                             average          low
                                                                                                                              low
                  yes,
                  yes, with
                       with
                    great
                    great                 22%
                                          22%               31%
                                                            31%               41%
                                                                              41%               24%
                                                                                                24%               45%
                                                                                                                  45%               25%
                                                                                                                                    25%
                  certainty
                  certainty
 1st survey
 1 st
      survey
                  with some
                  with some               65%
                                          65%               38%
                                                            38%               47%
                                                                              47%               76%
                                                                                                76%               52%
                                                                                                                  52%               56%
                                                                                                                                    56%
                  certainty
                  certainty
                     no
                     no                   13%
                                          13%               31%
                                                            31%               12%
                                                                              12%                0%
                                                                                                 0%                3%
                                                                                                                   3%               19%
                                                                                                                                    19%
      n
      n               55
                      55                   71
                                           71                85
                                                             85                34
                                                                               34                29
                                                                                                 29                16
                                                                                                                   16

40                                                                                                                                            41
                                                                                                                                              41
                 yes, with
                    great            41%             30%              25%             36%            42%             25%
                 yes, with
                 certainty
     2nd
                    great            41%             30%              25%             36%            42%             25%
   survey       with some
     2nd         certainty           52%             57%              63%             64%            46%             63%
                 certainty
   survey       with some
                     no               7%
                                     52%             13%
                                                     57%              12%
                                                                      63%              0%
                                                                                      64%            13%
                                                                                                     46%             13%
                                                                                                                     63%
                 certainty
      n              122              30              59                39             24             16
                     no               7%             13%              12%              0%            13%             13%
                 yes, with
      n              122              30              59                39             24             16
                    great            41%             24%              24%             38%            63%             50%
                 yes, with
                 certainty
     3 rd
                    great            41%             24%              24%             38%            63%             50%
   survey       with some
     3 rd        certainty           52%             40%              52%             60%            31%             50%
                 certainty
   survey       with some
                     no               7%
                                     52%             36%
                                                     40%              24%
                                                                      52%              2%
                                                                                      60%             6%
                                                                                                     31%               0%
                                                                                                                     50%
                 certainty
      n              165              25              21                53             16             10
                     no               7%             36%              24%              2%             6%               0%
Figuren5.3.9 shows that
                     165more than a half
                                      25 of respondents
                                                      21can calculate their
                                                                        53  income and expenses
                                                                                       16       with the
                                                                                                      10 same level of certainty.
the percentage of respondents who can calculate their income better than expenses is higher than the percentage of respondents
figure 5.3.9 shows that more than a half of respondents can calculate their income and expenses with the same level of certainty.
who can calculate their expenses better than income.
the percentage of respondents who can calculate their income better than expenses is higher than the percentage of respondents
who can calculate their expenses better than income.
figuRe 5.3.9.
FIGURe 5.3.9. COMpARISOn OF CeRtAIntY OF
              coMpaRisonofceRtaintyof    CALCULAtIOn
                                       calculation ofOF InCOMe
                                                      incoMe   AnD
                                                             and   eXpenSeS
                                                                 eXpenses
InteRVentIOn (n=211)
inteRvention (n=211)                                                                    contRol (n=79)
                                                                                        COntROL (n=79)




   the 2
At the
at     2nd
         nd
            survey the
            survey  the percentage   of respondents
                         percentage of  respondents who      know their
                                                       who know     their payments
                                                                          payments on    personal loans
                                                                                     on personal           with great
                                                                                                    loans with            certainty increased
                                                                                                                  great certainty    increased as as
compared to
compared       the baseline
            to the baseline survey  by 6%
                             survey by 6% in  intervention group
                                                            group and
                                           in intervention              declined by
                                                                   and declined      8% in
                                                                                        in control
                                                                                  by 8%              group. at
                                                                                            control group.    At the 3rd survey
                                                                                                                 the 3 rd
                                                                                                                          survey this percentage
                                                                                                                                 this percentage
declined  in both  groups. this decline occurred    due to the increased  percentage  of borrowers    that  repaid  their   loans.
declined in both groups. this decline occurred due to the increased percentage of borrowers that repaid their loans. the increase  the increase inin
the percentage
the percentage of   respondents who
                 of respondents   who know    their payments
                                       know their   payments on   loans, debts
                                                               on loans, debts with great certainty
                                                                                           certainty in
                                                                               with great                intervention group
                                                                                                      in intervention     group at  the 2
                                                                                                                                at the       survey,
                                                                                                                                        2nd survey,
                                                                                                                                          nd


and the
and  the decline  of the
         decline of  the percentage   at the
                                         the 3
                          percentage at           survey as
                                             3rd survey
                                               rd
                                                         as compared
                                                            compared to   the 2
                                                                       to the 2nd survey
                                                                               nd
                                                                                          can reflect
                                                                                  survey can           the positive
                                                                                               reflect the             impact of
                                                                                                             positive impact        consultations,
                                                                                                                                of consultations,
       declined with
which declined
which                  time.
                 with time.




                                                                                                                                                  41

42
     decline occurred due
     decline occurred      to the
                      due to      increased percentage
                              the increased   percentage ofof borrowers
                                                              borrowers that repaid their
                                                                        that repaid        loans. The
                                                                                     their loans.  The increase
                                                                                                        increase
     in the percentage of  respondents
     in the percentage of respondents    who
                                         who   know
                                               know  their
                                                     their payments
                                                           payments   on
                                                                      on loans,
                                                                         loans, debts
                                                                                debts  with
                                                                                       with  great
                                                                                             great   certainty
                                                                                                     certainty in
                                                                                                               in
                                    nd                                                            rd
     intervention group  at  the  2 nd survey, and the decline of the percentage at the 3rd survey as
                         at the 2 survey, and the decline of the percentage at the 3 survey as
     intervention group nd
     compared to
     compared      the 2
                to the      survey can
                       2nd survey    can reflect
                                         reflect the
                                                 the positive
                                                      positive impact  of consultations,
                                                               impact of                  which declined
                                                                          consultations, which    declined with
                                                                                                             with
     time.
     time.
          FIGURE 5.3.10. “DO YOU KNOW HOW MUCH REPAYMENT YOU OWE ON YOUR OWN LOANS AND
FIGUReFIGURE        YOU“DO
                5.3.10.
       5.3.10. “DO         YOU
                        KnOW   KNOW
                              hOW    HOWRepAYMent
                                  MUCh    MUCH REPAYMENT YOU
                                                   YOU OWe OnOWE  ON
                                                               YOUR  YOUR
                                                                    OWn   OWN AnD
                                                                              LOANS
                                                                        LOAnS       ANDthIS
                                                                                  DeBtS
                              DEBTS THIS
MOnth?”InteRVentIOn. n=211 DEBTS         MONTH?” INTERVENTION.
                                    THIS MONTH?” INTERVENTION. N=211
                                                               N=211
                                             Baseline
                                             Baseline                      Interim
                                                                           Interim                       Final
                                                                                                         Final

     Yes, with great
     Yes, with great certainty
                     certainty

     With some
     With some certainty
               certainty
     No
     No

        loan
     No loan
     No


FIGUReFIGURE    5.3.11.
      5.3.11. “DO
      FIGURE    5.3.11. “DO YOU
                        “DO
                  YOU KnOW   hOW
                            YOU KNOW
                                 MUChHOW
                                KNOW      MUCH
                                          MUCH YOU
                                      RepAYMent
                                      HOW       REPAYMENT
                                                REPAYMENT YOU
                                                          YOU OWE
                                                   OWe On YOUR OWnON
                                                              OWE     YOUR
                                                                   LOAnS
                                                                   ON    AnD
                                                                      YOUR OWN  LOANS
                                                                             DeBtS
                                                                           OWN  LOANS   AND
                                                                                   thIS MOnth?”
                                                                                        AND
COntROL. n=89                     DEBTS THIS
                                  DEBTS      MONTH?” CONTROL.
                                        THIS MONTH?” CONTROL. N=89
                                                              N=89
                                            Baseline
                                            Baseline                      Interim
                                                                          Interim                       Final
                                                                                                        Final

     Yes, with great
     Yes, with great certainty
                     certainty

     With some
     With some certainty
               certainty

     No
     No
            Report on Main Results of the Survey on the Impact of Counseling on Knowledge, Feelings and Actions of Over-
     No
     No loan
        loan                                                                                  Indebted Borrowers, 2016

          The level of awareness of the amount of payments on personal loans is higher than on general loans
the level of awareness of the amount of payments on personal loans is higher than on general loans of the household (family).
          of the household (family). The percentage of respondents that don’t know how much repayment
                                                                                                                       37
                                                                                                                       37as in
the percentage of respondents that don’t know how much repayment their household owes declined by 7% at the final survey
          their household owes declined by 7% at the final survey as compared to the baseline survey
           to the baseline group,
compared intervention      survey in intervention
                                    whereas        group, whereas
                                               it remained        it remained
                                                             unchanged      inunchanged  in control group.
                                                                               control group.
FIGURe 5.3.12.
         FIGURE“DO YOU KnOW
                  5.3.12.     hOWKNOW
                          “DO YOU      RepAYMent
                                  MUChHOW        YOUR hOUSehOLD
                                            MUCH REPAYMENT       OWeS On LOAnS
                                                           YOUR HOUSEHOLD  OWESAnD
                                                                                 ONDeBtS
                                                                                    LOANSthIS
                                                                                           AND
MOnth?” InteRVentIOn. n=211       DEBTS THIS MONTH?” INTERVENTION. N=211
                                                    Baseline                         Interim                      Final


           Yes, with great certainty

           With some certainty

           No

           No loan


           FIGURE 5.3.13. “DO YOU KNOW HOW MUCH REPAYMENT YOUR HOUSEHOLD OWES ON LOANS AND
                                     DEBTS THIS MONTH?” CONTROL. N=89
                                                 Baseline                      Interim                          Final

           Yes, with great certainty

           With some certainty

42         No

           No loan
       With some certainty

       No

       No loan

FIGURe 5.3.13. “DO
     FIGURE        YOU“DO
               5.3.13. KnOW hOW
                          YOU    MUCh
                              KNOW HOWRepAYMent YOUR hOUSehOLD
                                        MUCH REPAYMENT         OWeS On LOAnS
                                                       YOUR HOUSEHOLD        AnD
                                                                       OWES ON   DeBtSAND
                                                                                       thIS
                                                                               LOANS
MOnth?” COntROL. n=89            DEBTS THIS MONTH?” CONTROL. N=89
                                                   Baseline                        Interim                           Final

       Yes, with great certainty

       With some certainty

       No

       No loan


        There
there are              no significant
                  are cant
            no signifi     differences indifferences
                                          the knowledgein of
                                                           the  knowledge
                                                             repayments     of repayments
                                                                        on own               on own
                                                                               loans of households      loans
                                                                                                   in terms     of households
                                                                                                            of the                 in
                                                                                                                   levels of financial
        terms of the levels of financial literacy. This situation shows that the majority of respondents do
literacy. this situation shows that the majority of respondents do know how much repayment they own on loans regardless of their
        know how much repayment they own on loans regardless of their level of financial literacy.
level of financial literacy.

table5.3.9 shows
       Table      that shows
              5.3.9    the majority
                                that   the85%)
                                    (over      of respondents
                                           majority             that know
                                                       (over 85%)           how much repayment
                                                                       of respondents              they owe
                                                                                             that know     howwith great certainty
                                                                                                                 much    repayment also
       they owe with great certainty also know with great certainty how much repayment their household
know with  great certainty how much   repayment their household   owes. the  majority of respondents  that know how   much  repayment
       owes. The
their household  owesmajority    of respondents
                       on loans “with               that
                                      some certainty”     know
                                                      or don’t    how
                                                               know     much
                                                                     at all      repayment
                                                                            do know  about theirtheir  household
                                                                                                 personal            owes
                                                                                                           loans “with greaton  loans
                                                                                                                             certainty”.
       “with some certainty” or don’t know at all do know about their personal loans “with great certainty”.

tABLe5.3.9. DO YOU KnOW hOW MUCh RepAYMent YOU OWe On YOUR peRSOnAL LOAnS AnD DeBtS thIS
MOnth? & DO YOU KnOW hOW MUCh RepAYMent YOU OWe On YOUR peRSOnAL LOAnS AnD DeBtS thIS
MOnth?

                                                      Intervention                                          Control
                                           Do you know how much repayment                    Do you know how much repayment
                                           your household owes on loans and                   your household owes on loans and
                                                    debts this month?                                  debts this month?
                                          Yes, with                                          Yes, with    With
                                                     With some          no                                                 no
                                            great                 no                           great      some      no
                                                     certainty         loan                                               loan
                                          certainty                                          certainty certainty
    Do you        Yes, with
                       DO YOU 89%
                    great
 know how TABLE 5.3.9.        KNOW HOW 55%     43%
                                         MUCH REPAYMENT       90%
                                                        YOU OWE        63%
                                                                  ON YOUR      100%LOANS
                                                                           PERSONAL
    much          certainty
              AND DEBTS THIS MONTH? & DO YOU KNOW HOW MUCH REPAYMENT YOU OWE ON YOUR
 repayment   1st
                    With                           PERSONAL LOANS AND DEBTS THIS MONTH?
   you owe survey   some      9%       37%     18%            10%      38%      0%
   on your        certainty
   personal          no       2%       8%      39%             0%       0%      0%    38
  loans and
  debts this n       134       49       28            58       16        5
   month?




                                                                                                                                      43
                    Yes, with
                      great                 94%            70%         69%        0%         85%           74%         50%        0%
                    certainty
               2nd    With
             survey   some                   5%            26%         27%        0%         11%           22%          0%        0%
    Do you          certainty
 know how
                       no                    1%            4%           4%       0%           4%            4%         50%        0%
    much
 repayment           no loan                 0%            0%           0%      100%          0%            0%         0%        100%
   you owe      n      121                   53            26           11       46           27             4          2
   on your          Yes, with
   personal    3rd
                      great                 88%            34%         58%        0%         97%           52%         60%        0%
  loans and  survey
                    certainty
  debts this          With
   month?             some                  11%            62%          8%        0%          3%           48%         20%        0%
                    certainty
                       no                    1%            3%          33%       0%           0%            0%         20%        0%
                     no loan                 0%            0%          0%       100%          0%            0%         0%        100%
                n      101                   61            12           37       33           23             5          18

Figures 5.3.14-5.4.15show information about the knowledge of respondents about their rights when interacting with a credit
institution. Answers by respondents who think they have the right to request to reschedule the debt and those who think otherwise
divided almost by halves at the baseline survey. the percentage of respondents who think they have the right to request to reschedule
the debt increased by 11% in intervention group and by 5% in control group at the 3rd survey as compared to the baseline level.


FIGURe 5.3.14. IihavetheRighttoReQuest
figuRe 5.3.14.   hAVe the RIGht tO ReQUeSt MY
                                          My  FInAnCIALinstitution
                                             financial              (BAnK, MicRofinance
                                                        InStItUtIOn(banK,               ORGAnIZAtIOn,
                                                                           MICROFInAnCe oRganiZation,
cRedit UnIOn)
CReDIt union) tO    Reschedule MY
                 to ReSCheDULe  My pAYMentS
                                    payMents
InteRVentIOn
inteRvention (n=211)
             (n=211)                                                            contRol (n=79)
                                                                                COntROL (n=79)




the percentage of respondents who think they have the right to request to restructure their debt varied slightly in both groups
and percentage
the              of respondents
    is equal to about            who thinkgroup
                       50% in intervention       and the
                                           they have 40% right  to request
                                                           in control      to restructure their debt varied slightly in both groups
                                                                      group.
and is equal to about 50% in intervention group and 40% in control group.
figuRe 5.3.15. ihavetheRighttoReQuestMyfinancialinstitution (banK, MicRofinanceoRganiZation,
cReditunion) toRestRuctuReMydebt
inteRvention (n=211)                                                            contRol (n=79)
44
the percentage of respondents who think they have the right to request to restructure their debt varied slightly in both groups
the percentage of respondents who think they have the right to request to restructure their debt varied slightly in both groups
and is equal to about 50% in intervention group and 40% in control group.
and is equal to about 50% in intervention group and 40% in control group.
FIGURe
figuRe 5.3.15.
        5.3.15.I hAVe                                               (BAnK, MICROFInAnCe
                      the RIGht tO ReQUeSt MY FInAnCIAL InStItUtIOn(banK,
                  ihavetheRighttoReQuestMyfinancialinstitution                          ORGAnIZAtIOn,
                                                                           MicRofinanceoRganiZation,
figuRe
CReDIt  5.3.15.
       UnIOn)     ihavetheRighttoReQuestMyfinancialinstitution
                 tO ReStRUCtURe
cReditunion) toRestRuctuReMydebt MY  DeBt                          (banK,  MicRofinanceoRganiZation,
cReditunion)
InteRVentIOn    toRestRuctuReMydebt
             (n=211)                                           COntROL (n=79)
inteRvention (n=211)                                                                contRol (n=79)
inteRvention (n=211)                                                                contRol (n=79)




the changes
the           in answers
     changes in  answers to  the question
                          to the question about the right
                                                     right to
                                          about the           forgive part
                                                           to forgive      of or
                                                                              or all
                                                                      part of        debts are
                                                                                 all debts  are similar in intervention
                                                                                                similar in intervention and  control groups.
                                                                                                                         and control  groups.
the  changes
     percentage of
the percentagein answers  to the
                  of respondents question
                     respondents who      about
                                  who agreed    the
                                       agreed with   right
                                               with the
                                                    the question
                                                           to forgive part
                                                                   declined at
                                                        question declined  of or all
                                                                               the 3
                                                                            at the   debts
                                                                                     3rd survey
                                                                                      rd    are similar
                                                                                         survey as      in intervention
                                                                                                    compared to
                                                                                                 as compared    to the   and control
                                                                                                                       baseline level
                                                                                                                   the baseline       groups.
                                                                                                                                      by 21%
                                                                                                                                level by 21%
the
the
in intervention   of respondents
     percentagegroup    and  20%  who
                                 in    agreed
                                    control    with the question declined at the 3rd survey as compared to the baseline level by 21%
                                            group.
in intervention group and 20% in control group.
in intervention group and 20% in control group.
figuRe
FIGURe  5.3.16.
       5.3.16.        the RIGht tO ReQUeSt MY FInAnCIAL InStItUtIOn(banK,
                  ihavetheRighttoReQuestMyfinancialinstitution
               I hAVe                                                      MicRofinanceoRganiZation,
                                                                    (BAnK, MICROFInAnCe ORGAnIZAtIOn,
figuRe  5.3.16.
cReditunion)      ihavetheRighttoReQuestMyfinancialinstitution
                tofoRgive  paRt oR  all of My debt                 (banK,  MicRofinanceoRganiZation,
CReDIt UnIOn)    tO FORGIVe pARt OR  ALL OF MY
cReditunion) tofoRgive paRt oR all of My debt  DeBt
inteRvention (n=211)
InteRVentIOn (n=211)                                                                        (n=79)
                                                                                    contRol (n=79)
                                                                                    COntROL
inteRvention (n=211)                                                                contRol (n=79)




46
46
Figures 5.3.17 and 5.3.18 show answers to the questions about the borrower’s rights to a monthly loan statement and its explanation.
the majority (75%-85%) of respondents in both groups think they have the right to a monthly debt statement. this indicator varied
slightly at the 2nd survey as compared to the baseline level and declined by 20% at the 3rd survey. however, we cannot say this decline
was caused by the change of opinions in respondents; it was likely to be caused by the increase in the number of respondents who
repaid their loans.

In intervention group the percentage of respondents who think they have the right to the explanation of the loan statement
declined by 14% at the 2nd survey as compared to the baseline level. this decline was caused also by the increase (6%) in the number
of respondents who don’t think they have the right to the explanation of the loan statement. At the 3rd survey the percentage
of respondents who agree with this statement also declined as compared to the 2nd survey. In control group the percentage of
respondents who agree with the statement that they have the right to the explanation of the loan statement slightly declined.

It should be noted that the percentage of respondents who think they have the right to the explanation is higher than that of
respondents who think they have the right to the loan statement in both groups. this situation is contradictory and can be explained
by the fact that not all respondents understood what the loan statement meant.


                                                                                                                                           45
respondents who agree
respondents who agree with
                      with the
                           the statement that they
                               statement that they have
                                                   have the
                                                        the right
                                                            right to the explanation
                                                                  to the explanation of
                                                                                     of the
                                                                                        the loan
                                                                                            loan statement slightly declined.
                                                                                                 statement slightly declined.
it should be
it should  be noted
               noted that
                      that the
                            the percentage
                                percentage of   respondents who
                                             of respondents    who think
                                                                    think they
                                                                          they have
                                                                                have the  right to
                                                                                     the right     the explanation
                                                                                                to the   explanation is
                                                                                                                     is higher
                                                                                                                        higher than  that of
                                                                                                                               than that  of
respondents    who  think  they have the right to the loan statement  in both groups. this situation is contradictory and  can be explained
respondents who think they have the right to the loan statement in both groups. this situation is contradictory and can be explained
by  the fact
by the       that not
        fact that not all
                      all respondents
                          respondents understood
                                       understood what     the loan
                                                     what the       statement meant.
                                                               loan statement  meant.

FIGURe 5.3.17.
figuRe
figuRe         i
       5.3.17. I have
                 have the
               i hAVe the RIGht
                          Right to a
                                   a MOnthLY
                          Right tO
                                to A Monthly banK
                                     Monthly BAnK stateMent
                                             banK StAteMent about
                                                  stateMent ABOUt My
                                                            about MY debt
                                                                  My DeBt
                                                                     debt
inteRvention (n=211)
InteRVentIOn (n=211)
inteRvention                                                                            contRol
                                                                                        COntROL (n=79)
                                                                                        contRol (n=79)




figuRe 5.3.18.
figuRe 5.3.18. i  have the
                i have     Right to
                       the Right to an
                                    an eXplanation
                                       eXplanation of  the said
                                                    of the      banK stateMent
                                                           said banK stateMent (aneXplanationRegaRdin
                                                                               (aneXplanationRegaRdin
FIGURe 5.3.18. I hAVe the
gtheloanaMount,           RIGht tO An eXpLAnAtIOn OF the SAID BAnK StAteMent (An eXpLAnAtIOn ReGARDInG
                       nuMbeRofpayMents,
gtheloanaMount, nuMbeRofpayMents,
the LOAn AMOUnt, nUMBeR
effective                      OF pAYMentS, eFFeCtIVe InteReSt RAte etC.)
           inteRest Rate
effective inteRest    Rate etc.)
                           etc.)
InteRVentIOn (n=211)
inteRvention                                                                            COntROL
                                                                                        contRol (n=79)
inteRvention (n=211)                                                                    contRol (n=79)




the  question about
the question  about thethe right
                            right of
                                  of respondents
                                     respondents to    make a
                                                    to make  a complaint
                                                               complaint was
                                                                          was asked
                                                                               asked in    order to
                                                                                        in order   to identify
                                                                                                      identify the
                                                                                                               the personality
                                                                                                                    personality type of borrowers,
                                                                                                                                type of borrowers,
the
i.e. question about    the  right of respondents    to make  a complaint  was  asked    in order   to identify the  personality type    borrowers,
                                                                                                                                     ofthe
     whether they  generally    tend
i.e. whether they generally tend to file complaints to any organizations. the majority of respondents think they have the right
                                      to file complaints  to any  organizations.  the   majority    of respondents    think they have      right to
                                                                                                                                                 to
i.e. whether
make         they generally
       complaints.  it is       tend to
                          impossible   to  le complaints
                                         fistate that     to
                                                      there  any
                                                            are   organizations.
                                                                certain changes   the
                                                                                  in     majority of opinion
                                                                                      respondents      respondents
                                                                                                                as thethink they have
                                                                                                                       percentage  of  the right
                                                                                                                                      people  whoto
make complaints. it is impossible to state that there are certain changes in respondents opinion as the percentage of people who
make complaints.
have                                   to state that there
                    It is impossible among                  are certain changes   in respondents       opinion as the percentage of people who
      repaid their
have repaid        loans increased
             their loans   increased among thosethose who
                                                       who participated
                                                            participated in
                                                                         in the 2nd and
                                                                            the 2    and 3     follow-up surveys.
                                                                                           3rd follow-up
                                                                                  nd        rd
                                                                                                          surveys.
have repaid their loans increased among those who participated in the 2 and 3 follow-up surveys.
                                                                                  nd        rd
                                                                                                                                                  47
                                                                                                                                                  47
FIGURe 5.3.19.
figuRe         i hAVe
       5.3.19. I have the Right tO
                      the RIGht    MaKe A
                                to MAKe   coMplaint
                                        a COMpLAInt
inteRvention (n=211)
InteRVentIOn (n=211)                                                                            (n=79)
                                                                                        contRol (n=79)
                                                                                        COntROL




46 first survey with an intervention group showed low awareness of existing services that are available to guide borrowers to cope
the
with loan repayment difficulties. 89% of them didn’t know what services existed. after the consultations the awareness percentage
started to grow. thus, by the 3rd survey the percentage increased by 43%. in the control group the percentage of respondents who
the first survey with an intervention group showed low awareness of existing services that are available to guide borrowers to cope
with loan repayment difficulties. 89% of them didn’t know what services existed. After the consultations the awareness percentage
started to grow. thus, by the 3rd survey the percentage increased by 43%. In the control group the percentage of respondents who
are not aware of the consulting services staid more or less the same as during the 1st survey.

the respondents see banks and MFIs, where they took their loans, as the main source of consulting support on coping with loan
repayment difficulties. the percentage of respondents, who consider their bank, MFI to be a source of assistance in this matter,
tends to grow. this percentage in the intervention group increased by 43% by the 3rd survey in comparison with the 1st one. 11%
of respondents replied that they consider the International Finance Corporation, that conducted a community fair on financial
planning, to be such a service for them.


FIGURe 5.3.10. ARe YOU AWARe OF AnY SeRVICeS thAt ARe AVAILABLe tO GUIDe YOU tO COpe WIth RepAYMent
DIFFICULtIeS?
                    Intervention group                                                    Control group
                        I don’t know                     89%                               I don’t know                 68%
                             nGO                         5%                               Bank experts                  23%
                        Bank experts                     3%           1 survey                Friends                   5%
  1 survey            Do not need any
                                                         1%                                    Lawyer                    4%
                       consultations
                            Lawyer                       1%                                I don’t know                 66%
                negotiations, consultations,
                                                         1%           2 survey             Bank experts                 25%
                           booklets
                        I don’t know                     59%                                  Lawyer                     9%
                        Bank experts                     25%                               I don’t know                 65%
                   International Finance                              3 survey
                                                         11%                               Bank experts                 35%
                        Corporation
                            Lawyer                       3%
  2 survey
                      Do not need any
                                                         1%
                       consultations
                Commercial on tV regarding
                                                         1%
                    financial difficulties
                          Relatives                       1%
                        I don’t know                     46%
                        Bank experts                     38%
                   International Finance
                                                         11%
                        Corporation
                            Lawyer                       2%
  3 survey
                      Do not need any
                                                         1%
                       consultations
                           Friends                       1%
                 Creditor rights protection
                                                         1%
                            society

                                                                                                                                 47
the question on whether the respondents expected the total amount of loan repayments to be lower than the real amount was
asked in order to find out if the borrowers with loan repayment difficulties had a deliberate approach to taking a loan. the results
of the answer to this question (figure 5.3.11) in the intervention and control groups show that the majority of borrowers with loan
repayment difficulties (around 65%) didn’t expect the amount of loan repayment to as large as it actually was.

this percentage decreased by the final survey to reach 41% in both groups. the decrease of number of borrowers with the loan
repayment amount exceeding their expectations may be caused by the fact that, having had their previous negative experience,
they started to read the loan conditions more carefully.

FIGURe 5.3.11. When I WAS tAKInG A LOAn, I thOUGht/eXpeCteD thAt the tOtAL LOAn RepAYMent AMOUnt
WOULD Be SMALLeR (I.e. At the MOMent OF tAKInG the LOAn I DIDn’t eXpeCt the RepAYMent AMOUnt WOULD
Be SO hIGh)

                                                                              Intervention                      Control
                                                       Yes                        64%                            65%
            1 survey n=211
              st
                                                       no                         29%                            35%
                                                  I don’t know                     7%
                                                                                  100%                           100%
                               tOtAL
                                                                                   211                            79
      2nd survey, n=159 (only those                     Yes                       58%                            49%
     borrowers were interviewed who
      took a loan during the period                     no                         40%                            51%
     between the 1st and 2nd surveys)
                                                                                  100%                           100%
                               tOtAL
                                                                                   159                            53
       3rd survey, n=93 (only those
     borrowers were interviewed who
                                                        Yes                        41%                            41%
      took a loan during the period
     between the 2nd and 3rd surveys)
                                                        no                        59%                            59%
                                                                                  100%                           100%
                               tOtAL
                                                                                   93                             44


Figures 5.3.20 and 5.3.21 display the dynamics of the income level change. In this case the income was measured as per the
associative scale, i.e. income represents a perception of the respondents’ income level rather than the real income estimation.

the main part of respondents (about 80%) identify their income level as “enough money for food, but purchase of clothes causes
difficulties”, “enough money for food and clothes, but we can’t afford purchasing home appliances, furniture”, “enough money for
home appliances, but we can’t afford buying a car”.




48
                                                       total
                          FIGURE 5.3.20. “PLEASE, EVALUATE THE FINANCIAL                                     93       CONDITION OF         44 YOUR FAMILY”
                                                                                                                                                                                     INTERVENTIO
                       figures 5.3.20 and 5.3.21 display the dynamics of the  INTERVENTION. N=211
                                                                                  income  level change. in this case the income   was  measured as per the
                       associative scale, i.e. income represents a perception of the respondents’ income level rather than the real income estimation.
                        FIGURE 5.3.20. “PLEASE, EVALUATE THE FINANCIAL CONDITION OF YOUR FAMILY”
                       the main part of respondents (about 80%) identify   INTERVENTION.               N=211
                                                                             their income level as “enough  money for food, but purchase of clothes causes
                       difficulties”, “enough money for food and clothes, but we can’t afford purchasing home appliances, furniture”, “enough money for
                       home appliances, but we can’t afford buying a car”.
                “pLeASe,
 FIGURe 5.3.20.figuRe       eVALUAte
                      5.3.20.             the FInAnCIAL
                              “please, evaluate the financial COnDItIOn     OF YOUR
                                                              condition of youR faMily”FAMILY”  InteRVentIOn.
                                                                                       inteRvention. n=211    n=211




                          FIGURE 5.3.21. “PLEASE, EVALUATE THE FINANCIAL CONDITION OF YOUR FAMILY”
 figuRe 5.3.21.
              50                                 CONTROL. of
                “please, evaluate the financial condition    youR faMily” contRol. n=79
                                                          N=79
                        FIGURE 5.3.21. “PLEASE, EVALUATE THE FINANCIAL CONDITION OF YOUR FAMILY”
 FIGURe5.3.21.
figuRe  5.3.21.“please,
                “pLeASe,evaluate
                         eVALUAtethe
                                  thefinancial
                                      FInAnCIALcondition
                                                CONTROL. of
                                                 COnDItIOn  youR
                                                           OF
                                                         N=79    faMily”
                                                              YOUR       contRol.
                                                                   FAMILY”        n=79
                                                                           COntROL. n=79




 figure 5.3.22 contains the information on income level change in relation to the income level in the 1st survey. thus, we can see that
    Figure 5.3.22 contains the information on income level change in relation to the income level in the
 the percentage      of respondents         whose     income       increased     is higher    in theto  intervention      group      than     in the   control    group.       see that of
                                                                                                                                                                            percentage
    1st 5.3.22
figure
 Figure
   Figure survey.
           5.3.22contains
                       Thus,
                  contains
               5.3.22
                             the  information
                                 we
                               the
                          contains       the see
                                        can
                                    information    on on income
                                                        that
                                               information  incomethelevel
                                                                       levelchange
                                                                        percentage
                                                                       on      change
                                                                            income
                                                                                       in in
                                                                                          relation
                                                                                         levelof   respondents
                                                                                              relation
                                                                                                    change
                                                                                                          the
                                                                                                          to theincome
                                                                                                                  inincomelevel
                                                                                                                          whose
                                                                                                                      relation
                                                                                                                                   in
                                                                                                                               level   the
                                                                                                                                      to
                                                                                                                                             1st
                                                                                                                                         income
                                                                                                                                         in the
                                                                                                                                            the   survey.
                                                                                                                                                  1   survey.
                                                                                                                                                   income
                                                                                                                                                             thus,
                                                                                                                                                    st increased    wewe
                                                                                                                                                                thus,
                                                                                                                                                                level
                                                                                                                                                                         can
                                                                                                                                                                          in higher
                                                                                                                                                                         is   can
                                                                                                                                                                              thesee that
 respondents       whose    income     stayed    at  the    same     level  as  during    the         survey is higher
                                                                                                1stintervention              in than
                                                                                                                                 the intervention          group    than    in the control
   1in   the intervention       wegroup       than        in   the    control      group.       Percentage           of  respondents               whose       income        stayed
the
 thepercentage
      percentage    of
                     ofrespondents
                         respondents     whose     income       increased     is higher    in the                      group              in the  control    group.   percentage      of of
     st
        survey.      Thus,            canwhose
                                             see      income
                                                     that      the increased
                                                                      percentage is higherof in  the intervention
                                                                                               respondents                group
                                                                                                                      whose          than
                                                                                                                                    income   in the    control
                                                                                                                                                   increased     group.    percentage
                                                                                                                                                                    is higher
 group.
    atthe the
respondents percentage
                same
                 whose     of
                          levelrespondents
                          income    as   during
                                     stayed      whose
                                              atatthe   the
                                                         same income
                                                                  st
                                                                1 level  decreased
                                                                      survey
                                                                         asasduringis theis  lower
                                                                                        higher
                                                                                            1st        in
                                                                                                  st in the
                                                                                                           the   intervention
                                                                                                                  intervention       group.groupthis    indicator
                                                                                                                                                       than          tends
                                                                                                                                                                     the
                                                                                                                                                                in than       to decrease
                                                                                                                                                                             control
   in
 respondents  intervention
                  whose     incomegroupstayedthan      in
                                                     the    the
                                                            same   control
                                                                     level      group.
                                                                                during      Percentage
                                                                                          the   1survey
                                                                                                     survey    higher
                                                                                                            is is of        the
                                                                                                                         in in
                                                                                                                      respondents
                                                                                                                   higher       theinterventionwhose
                                                                                                                                       intervention    group
                                                                                                                                                           income
                                                                                                                                                          group than   in  the
                                                                                                                                                                        stayed
                                                                                                                                                                            in  control
                                                                                                                                                                               the control
 in the
    group.
group.    intervention
                Percentage
          percentage     ofgroup     and
                                    of
                             respondents   increase
                                         respondents
                                              whose      in  the
                                                           income
                                                               st  control
                                                                  whose       group.
                                                                              income
                                                                       decreased      isthese
                                                                                         lower    results
                                                                                            decreased
                                                                                                   in   the  demonstrate
                                                                                                                 is  lower
                                                                                                             intervention        the
                                                                                                                                in
                                                                                                                                group.  fact
                                                                                                                                      the      that
                                                                                                                                            this      the
                                                                                                                                              intervention
                                                                                                                                                   indicatorlevel  of
                                                                                                                                                                 tendsprosperity
                                                                                                                                                                    group.to     Thisin the
                                                                                                                                                                              decrease
   at   the    same     level    as    during       the      1     survey       is  higher       in    the    intervention
 group. percentage of respondents whose income decreased is lower in the intervention group. this indicator tends to decrease         group        than     in   the    control
    indicator
 intervention
in the             tends
                  group       to of
                           raised decrease
                                    more    thanin  ininthe
                                                         the    intervention
                                                               control   group.      group       and demonstrate
                                                                                                          increase
                                                                                                             is lowerin       the     control        group.      These       results
    theintervention
 ingroup.      Percentage
          intervention   group
                           group   and
                                    and increase
                                       respondents
                                          increase        the
                                                         in    whose
                                                             thecontrol
                                                                   control group.
                                                                           income
                                                                              group. these     results
                                                                                         decreased
                                                                                        these     results demonstrate       the
                                                                                                                           in      fact
                                                                                                                                 the
                                                                                                                                 the       that   the
                                                                                                                                          intervention
                                                                                                                                        fact   that     level
                                                                                                                                                      the     of
                                                                                                                                                           level   prosperity
                                                                                                                                                                group.       This
                                                                                                                                                                   of prosperity in the
                                                                                                                                                                                     in the
    demonstrate
   indicator
intervention      tends
                group     the
                            to
                         raised  fact
                                decrease
                                  more   that
                                          than   the
                                                in
                                                 in  the
                                                     the  level
                                                            control  of
                                                             interventionprosperity
                                                                       group.      group    inandthe     intervention
                                                                                                       increase       in  the   group
                                                                                                                                  control     raised
                                                                                                                                                group.    more
                                                                                                                                                             These  than      in
                                                                                                                                                                        results   the
 intervention group raised more than in the control group.
    control group.
   demonstrate          the fact that the level of prosperity in the intervention group raised more than in the
 figuRe 5.3.22. ChAnGe
 FIGURe         change OF    incoMe LeVeL
                         of InCOMe         in COMpARISOn
                                    level In              with the InCOMe
                                                                    incoMe LeVeL
                                              coMpaRison WIth                     RegisteRed DURInG
                                                                            level ReGISteReD duRing the
   control group.
 fiRst
 FIRSt suRvey
       SURVeY
figuRe 5.3.22. change
           FIGURE       of CHANGE
                   5.3.22. incoMe level         LEVEL IN with
                                         in coMpaRison
                                   OF INCOME                  the incoMe
                                                         COMPARISON       level
                                                                       WITH THERegisteRed  duRing the
                                                                                 INCOME LEVEL
  inteRvention
fiRst suRvey
  InteRVentIOn (n=211)               contRol (n=79)
                                     COntROL
                                 REGISTERED    DURING  THE  FIRST SURVEY
          FIGURE 5.3.22. CHANGE OF INCOME LEVEL IN COMPARISON WITH THE INCOME LEVEL
     INTERVENTION
 inteRvention (n=211) (N=211)  contRol (n=79)
                            REGISTERED  DURING  THE FIRST(N=79)
                                               CONTROL    SURVEY
    INTERVENTION (N=211)                      CONTROL (N=79)




                                                                                                                                                                                44
                                                                                                                                                                           44           49
Findings of chapter 5.3:

      •   According to the results of the first (initial) survey in the intervention group, the percentage of respondents with high level
      of financial literacy was quite low (26%). This percentage was higher in the control group (50%). The evaluation results show
      general raise of the respondents’ financial literacy level in both intervention and control groups. The intervention group tends to
      have a more significant raise of financial literacy (+52%) then the control group (+24%).

      •   Respondents in Talas tend to have a higher level of financial literacy as well as a more significant raise of this indicator, than in
      Naryn.

      •   There is a general increase in percentage of respondents who are able to calculate their income and expenses.

      •   The major part of the respondents is able to calculate both their income and expenses with similar certainty. Among those
      respondents, who cannot calculate their income and expenses with similar certainty, are able to determine their income more
      precisely than their expenses.

      •   The percentage of respondents who know exactly the amounts of their debts repayments has increased in the intervention
      group by 6% by the 2nd survey compared to the initial level, and decreased by 8% in the control group. By the 3rd survey this
      percentage decreased in both groups.

      •   Respondents who know exactly the amounts of their repayments are generally well aware of the whole household repayments.

      •   The majority of respondents (around 65%) who had difficulty with loan repayments in both groups didn’t expect the amounts
      of loan repayments would be as significant as it appeared to be in reality. As the final survey showed, this percentage decreased
      to 41% in both groups. Such a decrease may be caused by the heightened attention of the borrowers to the loan conditions.

      •   The income level analysis showed the increase of the percentage of respondents who raised their income level above the
      income that was registered during the initial survey. The increase was higher in the intervention group than in the control group.




50	
      5.4.Perception
      This chapter
      This  chapter will     describe the
                        will describe        perception by
                                        the perception        the borrowers
                                                          by the              having problems
                                                                                      problems with
                                                                  borrowers having                      debts repayment
                                                                                                  with debts    repayment of     of
5.4.  their loans
      their        PerCePtIon
                      feasibility, level
             loans feasibility,           of certainty
                                   level of  certainty ofof repayment,   their attitude
                                                                               attitude to
                                                            repayment, their                financial planning.
                                                                                         to financial  planning. A     complex
                                                                                                                    A complex
      indicator    integrating    different  aspects   is used  to summarize    evaluation    of the  respondents’
      indicator integrating different aspects is used to summarize evaluation of the respondents’ attitude              attitude
      to taking
      to taking
this chapter        and repaying
                   and   repaying
              will describe          loans.by the borrowers having problems with debts repayment of their loans feasibility, level of
                                    loans.
                            the perception
certainty of repayment, their attitude to financial planning. A complex indicator integrating different aspects is used to summarize
       As the
      As    the research       results showed,
                   research results         showed, only        51% of
                                                         only 51%            people in
                                                                         of people         the intervention
                                                                                                 intervention group
                                                                                       in the                     group andand 61%61% in      the
                                                                                                                                          in the
evaluation of the respondents’ attitude to taking and repaying loans.
       control     group    were       sure    during    the  initial   survey     (or   mostly    sure)
      control group were sure during the initial survey (or mostly sure) of keeping their collaterald       of  keeping      their  collaterald
                                                                                                                                                rd
As the property.      During
         research results
      property.            showed,
                      During     further
                                further       surveys
                                               51% of people
                                         onlysurveys     the percentage
                                                         the   percentage       increased.
                                                               in the intervention    group and
                                                                               increased.          the in
                                                                                               In 61%
                                                                                               In  the   intervention      group
                                                                                                           the control group
                                                                                                         intervention     group wereby
                                                                                                                                    by   the
                                                                                                                                      sure
                                                                                                                                         theduring
                                                                                                                                              33rd
       survey
      survey
the initial      the
                 the
             survey    overall
                       overall
                     (or           percentage
                         mostly percentage
                                   sure) of keepingof borrowers
                                                   of  borrowers
                                                       their          certain
                                                                      certain
                                                             collaterald         that
                                                                                that
                                                                          property.   their further
                                                                                      their
                                                                                    During    collateral
                                                                                              collateral   willthe
                                                                                                           will
                                                                                                      surveys   not
                                                                                                                not   be taken
                                                                                                                     be   taken
                                                                                                                    percentage         financial
                                                                                                                                   by financial
                                                                                                                                   by
                                                                                                                                 increased.  In the
       institution
      institution
intervention   group  as
                      as a
                       bya  loan
                            loan
                          the  3 survey
                                 rd  repayment
                                     repayment      increased
                                                    increased
                                             the overall          by 20%,
                                                                  by
                                                         percentage    20%,
                                                                       of      whereas
                                                                               whereas
                                                                          borrowers        in that
                                                                                           in
                                                                                     certain   control
                                                                                              control    group
                                                                                                   their group   – will
                                                                                                                 –
                                                                                                         collateral     17%.
                                                                                                                    by 17%.
                                                                                                                    by  not  be taken by financial
       The
      The as
institution   percentage
              percentage      of    borrowers
                             of borrowers
                a loan repayment      increased bywho
                                                  who20%, are
                                                         are   not
                                                              not sure
                                                           whereas  sure    or  not
                                                                            or not
                                                                     in control      certain
                                                                                     certain
                                                                                 group          that
                                                                                                that they are sure of not
                                                                                        – by 17%.     they   are   sure   of  not losing    their
                                                                                                                                   losing their
       collateral decreased
      collateral      decreased in          both groups.
                                        in both    groups. In       the intervention
                                                                In the     intervention groupgroup decrease
                                                                                                       decrease of      percentage of
                                                                                                                    of percentage             the
                                                                                                                                          of the
the percentage of borrowers who are not sure or not certain that they are sure of not losing their collateral decreased in both
       respondents       who      cannot      answer    with   certainty     to   which   degree
      respondents who cannot answer with certainty to which degree they are sure they will keep the  they   are   sure   they   will  keep    the
groups.   In the intervention
       collateral
      collateral     (-15%) is
                     (-15%)     group
                                is   more
                                    more  decrease  of percentage
                                             significant
                                             significant   than in
                                                           than   inofthe
                                                                      the   respondents
                                                                        thecontrol
                                                                           control   group
                                                                                     group who   cannot answer with certainty to which degree
                                                                                              (-10%).
                                                                                              (-10%).
they are sure they will keep the collateral (-15%) is more significant than in the control group (-10%).
              FIGURE
FIGURe 5.4.1. FIGURE
              “hOW SURe5.4.1.
                       5.4.1.
                           ARe“HOW
                              “HOW SURE
                                   SURE
                               YOU thAt  AREWILL
                                         ARE
                                        YOU  YOUGet
                                             YOU   THAT
                                                  THAT   YOU
                                                      tOYOU
                                                          KeepWILL
                                                              WILL
                                                               YOURGET
                                                                   GET    KEEP YOUR
                                                                       TO KEEP
                                                                       TO
                                                                    COLLAteRAL YOUR  COLLATERAL
                                                                                     COLLATERAL
                                                                               (the FInAnCe      (THE
                                                                                                 (THE
                                                                                            InStItUtIOn
             FINANCE
            FINANCE
WILL nOt tAKe           INSTITUTION
                It AS A INSTITUTION  WILL
                        RepAYMent OFWILL  NOT  TAKE
                                          NOT TAKE
                                     the DeBt)?”     IT AS  A
                                                     IT AS A REPAYMENT OF THE DEBT)?” INTERVENTION
                                                 InteRVentIOn REPAYMENT  OF THE DEBT)?” INTERVENTION

                                                        Baseline
                                                        Baseline                            Interim
                                                                                           Interim                             Final
                                                                                                                               Final

                 sure
      Absolutely sure
      Absolutely

             sure
      Mostly sure
      Mostly

              sure, nor
      Neither sure,
      Neither           uncertain
                    nor uncertain

             not sure
      Mostly not
      Mostly     sure

                 not sure
      Absolutely not
      Absolutely     sure



              FIGURE
              “hOW
FIGURe 5.4.2. FIGURE   5.4.2.
                     SURe ARe
                       5.4.2. “HOW  SURE
                               YOU thAt
                              “HOW  SURE  ARE
                                        YOU
                                         ARE  YOU
                                            WILL
                                              YOU  THAT
                                                  Get tO Keep
                                                   THAT  YOU YOUR
                                                         YOU   WILL GET
                                                              WILL  GET TO KEEP
                                                                        TO KEEP
                                                                    COLLAteRAL   YOUR
                                                                               (the
                                                                                YOUR   COLLATERAL
                                                                                    FInAnCIAL      (THE
                                                                                              InStItUtIOn
                                                                                       COLLATERAL  (THE
WILL nOt tAKe   It AS A RepAYMent
               FINANCIAL
               FINANCIAL           OF the
                            INSTITUTION
                           INSTITUTION    DeBt)?»
                                         WILL
                                         WILL  NOT
                                              NOT COntROL
                                                    TAKE IT
                                                   TAKE      AS A
                                                          IT AS   REPAYMENT OF
                                                                A REPAYMENT  OF THE  DEBT)?» CONTROL
                                                                                 THE DEBT)?» CONTROL

                                                      Baseline
                                                      Baseline                            Interim
                                                                                         Interim                             Final
                                                                                                                             Final

                 sure
      Absolutely sure
      Absolutely

             sure
      Mostly sure
      Mostly

              sure, nor
      Neither sure,
      Neither           uncertain
                    nor uncertain

             not sure
      Mostly not
      Mostly     sure

                 not sure
      Absolutely not
      Absolutely     sure




In the structure of replies to this question in naryn and talas the general trend stays the same, but there are differences in the level
of certainty/uncertainty regarding keeping the loan collateral.

In the intervention group. During the initial survey in naryn a lower percentage of borrowers sure of keeping the loan collateral was
registered (21%) in comparison with talas (45%). In naryn the percentage increased by the 2nd survey after consultations by 16%
                                                                                                                                                 51

                                                                                                                                             46
                                                                                                                                             46
          loan collateral increased by the 3rd survey by 34% compared to the initial survey. The percentage of
          respondents not sure how to answer that question is significantly higher in Naryn than in Talas.
          During the initial survey this indicator showed 48% in Naryn and decreased to 43% by the 3rd
          survey, whereas in Talas it decreased from 29% to 3%.
          In the control group. During the initial survey a higher percentage of the borrowers sure of keeping
compared  their
            to the                   and thenwas
                   collateral
                     initial level, (60%)                 registered
                                                  decreased     by 13%. in        Naryn,
                                                                             In talas          than in of
                                                                                       the percentage       Talas   (23%).
                                                                                                              borrowers          However,
                                                                                                                           absolutely   sure of during
                                                                                                                                                not losing further
                                                                                                                                                              their
          surveys       a    much       lower     percentage          of
loan collateral increased by the 3rd survey by 34% compared to the initial survey. the percentage of respondents not sure howwas
                                                                            borrowers          absolutely      sure    of   keeping      their   property        to
          registered
answer that    question is  in        cantlythan
                                 Naryn,
                              signifi          higherin    Talas.
                                                        in naryn      Increase
                                                                   than               of percentage
                                                                          in talas. During                   of borrowers
                                                                                                the initial survey this indicator “absolutely”
                                                                                                                                    showed 48% in   sure
                                                                                                                                                      naryn  ofand
                                                                                                                                                                 not
                                                                                                                                                 rd
          losing the collateral was more significant in Talas (+33%). In Naryn during the 3 survey the
decreased to 43% by the 3rd survey, whereas in talas it decreased from 29% to 3%.
          percentage of respondents “mostly sure” of keeping their collateral property increased significantly
In the control
          (+52%).group. During the initial survey a higher percentage of the borrowers sure of keeping their collateral (60%) was
registered  in naryn,
          Having        than in talasthe
                       compared            (23%).  however,
                                                 results     for   the further
                                                                during              surveys a group
                                                                           intervention                    andpercentage
                                                                                                  much lower     control group,
                                                                                                                              of borrowers
                                                                                                                                         we absolutely
                                                                                                                                              can state    sure  of
                                                                                                                                                               that,
                                              nd
          whereas
keeping their    propertyduring      the 2 in
                             was registered       survey
                                                      naryn, in
                                                              than Talas
                                                                     in talas.the   percentage
                                                                                  Increase                     of borrowersabsolutely
                                                                                                       of respondents
                                                                                              of percentage                                   sure
                                                                                                                               “absolutely” sure    ofof keeping
                                                                                                                                                       not  losing
          their
the collateral  wasproperty
                      more signifi significantly        increased,
                                       cant in talas (+33%).             theduring
                                                                  In naryn        percentage         of people
                                                                                         the 3rd survey            not able
                                                                                                           the percentage         to answer“mostly
                                                                                                                              of respondents      this question
                                                                                                                                                          sure” of
          decreased
keeping their   collateral in   both groups
                             property     increased      29%
                                                     tosignifi   and (+52%).
                                                               cantly   20% correspondingly. Then in the final survey the percentage
          of people not able to answer the question again increased in the control group by 18%, and the
having compared the results for the intervention group and control group, we can state that, whereas during the 2nd survey in talas
          percentage of borrowers absolutely sure of keeping their collateral decreased; whereas in the
the percentage                 groupabsolutely
                  of respondents
          intervention                                sure of keeping
                                         the percentage                     their property
                                                                  of respondents                significantly
                                                                                            unable            increased,
                                                                                                       to answer     that  the percentage
                                                                                                                             question        of people
                                                                                                                                          kept           not able
                                                                                                                                                 on decreasing
to answer tothis
               3%.question      decreased in
                      This situation          in both    groups to
                                                 the control          29% and
                                                                   group            20% correspondingly.
                                                                               is probably        caused by thentheir inoverestimating
                                                                                                                          the final survey theof percentage
                                                                                                                                                  their abilitiesof
people not    able to answer
          (significant            the question
                             increase       of the  again   increased in
                                                      percentage        of the     control group
                                                                               “absolutely”          by 18%,
                                                                                                   sure        and
                                                                                                          in the  2thesurvey)
                                                                                                                    nd  percentage  of of borrowers
                                                                                                                                       repaying        absolutely
                                                                                                                                                     the  loan by
sure of keeping    their  collateral    decreased;    whereas    in the  intervention       group   the  percentage
          the borrowers in the second survey (after this question was repeated) and more realistic estimation         of  respondents    unable  to  answer    that
                                                   rd
question ofkepttheir   abilities by
                 on decreasing       to 3%.the   3 situation
                                               this    surveyin   (3
                                                                   the months
                                                                        control grouplater).     Since borrowers
                                                                                             is probably                from
                                                                                                           caused by their       the intervention
                                                                                                                                                of theirgroup
                                                                                                                              overestimating             abilitiesin
          Talas,
(significant         having
              increase            percentageconsultation
                         of the received          of “absolutely” suresupport,in the 2became
                                                                                       nd
                                                                                          survey) more       literate
                                                                                                    of repaying          in by
                                                                                                                  the loan   terms     of finance
                                                                                                                                 the borrowers    in the(which
                                                                                                                                                          secondis
          confirmed        by    the    chapter      5.3.1)     and    conducted          a  better     evaluation     of  their   financial
survey (after this question was repeated) and more realistic estimation of their abilities by the 3rd survey (3 months later). Since           abilities,    which
borrowers    from thethe
          affected             level of group
                         intervention       their certainty        of being
                                                    in talas, having    received  able   to repay support,
                                                                                                        the loan.
                                                                                      consultation               became more literate in terms of finance
(which is confirmed by the chapter 5.3.1) and conducted a better evaluation of their financial abilities, which affected the level of
                    FIGURE
their certainty of being         repay “HOW
                               5.4.3.
                         able to               SURE ARE YOU THAT YOU WILL GET TO KEEP YOUR COLLATERAL (THE
                                       the loan.
FIGURe 5.4.3. “hOW SURe     FINANCIAL
                               ARe YOU thAtINSTITUTION
                                                 YOU WILL WILL NOT
                                                          Get tO     TAKE
                                                                  Keep  YOURIT COLLAteRAL
                                                                                AS A REPAYMENT            OF THE DEBT)?”
                                                                                                (the FInAnCIAL        InStItUtIOn
                                                           INTERVENTION.
WILL nOt tAKe It AS A RepAYMent OF the DeBt)?” InteRVentIOn. nARYn              NARYN

                                                               Baseline                               Interim                                 Final

           Absolutely sure

           Mostly sure

           Neither sure, nor uncertain

           Mostly
            Reportnot
                    onsure
                        Main Results of the Survey on the Impact of Counseling on Knowledge, Feelings and Actions of Over-
                                                                                                                                 Indebted Borrowers, 2016
           Absolutely not sure
                        FIGURE 5.4.4. “HOW SURE ARE YOU THAT YOU WILL GET TO KEEP YOUR COLLATERAL (THE
FIGURe 5.4.4. “hOW SURe ARe YOU
                 FINANCIAL      thAt YOU WILL
                            INSTITUTION  WILL Get
                                               NOTtO Keep
                                                   TAKE   YOUR
                                                         IT AS ACOLLAteRAL
                                                                 REPAYMENT (the FInAnCIAL
                                                                             OF THE       InStItUtIOn
                                                                                    DEBT)?” CONTROL.
WILL nOt tAKe It AS A RepAYMent OF the DeBt)?” COntROL NARYN

                                                                  Baseline                               Interim                                 Final

            Absolutely sure

            Mostly sure
                                                                                                                                                                47
            Neither sure, nor uncertain
            Mostly not sure
            Absolutely not sure

52
                        FIGURE 5.4.5. “HOW SURE ARE YOU THAT YOU WILL GET TO KEEP YOUR COLLATERAL (THE
                             FINANCIAL INSTITUTION WILL NOT TAKE IT AS A REPAYMENT OF THE DEBT)?”
                 not not
          Absolutely
          Mostly     suresure

          Absolutely not sure

                 FIGURE 5.4.5. “HOW SURE ARE YOU THAT YOU WILL GET TO KEEP YOUR COLLATERAL (THE
                       FINANCIAL INSTITUTION WILL NOT TAKE IT AS A REPAYMENT OF THE DEBT)?”
                 FIGURE 5.4.5. “HOW SURE ARE YOU THAT YOU WILL GET TO KEEP YOUR COLLATERAL (THE
                                                  INTERVENTION. TALAS
FIGURe 5.4.5. “hOW SURe ARe YOU thAt
                       FINANCIAL     YOU WILL Get
                                  INSTITUTION  WILL tO Keep
                                                      NOT   YOUR
                                                          TAKE   COLLAteRAL
                                                                IT           (the FInAnCIAL
                                                                   AS A REPAYMENT           InStItUtIOn
                                                                                    OF THE DEBT)?”
                                           Baseline
WILL nOt tAKe It AS A RepAYMent OF the DeBt)?” InteRVentIOn.  tALAS
                                                  INTERVENTION. TALASInterim                  Final
                                                      Baseline                       Interim                         Final
          Absolutely sure

          Absolutely sure
          Mostly sure

          Neithersure
          Mostly  sure, nor uncertain

          Neither sure,
          Mostly not    nor uncertain
                     sure

          Mostly not sure
          Absolutely not sure

          Absolutely not sure
                   FIGURE 5.4.6. “HOW SURE ARE YOU THAT YOU WILL GET TO KEEP YOUR COLLATERAL (THE
FIGURe 5.4.6. “hOW SURe ARe YOU
                 FINANCIAL       thAt YOU WILL
                            INSTITUTION        NOTtO
                                          WILL Get   Keep
                                                   TAKE   YOUR
                                                         IT      REPAYMENT(the
                                                            AS ACOLLAteRAL     FInAnCIAL
                                                                           OF THE        InStItUtIOn
                                                                                   DEBT)?”  CONTROL.
                 FIGURE 5.4.6. “HOW SURE ARE YOU THAT YOU WILL GET TO KEEP YOUR COLLATERAL (THE
WILL nOt tAKe It AS A RepAYMent OF the DeBt)?” COntROL. tALAS
                                                         TALAS
                    FINANCIAL INSTITUTION WILL NOT TAKE IT AS A REPAYMENT OF THE DEBT)?” CONTROL.
                                          Baseline      TALAS    Interim               Final
                                                    Baseline                        Interim                         Final
          Absolutely sure

          Absolutely sure
          Mostly sure

          Mostly sure
          Neither sure, nor uncertain

          Neither sure,
          Mostly not    nor uncertain
                     sure

          Mostly     sure
                 not not
          Absolutely     sure

          Absolutely not sure

the respondents were asked about the benefit they have from the loans taken (figures 5.4.7-5.4.11). Some of the borrowers took
loans again after the initial survey. In that case they were asked to give their opinion about the new loan. two types of borrowers
were considered to compare the perception changes:

   1. Respondents who didn’t take new loans after the first survey. In this case it was possible to research the dynamics of their
   answers on the same loan during the whole period of research.

   2. Respondents who said they took loans during the 2nd and 3rd surveys. thus, these borrowers took loans at least twice after
   the initial survey. Consideration of these borrowers gives an opportunity to evaluate how the respondents answers changed
   regarding the new loans compared to their answers regarding those considered during the first survey.                        48

At the figure 5.4.7 we can see the dynamics of replies of the respondents to the question on the purposes of the loan taken before48
the start of the research. the intervention group shows that the loan amount was spent usefully in the long-term perspective by
52% of respondents during the first survey. the percentage of respondents who stayed of the same opinion was the same during
the intermediary survey. During the 3rd survey only 39% of respondents replied so. however, the percentage of respondents who
thought that the borrowed funds are useful in the longer term increased by 13% by the 3rd survey in comparison with the initial
one. there was an insignificant number of borrowers in the control group who didn’t take new loans after the initial survey – 4
people. the only perception change regarding the purposes of taking a loan took place when a borrower, who was unsure about
the answer during the first survey, later replied that the loan was meant for getting benefit in the short-run.

                                                                                                                                 53
figuRe 5.4.7.
FIGURe
figuRe        i Spent
       5.4.7. I
              i spent the
                spent     Money tAKen
                      the MOneY
                          Money taKen AS
                                taKen as A
                                      as a LOAn
                                         a loan FOR
                                           loan foR the
                                                foR     puRposes thAt
                                                    the pURpOSeS that ARe
                                                        puRposes that aRe GOOD/BeneFICIAL
                                                                      aRe good/beneficial
                                                                          good/beneficial9
                                                                                          9


inteRvention (n=31)
InteRVentIOn
inteRvention (n=31)                                                                                 contRol (n=4)
                                                                                                    COntROL
                                                                                                    contRol (n=4)




In the interventions group of borrowers who evaluated different loans during each of the surveys it can be seen that the percentage of
in the
in     interventions group
   the interventions    group of of borrowers
                                    borrowers who    evaluated different
                                                who evaluated               loans during
                                                                  different loans  during each
                                                                                            each of
                                                                                                 of the   surveys it
                                                                                                    the surveys       can be
                                                                                                                   it can  be seen
                                                                                                                               seen that
                                                                                                                                    that the  percentage of
                                                                                                                                         the percentage       of
borrowers, who took the loan for beneficial purposes in the short term, decreased by the 3rd survey by 7% compared to the initial survey,
borrowers,   who   took  the loan   for beneficial purposes   in the  short term, decreased    by the  3rd  survey  by  7%  compared    to
borrowers, who took the loan for beneficial purposes in the short term, decreased by the 3rd survey by 7% compared to the initial survey,  the  initial survey,
and the percentage of borrowers considering their loans to be beneficial in the long term increased by 10%. the situation in the control
and  the percentage
and the    percentage ofof borrowers
                           borrowers considering
                                        considering their   loans to
                                                      their loans      be beneficial
                                                                   to be  beneficial in
                                                                                      in the
                                                                                         the long term increased
                                                                                             long term   increased by by 10%.
                                                                                                                         10%. the
                                                                                                                                the situation
                                                                                                                                    situation in  the control
                                                                                                                                               in the   control
group is the opposite – the percentage of borrowers who consider their loans to be useful in the short term increased by 14% by the 3rd
group is the opposite – the percentage of borrowers who consider their loans to be useful in the short term increased by 14% by
group   is the opposite   – the  percentage    of borrowers   who   consider  their loans  to be useful  in  the short  term  increased  by  14%        the 3rd
                                                                                                                                                   by the    3rd
survey compared to the initial level, and the percentage of respondents considering their loan to be useful in the long term decreased.
survey   compared    to the  initial level, and the percentage     of respondents    considering   their  loan  to be  useful  in the long
survey compared to the initial level, and the percentage of respondents considering their loan to be useful in the long term decreased.     term  decreased.
thus, it may be concluded that after consultations a percentage of borrowers who took loans for benefit in the long term increased in the
thus, it may
thus, it may bebe concluded
                  concluded that     after consultations
                                that after                a percentage
                                            consultations a  percentage ofof borrowers
                                                                             borrowers who     took loans
                                                                                          who took           for benefit
                                                                                                     loans for   benefit in
                                                                                                                         in the
                                                                                                                            the long
                                                                                                                                 long term  increased in
                                                                                                                                      term increased      in the
                                                                                                                                                             the
interventions group, and in the control group – for the short-term benefit.
interventions   group,  and   in the  control group  – for the  short-term
interventions group, and in the control group – for the short-term benefit.  benefit.

figuRe 5.4.8.
FIGURe
figuRe        i Spent
       5.4.8. I
              i spent the
                spent     Money tAKen
                      the MOneY
                          Money taKen AS
                                taKen as A
                                      as a LOAn
                                         a loan FOR
                                           loan foR the
                                                foR     puRposes thAt
                                                    the pURpOSeS that ARe
                                                        puRposes that aRe GOOD/BeneFICIAL
                                                                      aRe good/beneficial 10
                                                                          good/beneficial10
inteRvention (n=72)
InteRVentIOn
inteRvention (n=72)                                                                      contRol (n=11)
                                                                                         COntROL
                                                                                         contRol (n=11)




as a
as
As    more detailed
   a more             analysis of
             detailed analysis   of the
                                of   the answers
                                     the  answers to
                                          answers        this question
                                                     to this
                                                    to  this  question intervention
                                                                         intervention group
                                                              question  intervention    groupshows,
                                                                                       group  shows,the
                                                                                             shows,   theloans
                                                                                                     the  loanspurposes
                                                                                                         loans   purposesevaluated
                                                                                                                            evaluatedin
                                                                                                                purposes   evaluated  inthe
                                                                                                                                         the2nd
                                                                                                                                     in the    2nd
                                                                                                                                             2nd
survey are
survey  are the  same as
            the same      in the
                      as in       first
                             the fi
                                  first survey for
                                    rst survey      51% of
                                                for 51%       borrowers. 46%
                                                           of borrowers.        of respondents
                                                                           46% of  respondents took
                                                                                                took loans          the period
                                                                                                     loans during
                                                                                                           during the          between the
                                                                                                                        period between  the first
                                                                                                                                             first
                                                                                                                                             first
and  intermediary   surveys   for  the  purposes   other    than  those  of the loans  considered
and intermediary surveys for the purposes other than those of the loans considered during the fi  during  the   rst survey. the purposes of the
                                                                                                              first
                                                                                                              first survey. the purposes  of  the
loans  stayed  the same  by  the
loans stayed the same by the 3rd  3rd   survey
                                  3rd survey
                                        surveyfor
                                               for 65%
                                               for65%
                                                   65%of  of  borrowers,
                                                          of borrowers,   but
                                                              borrowers, but
                                                                          but diff
                                                                              differ for 28%
                                                                                  er for
                                                                              differ for 28% of borrowers. More   borrowers changed
                                                                                         28% of borrowers. More borrowers    changed their
                                                                                                                                      their loan
                                                                                                                                            loan
purposes in
purposes   in the control group
              the control  group than     in the
                                             the intervention
                                    than in                      group.
                                                 intervention group.




9. the opinion of the respondents who didn’t take loans after the fi rst survey is under consideration here
9. the opinion of the respondents who didn’t take loans after the first
                                                                   first survey is under consideration here
10. Opinion  of the respondents who took a loan at least twice after consultations (i.e. those who stated during the 2nd and 3rd surveys to have taken a loan  during
    opinion of the respondents who took a loan at least twice after consultations (i.e. those who stated during the 2nd
10. opinion                                                                                                               and 3rd
                                                                                                                     2nd and  3rd surveys
                                                                                                                                   surveys to
                                                                                                                                           to have
                                                                                                                                              have taken
                                                                                                                                                   taken a  loan during
                                                                                                                                                          a loan during
the last 3 months)
the last 3 months)
54
56
56
figuRe 5.4.9.
FIGURe
figuRe        analysis OF
       5.4.9. AnALYSIS
              analysis of SIMILARItIeS
                       of              of the
                          siMilaRities OF
                          siMilaRities of     loans pURpOSeS
                                          the LOAnS
                                              loans puRposes 11
                                                    puRposes11
inteRvention (n=72)
InteRVentIOn
inteRvention (n=72)                                                                      contRol (n=11)
                                                                                         COntROL
                                                                                         contRol (n=11))
                                                                                                 (n=11))




the percentage of borrowers, who stated during further surveys that the loan was useful for both the borrower and his family,
the percentage
the  percentage of     borrowers, who
                    of borrowers,        stated during
                                     who stated during further
                                                       further surveys
                                                                surveys that
                                                                          that the loan was
                                                                               the loan       useful for
                                                                                         was useful       both the
                                                                                                      for both the
increased in the intervention group.
borrower and
borrower and his family, increased
             his family,           in the
                         increased in     intervention group.
                                      the intervention group.

figuRe 5.4.10.
figuRe
FIGURe         i
       5.4.10. I spent the
                 spent
               i Spent     Money
                       the MOneY taKen
                           Money tAKen as
                                 taKen AS a
                                       as A loan
                                          a LOAn
                                            loan FOR
                                                 foR
                                                 foR the puRposes
                                                     the pURpOSeS
                                                         puRposes thAt
                                                                  that aRe
                                                                  that ARe good/beneficial
                                                                       aRe GOOD/BeneFICIAL
                                                                                           12
                                                                           good/beneficial 12
inteRvention
InteRVentIOn
inteRvention (n=31)
             (n=31)                                                                      contRol
                                                                                         contRol (n=4)
                                                                                         COntROL (n=4)




among the
among       borrowers who
        the borrowers  who took
                           took new
                                 new loans
                                      loans after the first
                                            after the first survey
                                                            survey
Among the borrowers who took new loans after the first survey the percentage of respondents who borrowed funds for
the percentage  of respondents  who  borrowed
the percentage of respondents who borrowed funds for themselves and
                                                funds  for  themselves     their families
                                                                       and their families increased.
                                                                                          increased.
themselves and their families increased.
figuRe 5.4.11.
figuRe         i spent
       5.4.11. i       the Money
                 spent the       taKen as
                           Money taKen as a
                                          a loan
                                            loan foR the puRposes
                                                 foR the          that aRe
                                                         puRposes that aRe good/beneficial
                                                                                           13
                                                                           good/beneficial 13
                                                                                           13
FIGURe 5.4.11. I Spent
inteRvention (n=72)
                       the MOneY tAKen AS A LOAn FOR the pURpOSeS thAt
                                                       contRol (n=11)
                                                                       ARe GOOD/BeneFICIAL
inteRvention (n=72)                                                                      contRol (n=11)
InteRVentIOn (n=72)                                                                      COntROL (n=11)




11. Opinion
11.  opinion of
     opinion  of the
                  the respondents
                      respondents who
                                  who took a loan
                                      took a      at least
                                             loan at least twice
                                                           twice after
                                                                 after consultations (i.e. those
                                                                       consultations (i.e.       who stated
                                                                                           those who stated during
                                                                                                            during the
                                                                                                                   the 2
                                                                                                                       2nd
                                                                                                                        nd
                                                                                                                       2nd and
                                                                                                                            and
                                                                                                                            and33rd
                                                                                                                                rd
                                                                                                                                3rdsurveys toto
                                                                                                                                     surveys
                                                                                                                                     surveys  have
                                                                                                                                             to    taken
                                                                                                                                                have
                                                                                                                                                have     a loan
                                                                                                                                                     taken
                                                                                                                                                     taken  a    during
                                                                                                                                                            a loan
                                                                                                                                                              loan
the last
during   3
        themonths)
            last 3 months)
during the last 3 months)
     opinion of the respondents who did not take any loans after the fi
12. Opinion                                                               rst survey
                                                                        first
12. opinion of the respondents who did not take any loans after the first survey
     opinion of the respondents who took a loan at least twice after consultations (i.e. those who stated during the 2
13. Opinion                                                                                                            2nd
                                                                                                                        nd
                                                                                                                           and
                                                                                                                            and33rd
                                                                                                                                rd
                                                                                                                                   surveys toto
                                                                                                                                     surveys  have taken
                                                                                                                                                have     a loan
                                                                                                                                                     taken       during
                                                                                                                                                            a loan
13. opinion of the respondents who took a loan at least twice after consultations (i.e. those who stated during the 2nd and 3rd surveys to have taken a loan
the lastthe
during
during   3 months)
        the      3 months)
            last 3
            last   months)
                                                                                                                                                                      55
                                                                                                                                                                      57
                                                                                                                                                                      57
figure 5.4.12
Figure    5.4.12 shows  that the
                 shows that        major part
                             the major    part of   the respondents
                                                        respondents consider
                                                 of the                           their loans
                                                                         consider their  loans toto have   improved their
                                                                                                    have improved           quality of
                                                                                                                      their quality      living (the
                                                                                                                                     of living   (the
responses    “absolutely agree”, “partially
responses “absolutely agree”, “partially agree”). As the results of the 3rd survey have shown (+5% compared to the initial level), in the
                                            agree”). as the results  of the 3rd survey  have   shown    (+5%  compared  to the initial level), in the
intervention group
intervention    group there is an
                      there is    increase of
                               an increase   of the percentage of
                                                the percentage      respondents who
                                                                 of respondents         don’t think
                                                                                  who don’t     think that  the loan
                                                                                                       that the      money improve
                                                                                                                loan money             their quality
                                                                                                                            improve their    quality
of life.
of life. this percentage decreased
         this percentage  decreased in   the control
                                      in the  control group   (-8% compared
                                                                    compared to
                                                      group (-8%                   the initial
                                                                                to the         level).
                                                                                       initial level).


figuRe 5.4.12. I
FIGURe           choose tO
               i ChOOSe    taKe A
                        to tAKe a LOAn
                                  loan BeCAUSe
                                       because It iMpRoves the QUALItY
                                               it IMpROVeS             of MY
                                                               Quality OF My LIFe
                                                                             life
inteRvention (n=211)
InteRVentIOn                                                                   contRol (n=79)
                                                                               COntROL




consideration of
Consideration    of the  answers to
                    the answers      this question
                                 to this  question during   the fi
                                                                 first
                                                     during the        survey, taking
                                                                   rst survey,  taking into
                                                                                        into account  the initial
                                                                                             account the          survey, shows
                                                                                                          initial survey,        that around
                                                                                                                          shows that  around 50%
                                                                                                                                              50%
of respondents    kept  the
of respondents kept the same opinion (red print). Among respondents of the intervention group, who absolutely did not agree that
                            same  opinion   (red print). among   respondents      of the intervention  group,  who  absolutely  did not agree that
loans improve
loans  improve their   quality of
                 their quality    life, only
                               of life, only 21%   stayed of
                                                           of the
                                             21% stayed            same opinion.
                                                              the same   opinion. thethe major  part of
                                                                                          major part    the respondents
                                                                                                     of the                 (76%) responded
                                                                                                             respondents (76%)    responded that
                                                                                                                                              that
they agreed
they  agreed with    the statement
               with the              during the
                         statement during     the 2nd
                                                  2nd survey.     thecontrol
                                                               inthe
                                                       survey.In       controlgroup     the percentage
                                                                                group the   percentage ofof the respondents who
                                                                                                            the respondents         changed their
                                                                                                                               who changed   their
opinion  from   disagreement   to consent    with the statement    (44%)  was  lower   during the   nd survey in comparison with the initial one
                                                                                                  2nd
opinion from disagreement to consent with the statement (44%) was lower during the 2 survey in comparison with the initial one
     than in
and than
and           the interventional
           in the                 group (76%).
                  interventional group    (76%).


table 5.4.1.
tABLe 5.4.1. OpInIOn of the
             opinion OF  the ReSpOnDent that LOAnS
                                             loans IMpROVe
                             Respondent thAt               the Quality
                                                   iMpRove the QUALItY of LIFe in
                                                                       OF life    COMpARISOn with
                                                                               In coMpaRison WIth
          duRing the
answeRs DURInG
AnSWeRS               fiRst SURVeY
                  the FIRSt suRvey
                                                         1st
                                            intervention 1
                                            Intervention
                                                           st
                                                              survey
                                                              survey                                         control 1
                                                                                                             Control 1st
                                                                                                                       st
                                                                                                                          survey
                                                                                                                          survey
                                 absolutely partially
                                 Absolutely   partially Absolutely
                                                        absolutely                       don’t
                                                                                       i don’t
                                                                                       I                         partially Absolutely
                                                                                                     absolutely partially
                                                                                                     Absolutely               absolutely
                                   agree
                                   agree       agree
                                               agree     disagree
                                                         disagree                       know
                                                                                        know           agree
                                                                                                       agree      agree
                                                                                                                  agree        disagree
                                                                                                                               disagree
               absolutely
               Absolutely            42%
                                     42%               37%
                                                       37%              29%
                                                                        29%             64%
                                                                                        64%              65%
                                                                                                         65%              28%
                                                                                                                          28%             22%
                                                                                                                                          22%
                  agree
                  agree
                partially
                partially            49%
                                     49%               50%
                                                       50%              47%
                                                                        47%             27%
                                                                                        27%              29%
                                                                                                         29%              56%
                                                                                                                          56%             22%
                                                                                                                                          22%
       2nd
       2
         nd       agree
                  agree
     survey
     survey    absolutely
               Absolutely             9%
                                      9%               13%
                                                       13%              21%
                                                                        21%              9%
                                                                                         9%               6%
                                                                                                          6%              15%
                                                                                                                          15%             56%
                                                                                                                                          56%
                disagree
                disagree
                   don’t
                 i don’t
                 I                    0%
                                      0%               0%
                                                       0%               3%
                                                                        3%               0%
                                                                                         0%
                  know
                  know
               absolutely
               Absolutely            30%
                                     30%               29%
                                                       29%              15%
                                                                        15%             18%
                                                                                        18%              52%
                                                                                                         52%              41%
                                                                                                                          41%             44%
                                                                                                                                          44%
                  agree
                  agree
       3rd
       3
         rd
                partially
                partially            53%
                                     53%               53%
                                                       53%              47%
                                                                        47%             55%
                                                                                        55%              45%
                                                                                                         45%              56%
                                                                                                                          56%             56%
                                                                                                                                          56%
     survey
     survey       agree
                  agree
               absolutely
               Absolutely            18%
                                     18%               17%
                                                       17%              38%
                                                                        38%             27%
                                                                                        27%               3%
                                                                                                          3%              3%
                                                                                                                          3%               0%
                                                                                                                                           0%
                disagree
                disagree
                    n
                    n                74
                                     74                92
                                                       92              34
                                                                       34               11
                                                                                        11               31
                                                                                                         31               39
                                                                                                                          39               9
                                                                                                                                           9
     tOtaL
     tOtaL          %
                    %               100%
                                    100%              100%
                                                      100%            100%
                                                                      100%             100%
                                                                                       100%             100%
                                                                                                        100%             100%
                                                                                                                         100%            100%
                                                                                                                                         100%
58
56
there  are differences
there are   differences between
            differences  between naryn       and talas
                                     naryn and         in terms
                                                 talas in terms ofof certainty   that the
                                                                     certainty that   the financial
                                                                                          financial situation
                                                                                          financial  situation is   under control.
                                                                                                                 is under            thus, in
                                                                                                                            control. thus, in the
                                                                                                                                              the
intervention   group
intervention group thethe percentage
                          percentage of
                      the percentage    of  those
                                         of those who
                                             thosewho
                                                   whowas
                                                        was  sure of
                                                         wassure
                                                              sureofofthe
                                                                       the
                                                                      the control
                                                                          control
                                                                            controlover
                                                                                   over their
                                                                                     over
                                                                                        their financial
                                                                                          their
                                                                                              financial
                                                                                                financialsituation  in
                                                                                                                    in in
                                                                                                            situation
                                                                                                         situation      talas
                                                                                                                        talas was
                                                                                                                              was
                                                                                                                          talas   higher
                                                                                                                                  higher
                                                                                                                                was       than
                                                                                                                                     higher
                                                                                                                                          than  in
                                                                                                                                                in
                                                                                                                                             than
naryn
naryn
in     by
   naryn  14%
       by by
          14% 14%during
                   during
                 during the
                        the 1st
                            1st1survey,
                           the   survey,
                                 st       by
                                    survey,
                                          by  18%
                                             by
                                              18%
                                                18%during
                                                   during
                                                     duringthe
                                                             the
                                                           the  2nd
                                                                  2ndsurvey,
                                                                2nd   survey,and
                                                                     survey,  andby
                                                                             and    by54%
                                                                                   by  54%during
                                                                                      54%    duringthe
                                                                                            during   the3rd
                                                                                                   the   3rd           In naryn
                                                                                                              survey. in
                                                                                                          3rd survey.  in naryn this
                                                                                                                                 this percentage
                                                                                                                                      percentage
increased by
increased  by the
               the 2nd
                   2nd
                   2nd survey
                        survey  (+12%)
                        survey(+12%)     after
                                (+12%)after     consultations
                                         afterconsultations
                                                consultationsand
                                                               and
                                                               andthen
                                                                    then  significantly
                                                                          significantly
                                                                    then signifi        decreased
                                                                                 cantly decreased   (-27%).
                                                                                        decreased (-27%).
                                                                                                    (-27%). there
                                                                                                              there  is
                                                                                                              there is  a growing
                                                                                                                     is a growing trend
                                                                                                                                   trend in
                                                                                                                                          in talas
                                                                                                                                             talas
during  the whole   period of research.
during the whole period of research.
in
in the
In the control        of naryn
       control group
               group of   naryn the    percentage of
                                  the percentage      of those
                                                         those certain
                                                                certain of
                                                                        of their control over
                                                                           their control over their financial situation
                                                                                              their financial
                                                                                                    financial             has increased
                                                                                                               situation has             by 12%
                                                                                                                              increased by  12% by
                                                                                                                                                by
the   nd survey in comparison with the initial level, and then dropped down by 27% by the time of the 3rd
    2nd
     2 survey
the 2nd   surveyin
                 incomparison
                    comparisonwith           initial level,
                                   withthe
                                         theinitial   level, and
                                                             and then dropped down by 27% by    by the   time of
                                                                                                    the time    ofthe   rd survey. this percentage
                                                                                                                       3 survey. this percentage
                                                                                                                   the3rd
in talas
in talas is growing. in
         is growing. In the
                     in the control    group of
                             control group                the percentage
                                                  naryn the
                                              of naryn         percentage of   people sure
                                                                            of people  sure of
                                                                                            of having
                                                                                               having their   financial situation
                                                                                                        their financial
                                                                                                              financial            under control
                                                                                                                        situation under   control is
                                                                                                                                                  is
decreasing,   whereas  in talas it is increasing.
decreasing, whereas in talas it is increasing.
figuRe
FIGURe 5.4.13.
figuRe 5.4.13. My
               MY financial
               My FInAnCIAL situation,
                  financial situation, pOSSIBILItY to
                                                   tO save
                            SItUAtIOn, possibility
                                       possibility to SAVe up
                                                      save Up Money
                                                           up MOneY and
                                                              Money AnD My
                                                                    and    DeBt aRe
                                                                        MY debt
                                                                        My debt ARe undeR
                                                                                aRe       MY contRol.
                                                                                    UnDeR My
                                                                                    undeR My COntROL.
                                                                                             contRol.
naRyn
naRyn
nARYn
inteRvention
inteRvention (n=108)
InteRVentIOn (n=108)                                                           contRol
                                                                               COntROL (n=45)
                                                                               contRol (n=45)




FIGURe 5.4.14.
figuRe
figuRe 5.4.14. My FInAnCIAL situation,
               MY financial
               My financial SItUAtIOn, possibility
                            situation, pOSSIBILItY to
                                       possibility tO save
                                                   to SAVe up
                                                      save Up Money
                                                           up MOneY and
                                                              Money AnD My
                                                                    and MY debt
                                                                        My DeBt aRe
                                                                           debt ARe undeR
                                                                                aRe UnDeR My
                                                                                    undeR MY contRol.
                                                                                          My COntROL.
                                                                                             contRol.
talas
tALAS
talas
(n=103)
(n=103)                                                                        contRol (n=34)
                                                                               COntROL (n=34)
                                                                               contRol




around 90%
around
Around   90% of
         90%   of the
                  the respondents
               of the respondents feel
                      respondents     feel  confident making
                                                       making their
                                      feel confident
                                            confident  making   their financial
                                                                their financial plans.
                                                                      financial plans.    comparison with
                                                                                       In comparison
                                                                                plans. in
                                                                                       in comparison    with the
                                                                                                        with      initial level
                                                                                                              the initial
                                                                                                              the initial level in
                                                                                                                          level     the intervention
                                                                                                                                 in the
                                                                                                                                in  the intervention
                                                                                                                                        intervention
group  the
group the   number
       the number
            number of of respondents,
                      ofrespondents,
                         respondents,who  who   feel
                                          whofeel
                                                feel  absolutely
                                                    absolutely
                                                      absolutely  confident
                                                                confi
                                                                  confident  making
                                                                      dent making
                                                                             making   their
                                                                                    their    financial
                                                                                          financial
                                                                                      their            plans,
                                                                                                    plans,
                                                                                             financial     has
                                                                                                       plans, has
                                                                                                              has  increased
                                                                                                                increased
                                                                                                                   increased    after
                                                                                                                            after     consultations:
                                                                                                                                   consultations:
                                                                                                                                after              by
                                                                                                                                      consultations:
by
5%5%
by  5% by
    by the   nd 2nd survey, and by 13% by the
           the
       by the   survey,
            2 2nd       and by
                    survey,  and 13%   by the
                                   by 13%    by3
                                                 rd 3rd survey. this indicator in the control group decreased by 5% by the time of
                                                thesurvey. this indicator
                                                     3rd survey.          in thein
                                                                 this indicator  control  groupgroup
                                                                                   the control   decreased    by 5%by
                                                                                                        decreased    by5%theby
                                                                                                                             timetheof the of
                                                                                                                                     time
                                                                                                                                            rdthe 3rd
                                                                                                                                           3 the
                                                                                                                                               survey
                                                                                                                                                  3rd
survey
survey  in comparison
in comparison    with the
        in comparison    with
                         with  the
                           initial
                               the  initial
                                   level.   level.
                                    initial level.
figuRe 5.4.18.
figuRe
FIGURe         i
       5.4.18. I feel
               i FeeL confident
                      confident MAKInG
                 feel COnFIDent MaKing financial
                                MaKing FInAnCIAL plans
                                       financial pLAnS
                                                 plans
inteRvention(n=211)
InteRVentIOn(n=211)
inteRvention(n=211)                                                  contRol (n=79)
                                                                     COntROL (n=79)
                                                                     contRol (n=79)




                                                                                                                                                   59
                                                                                                                                                   59
                                                                                                                                                   57
despite the fact that respondents participating in the research were borrowers with problems in loan repayment, the majority of
Despite
them replied that they did not have major diffi culties with repayment of loans. thus, only 15-20% of both groups replied that they
                                          difficulties
had difficulties with loan repayment.
    difficulties
figuRe 5.4.19. I
FIGURe           can eASILY
               i CAn easily AFFORD
                            affoRd MOnthLY
                                   Monthly pAYMentS on MY
                                           payMents On My LOAn/DeBt
                                                          loan/debt
inteRvention (n=211)
InteRVentIOn                                                       contRol (n=79)
                                                                   COntROL




the fi
the  figure 5.4.2 contains
       gure 5.4.2           the information
                  contains the   information on on perception    difficulties
                                                              of diffi
                                                   perception of               with repayments
                                                                       culties with repayments andand delays  in loans
                                                                                                       delays in       repayments. thus,
                                                                                                                 loans repayments.    thus, less
                                                                                                                                            less
than  20%  of respondents   in the   intervention group  consider to have   no difficulties with loans repayments,  and  still they
than 20% of respondents in the intervention group consider to have no difficulties with loans repayments, and still they have delayshave delays
in repayments.
in repayments. this    indicator is
                  this indicator     higher in
                                  is higher    the control
                                                   control group
                                            in the               (28-36%).
                                                           group (28-36%).
table 5.4.2.
tABLe 5.4.2. I can eASILY
             i CAn        affoRd MOnthLY
                   easily AFFORD         payMents On
                                                  on MY
                                 Monthly pAYMentS       loan/debt AnD
                                                     My LOAn/DeBt and DO YOU have
                                                                      do you      pAYMent delays
                                                                             hAVe payMent DeLAYS
on youR   loan/debt
On YOUR LOAn/DeBt
                                                      can easily
                                                    i can
                                                    i            afford
                                                          easily aﬀ     monthly payments
                                                                    ord monthly          on my
                                                                                payments on    loan/debt
                                                                                            my loan/debt
        you have
     do you
     do           payment
             have payment
             on your
      delays on
      delays         loan/
                your loan/                      intervention
                                                intervention                           control
                                                                                       control
             debt?
             debt?                 absolutely partially absolutely i
                                              partially absolutely   don’t absolutely
                                                                   i don’t            partially absolutely
                                                                           absolutely partially absolutely
                                   absolutely
                                     agree
                                     agree     agree
                                               agree     disagree
                                                         disagree   know
                                                                    know     agree
                                                                             agree      agree
                                                                                       agree     disagree
                                                                                                 disagree
                    yes
                    yes               17%
                                      17%       56%
                                                56%        23%
                                                           23%        5%
                                                                     5%       34%
                                                                              34%        48%
                                                                                         48%       18%
                                                                                                   18%
       1
       1
        st
        st          no
                    no                27%
                                      27%       48%
                                                48%        23%
                                                           23%        3%
                                                                     3%       28%
                                                                              28%        45%
                                                                                         45%       28%
                                                                                                   28%
     survey
     survey       no loan
                  no loan              0%
                                       0%        0%
                                                 0%         0%
                                                            0%        0%
                                                                     0%
                 don’t know
               i don’t
               i       know           29%
                                      29%       29%
                                                29%         0%
                                                            0%       43%
                                                                     43%
                    yes
                    yes               19%
                                      19%       57%
                                                57%        24%
                                                           24%        0%
                                                                     0%       28%
                                                                              28%        54%
                                                                                         54%       18%
                                                                                                   18%
       2nd
       2
         nd         no
                    no                45%
                                      45%       45%
                                                45%         9%
                                                            9%        1%
                                                                     1%       34%
                                                                              34%        55%
                                                                                         55%       11%
                                                                                                   11%
     survey
     survey       no loan
                  no loan             55%
                                      55%       18%
                                                18%        18%
                                                           18%        9%
                                                                     9%       50%
                                                                              50%        50%
                                                                                         50%        0%
                                                                                                    0%
                 don’t know
               i don’t
               i       know
                    yes
                    yes                 19%
                                        19%            61%
                                                       61%             19%
                                                                       19%                           36%
                                                                                                     36%            52%
                                                                                                                    52%             12%
                                                                                                                                    12%
       3rd
       3
         rd
                    no
                    no                  28%
                                        28%            56%
                                                       56%             15%
                                                                       15%                           19%
                                                                                                     19%            64%
                                                                                                                    64%             17%
                                                                                                                                    17%
     survey
     survey          loan
                  no loan
                  no                    38%
                                        38%            43%
                                                       43%             19%
                                                                       19%                           50%
                                                                                                     50%            39%
                                                                                                                    39%             11%
                                                                                                                                    11%

the question
the question on  life quality
              on life         perception during
                      quality perception        increasing expenditures
                                                           expenditures on
                                         during increasing                   food, clothing
                                                                          on food, clothing and transportation yielded
                                                                                            and transportation         similar response
                                                                                                               yielded similar response
patterns in both  intervention  and control groups  across three surveys.
patterns in both intervention and control groups across three surveys.




58
60
figuRe 5.4.20 eVen
FIGURe        even IF   My eXpenDItUReS
                     if MY              on FOOD,
                           eXpendituRes On food, tRAnSpORt
                                                 tRanspoRt AnD
                                                           and FOOD   incRease, MY
                                                               food InCReASe,      life QUALItY
                                                                                My LIFe Quality WILL
                                                                                                will
ReMain 5.4.20
figuRe
ReMAIn        even if My eXpendituRes on food, tRanspoRt and food incRease, My life Quality will
        the SAMe
            saMe
ReMain the saMe
InteRVentIOn
inteRvention (n=211)                                        contRol (n=79)
                                                            COntROL
inteRvention (n=211)                                                                         contRol (n=79)
inteRvention (n=211)                                                                         contRol (n=79)




the majority
the  majority of    respondents (approximately
                of respondents    (approximately 80%) 80%) are     confident
                                                              are confi             are capable
                                                                               they are
                                                                        dent they        capable of of being
                                                                                                       being more    efficient with
                                                                                                              more efficient         their expenditures.
                                                                                                                               with their   expenditures.
the majority of respondents (approximately 80%) are confident they are capable of being more efficient with their expenditures.
degrees   of confidence    in
Degrees of confidence in capability of being more efficient with expenditures in talas and naryn are noticeably different. number
                              capability  of being   more    efficient with  expenditures   in  talas and  naryn  are  noticeably  different.    number ofof
degrees of confidence in capability of being more efficient with expenditures in talas and naryn are noticeably different. number of
respondents     firmly  confident  in capability  of   being   more   expenditure   efficient  in  higher in talas than   in naryn
respondents firmly confident in capability of being more expenditure efficient in higher in talas than in naryn for the interventionfor the   intervention
respondents
group. In       firmly
           talas,
        in talas,       confident
                   the segment
                       segment  ofin  capability of
                                    respondents        being
                                                   firmly      more expenditure
                                                            confident               efficient
                                                                        in capability          in higher in talas  than in naryn    for the   intervention
group.            the           of  respondents    firmly confi   dent in             of higher
                                                                           capability of          expenditure efficiency
                                                                                         higher expenditure     efficiency has
                                                                                                                             has grown
                                                                                                                                 grown at   a significantly
                                                                                                                                         at a  significantly
group.  in talas,  the segment  of respondents     firmly   confident      capability
                                                                        ingroup       of higher   expenditure   efficiency   has grown   at a significantly
higher  rate  than   in
higher rate than in naryn. the baseline survey in the control group showed that the percentage of respondents confident of
                        naryn. the   baseline  survey    in the  control          showed   that   the  percentage   of respondents    confident     of their
                                                                                                                                                       their
higher rate than in naryn. the baseline survey in the control group showed that the percentage of respondents confident of their
capability  of  being    more  cost  efficient was    lower   in  talas  than  in naryn.  the   following   surveys,  however,
capability of being more cost efficient was lower in talas than in naryn. the following surveys, however, revealed an opposite    revealed    an  opposite
capability of being more cost efficient was lower in talas than in naryn. the following surveys, however, revealed an opposite
situation –
situation  – percentage
             percentage of    respondents of
                           of respondents     of such   respondents was
                                                 such respondents             higher in
                                                                         was higher     talas.
                                                                                     in talas.
situation – percentage of respondents of such respondents was higher in talas.
figuRe 5.4.21 do you thinK you can be MoRe cost efficient?
figuRe 5.4.21(n=211)
FIGURe
inteRvention
              DO you thInK
              do YOU thinK YOU can Be
                           you CAn be MORe
                                      MoRe COSt
                                           cost eFFICIent?
                                                efficient?                                   contRol (n=79)
inteRvention (n=211)
inteRvention (n=211)
InteRVentIOn                                                                                 contRol (n=79)
                                                                                             COntROL




figuRe 5.4.22
FIGURe 5.4.22 DO you thInK
              do YOU       you CAn
                     thinK YOU     be MORe
                                      MoRe COSt
                               can Be           efficient? nARYn
                                           cost eFFICIent? naRyn
figuRe 5.4.22 do you
inteRvention (n=108) thinK you can be MoRe cost efficient? naRyn
                                                             contRol (n=45)
             (n=108)
inteRvention (n=108)
InteRVentIOn                                                                                         (n=45)
                                                                                             contRol (n=45)
                                                                                             COntROL
inteRvention (n=108)                                                                         contRol (n=45)




                                                                                                                                                          59
                                                                                                                                                          61
                                                                                                                                                          61
figuRe 5.4.23 DO
FIGURe 5.4.23
figuRe        do     thinK YOU
                 you thInK
              do YOU
                 you thinK you CAn
                           you can Be
                               can be MORe
                                   be MoRe COSt
                                           cost eFFICIent?
                                      MoRe cost efficient? tALAS
                                                efficient? talas
                                                           talas
InteRVentIOn (n=103)
inteRvention
inteRvention (n=103)                                                              contRol
                                                                                  contRol (n=34)
                                                                                  COntROL (n=34)




the rate of optimistic respondents, those who are confident in improvement of their financial standings, is higher in talas than
the
the rate of
    rate of optimistic
            optimistic respondents,
                       respondents,   those  who
                                      thosethe
                                             who  are confident
                                                  are confident   in improvement   of their
                                                                                   of       financial standings, is higher
                                                                                                                 is        in talas
                                                                                                                           in       than
in naryn across the intervention   groups.      increase  of this in
                                                                   % improvement
                                                                      towards the 3rd their financial
                                                                                       survey         standings,
                                                                                               could be  caused by  higher    talas
                                                                                                                     the increase ofthan
                                                                                                                                     the
in naryn across
         across the
                the  intervention
                     intervention  groups.
                                   groups.  the increase  of this  %  towards the 3rd  survey  could  be caused  by  the increase of the
respondent  group who   paid off their loansthe       1). of this % towards the 3rd survey could be caused by the increase of the
                                                increase
                                             (Chapter
respondent group
respondent  group who   paid off
                  who paid       their loans
                             off their       (chapter 1)
                                       loans (chapter 1)
       5.4.24 I BeLIeVe
FIGURe 5.4.24           MY FInAnCIAL StAnDInG neXt YeAR WILL Be BetteR thAn thIS YeAR. nARYn
figuRe        i believe
figuRe 5.4.24 i         My financial
                believe My           standing neXt
                           financial standing neXt yeaR
                                                   yeaR will
                                                        will be betteR than
                                                             be betteR      this yeaR.
                                                                       than this yeaR. naRyn
                                                                                       naRyn
InteRVentIOn (n=108)
inteRvention                                                                      COntROL (n=45)
inteRvention (n=108)
             (n=108)                                                              contRol
                                                                                  contRol (n=45)
                                                                                          (n=45)




FIGURe 5.4.25 I BeLIeVe MY FInAnCIAL StAnDInG neXt YeAR WILL Be BetteR thAn thIS YeAR. tALAS
figuRe 5.4.25 i
figuRe 5.4.25   believe My
              i believe    financial standing
                        My financial standing neXt
                                              neXt yeaR
                                                   yeaR will be betteR
                                                        will be        than this
                                                                betteR than      yeaR. talas
                                                                            this yeaR. talas
InteRVentIOn (n=103)
             (n=103)                                                              COntROL (n=34)
inteRvention (n=103)                                                              contRol
                                                                                  contRol (n=34)
                                                                                          (n=34)




table
table 5.4.3. reviews answers of   respondents who     paid off  their debts to the  final survey moment. it  maybe noted   that the   % of
      5.4.3. reviews
table 5.4.3.         answers of
             reviews answers   of respondents
                                  respondents who
                                                who paid    off their
                                                      paid off  their debts
                                                                      debts to
                                                                            to the
                                                                               the final  survey moment.
                                                                                    final survey          It maybe
                                                                                                 moment. it  maybe noted
                                                                                                                     noted that
                                                                                                                            that the
                                                                                                                                 the %% of
                                                                                                                                        of
loaners who
loaners who are   confident in
              are confident    improvement of
                            in improvement       their financial
                                                       financial standings
                                              of their                      has significantly
                                                                 standings has  significantly grown by the
                                                                                              grown by     3rd
                                                                                                       the 3rd  survey. therefore if could
                                                                                                             rd survey. therefore if could
loaners who are confident in improvement of their financial standings has significantly grown by the 3 survey. therefore if could
be
be concluded that   with debt  payoffs the respondent become      more financially  confident.
   concluded that
be concluded        with debt
               that with debt payoffs
                               payoffs the
                                       the respondent
                                           respondent become      more financially
                                                         become more    financially confident.
                                                                                    confident.




62
60
62
tABLe 5.4.3. I BeLIeVe MY FInAnCIAL StAnDInG neXt YeAR WILL Be BetteR thAn thIS YeAR 14


                                            Intervention n=37                                           Control n=18
                                 1st survey      2nd survey   3rd survey                 1st survey      2nd survey    3rd survey
  Absolutely agree                  43%             62%          70%                        50%             39%           83%
   partially agree                  38%             35%          24%                        44%             56%           11%
      Absolutely
                                    14%                    3%                 5%            6%              6%             6%
       disagree
    I don’t know                     5%

For evaluation of respondents’ stance on their debts a complex indicator which includes criteria listed in table 5.4.1. was developed.
this index characterizes the responders’ degree of confidence in control of their financial situation.


tABLe 5.4.1. peRCeptIOn RAte CLASSIFICAtIOn
                                                           1                                2                          3
                  Criteria
                                                 Optimistic perception             neutral perception       pessimistic perception
   I choose to contract a loan/
   debt because it will increase                     Absolutely agree                partially agree         Absolutely disagree
            my life quality.
        I control my financial
   standing, expenditures and                        Absolutely agree                partially agree         Absolutely disagree
                 debts.
    I can easily afford monthly
                                                     Absolutely agree                partially agree         Absolutely disagree
   payments on my loan/debt
   even if my expenditures on
      food, transport and food
                                                     Absolutely agree                partially agree         Absolutely disagree
   increase, my life quality will
           remain the same
 I believe my financial standing
   next year will be better than                     Absolutely agree                partially agree         Absolutely disagree
               this year.
         What’s your level of
   confidence in keeping your
  collateral assets (the financial                 Absolutely sure OR               neither sure nor        Absoletely not sure OR
       institution doesn’t take                       pretty sure                      uncertain                pretty unsure
 possession of you collateral to
          pay off your loan)?

Charts 5.4.26 and 5.4.27 indicate that across intervention groups the % of respondents who are optimistic about their financial
standings is higher in talas than in naryn. Amount of pessimistic respondents in naryn was quite high (68%) in the 3rd survey
whereas in talas it was only 11%. Across the control group the situation is opposite - there were more optimists in naryn than in
talas.
14. Analysis of respondents who stated they have no debts in the 3rd survey
                                                                                                                                     61
naryn intervention group revealed increase of % of positive and neutral and positive respondents in the 2nd survey, although it
naryn intervention
decreased in the 3rd group revealed
                      survey         increase
                             with increase     of %
                                              of  % of positive
                                                    of positive
                                           of pessimists.        and neutral
                                                                 and
                                                          talas showsneutral     positive
                                                                              andpositive
                                                                             and
                                                                      continuous          respondents
                                                                                  growth respondents
                                                                                          of             inthe
                                                                                                        in
                                                                                             rate of neutralthe2nd
                                                                                                             and2positive
                                                                                                                 nd
                                                                                                                    survey, although it
                                                                                                                          respondents.
                 3 survey
decreased in the 3rd
                  rd
                      surveywith  increaseof
                             withincrease     pessimists.talas
                                           ofpessimists.        showscontinuous
                                                          talasshows              growthof
                                                                      continuousgrowth    ofrate  ofneutral
                                                                                             rateof          andpositive
                                                                                                     neutraland  positiverespondents.
                                                                                                                          respondents.

figuRe 5.4.26 oveRall Respondent peRception of loans. naRyn
figuRe 5.4.26(n=108)
FIGURe
inteRvention  oveRall ReSpOnDent
              OVeRALL            peRception OF
                      Respondent peRCeptIOn of LOAnS.
                                               loans. nARYn
                                                      naRyn
                                                          contRol (n=45)
inteRvention (n=108)
InteRVentIOn                                                                    contRol (n=45)
                                                                                COntROL




figuRe 5.4.27.
FIGURe 5.4.27. OVeRALL Respondent peRCeptIOn
               oveRall ReSpOnDent peRception OF loans. tALAS
                                             of LOAnS. talas
figuRe 5.4.27. oveRall
inteRvention (n=103)   Respondent peRception of loans. talas
                                                           contRol (n=34)
InteRVentIOn (n=103)                                                            COntROL (n=34)
inteRvention (n=103)                                                            contRol (n=34)




64
62
64
findingS Of chaptEr 5.4.
                                                                                                              	 cant	positive	changes	
•			General	analysis	of	respondents’	perception	is	trended	upward.	The	intervention	group	revealed	more	signifi
than in the control group.

                                                        	 dent	on	losing	their	collateral	assets.	The	rate	of	respondents	fully	confi
•			In	the	basic	survey	half	of	respondents	was	not	confi                                                                           	 dent	
that the bank/MFI won’t take possession of their collateral assets to compensate the debt has increase after consultations. Whereas
in the control group this parameter didn’t change.

•			In	the	intervention	group	perception	of	short-term	loan	objectives	shifted	towards	long-term	objectives	in	the	3rd	survey.	In	the	
control group it went towards short-term objectives.

•			The	majority	of	respondent	believe	that	loans	improve	their	life	quality	(answered	“strongly	agree”	and	“partly	agree”).		The	3rd
survey showed that in the intervention group increased rate (+5% of base level) of respondent who do not believe borrowed money
improve their life quality. In the control group this % decreased (-8% of base level).

•			Approximately	90%	of	respondents	feel	confi               	 nancial	plans.	Across	the	intervention	group	rate	of	respondents	who	
                                               	 dent	making	fi
feel confident making financial plans grew after consultations by 5% of base level in the second survey and 13% in the 3rd survey. In
the control group this parameter decreased in the 3rd survey by 5% of base level.

                                                            	 dent	they	are	capable	of	being	more	effi
•			The	majority	of	respondents	(approximately	80%)	are	confi                                       		cient	with	their	expenditures.

                                                                      		cult	 to	 make.	 	 Only	 15-20%	 in	 both	 groups	 mentioned	 that	 they	
•	 	 	 Most	 respondent	 believe	 their	 loan	 payments	 are	 not	 diffi
experienced difficulties paying off their loans. In the intervention group less than 20% think they have no difficulties with payoffs
but have delays. this % is higher in the control group (28-36%). thus, even though those borrowers are able to make payments in
time they still make delays.

•			Across	Naryn	intervention	group	the	%	of	respondents	who	are	fi	 rmly	confi	 dent	in	keeping	their	collaterals,	in	capability	of	being	
more cost efficient and improvement of their financial situation next year is significantly lower that in talas.

                                                                 	 nancial	situation	and	the	degree	of	preparedness	in	the	intervention	
•			The	aggregate	parameter	of	respondents’	perception	of	their	fi
group shows higher % of optimistic respondents in talas than in naryn. the amount of pessimistic respondents in naryn was quite
high (68%) in the 3rd survey whereas in talas it was only 11% Across the control group the situation is opposite – there were more
optimists in naryn than in talas.

•			Naryn	intervention	group	revealed	increase	of	%	of	positive	and	neutral	and	positive	respondents	in	the	2nd survey, although it
decreased in the 3rd survey with increase of pessimists. talas shows continuous growth of rate of neutral and positive respondents.




                                                                                                                                              63
5.5.
5.5.                aCtIons
                    aCtIons
5.5.                aCtIons
within the framework of this study was important to figure out how consultations influenced actions of borrowers. because
within the framework of this study was important to figure out how consultations influenced actions of borrowers. because
             framework
Within the only
eventually        real actions      canstudy
                              of this         was
                                        lead to      important
                                                 future   financial to figure out how consultations influenced actions of borrowers. Because
                                                                     stability.
eventually only real actions can lead to future financial stability.
eventually only real actions can lead to future financial stability.
financial awareness and perception of loans were reviewed in the previous sections of this report. this section reviews practical
financial awareness and perception of loans were reviewed in the previous sections of this report. this section reviews practical
Financial
actions    awareness
         taken           and perception
                by borrowers       in order toof  loans were
                                               improve      theirreviewed   in the previous
                                                                  financial situation         sections
                                                                                       (My last payment ofwas   report.
                                                                                                           thismade  on this section
                                                                                                                         time;        reviews practical
                                                                                                                               i sold property to make
actions taken by borrowers in order to improve their financial situation (My last payment was made on time; i sold property to make
actions taken
loan/debt       by borrowers
            payments;              in order
                          i set financial   to improve
                                           goals   for the their
                                                            next fi nancial
                                                                  several   situation
                                                                           months;     (My last payment
                                                                                    i discussed           was made
                                                                                                 our incomes         on time; I sold
                                                                                                               and expenditures       property
                                                                                                                                   with        to make
                                                                                                                                        my family  etc.),
loan/debt payments; i set financial goals for the next several months; i discussed our incomes and expenditures with my family etc.),
loan/debt   payments;     I set financial  goals   for the  next  several  months;  I discussed  our incomes   and expenditures
their financial future plans (i will make the next payment on my loan/debt on time; if i encounter difficulties with loan payments with my  family etc.),
                                                                                                                                                      in
their financial future plans (i will make the next payment on my loan/debt on time; if i encounter difficulties with loan payments in
their
the   financial
    future  thanfuture   plans (I will make the next payment on my loan/debt on time; If I encounter difficulties with loan payments in
                  i will...).
the future than i will...).
the future than I will...).
the majority of borrowers (over 80%) made their previous payments promptly as the result of basic survey indicate. in the second
the majority of borrowers (over 80%) made their previous payments promptly as the result of basic survey indicate. in the second
the majority
survey   the %ofofborrowers
                    borrowers     (over   had made
                                    who80%)    payment  their previous
                                                             delays   decreased  by promptly
                                                                          payments    2% across as theintervention
                                                                                                  the  result of basic  survey
                                                                                                                    group.   atindicate.
                                                                                                                                 the sameIn time
                                                                                                                                            the second
                                                                                                                                                 5% of
survey the % of borrowers who had payment delays decreased by 2% across the intervention group. at the same time 5% of
             % of
survey thepaid
borrowers           borrowers
                  off their debts.  who   hadcontrol
                                       in the  payment           thisdecreased
                                                             delays
                                                         group        parameter by    2% across
                                                                                  increased  by 8%the intervention
                                                                                                     and            group.
                                                                                                          3% paid off        At the same time 5% of
                                                                                                                      their debts.
borrowers paid off their debts. in the control group this parameter increased by 8% and 3% paid off their debts.
borrowers paid off their debts. In the control group this parameter increased by 8% and 3% paid off their debts.

FIGURe 5.5.1. MY
figuRe        My LASt payMent On
                 last pAYMent on MY loan/debt WAS
                                 My LOAn/DeBt was MADe
                                                  Made On
                                                       on tIMe
                                                          tiMe
figuRe 5.5.1. My last payMent on My loan/debt was Made on tiMe
InteRVentIOn (n=211)
inteRvention                                                                               contRol (n=79)
                                                                                           COntROL
inteRvention (n=211)                                                                       contRol (n=79)




almost all borrowers believe they will make their next payment on time. this situation is enforced by the high % of respondents who
Almost all
almost     borrowers believe
       all borrowers  believe they  will make
                              they will  make their   next payment
                                                            payment on
                                                their next               time. this
                                                                      on time.        situation is
                                                                                                 is enforced
                                                                                this situation               by the
                                                                                                    enforced by the high
                                                                                                                     high %% of respondents who
                                                                                                                             of respondents who
are convinced they can control their financial situation (section 5.4). in the intervention group the rate of respondents uncertain
are convinced
are             they can
    convinced they   can control  their financial
                         control their   financial situation  (Section 5.4).
                                                   situation (section   5.4). in  the intervention
                                                                                       intervention group
                                                                              In the                         the rate
                                                                                                      group the        of respondents
                                                                                                                 rate of                uncertain
                                                                                                                          respondents uncertain
they can make next payment on time increased by 15% in the 3rd survey against the previous survey. for the control group this
they can make    next payment   on  time   increased   by  15%  in the 3rd survey    against   the  previous survey.  For  the
they can make next payment on time increased by 15% in the 3rd survey against the previous survey. for the control group this  control group this
parameter did not change.
parameter did
parameter       not change.
            did not change.
the number of borrowers who think they will delay next loan payment is higher than the number of borrowers who delayed their
the number of
the number       borrowers who
              of borrowers  who think   they will
                                 think they   will delay  next loan
                                                   delay next  loan payment
                                                                     payment is  is higher  than the
                                                                                    higher than    the number  of borrowers
                                                                                                       number of   borrowers who    delayed their
                                                                                                                               who delayed  their
previous payment across the intervention group. in the control group this number is higher in the 3rd           rd survey only.
previous payment
previous payment across
                    across the
                           the intervention
                               intervention group.     in the
                                               group. In  the control
                                                              control group
                                                                       group this
                                                                               this number
                                                                                    number is    higher in
                                                                                              is higher    the 3
                                                                                                        in the      surveyonly.
                                                                                                               3rdsurvey    only.

figuRe        i WILL
FIGURe 5.5.2. I will MAKe
                     MaKe neXt pAYMent
                               payMent On
                                       on MY loan/debt On
                                          My LOAn/DeBt    tiMeЯ
                                                       on tIMe
figuRe 5.5.2. i will MaKe neXt payMent on My loan/debt on tiMeЯ
inteRvention (n=211)
InteRVentIOn (n=211)                                                                               (n=79)
                                                                                           contRol (n=79)
                                                                                           COntROL
inteRvention (n=211)                                                                       contRol (n=79)




66
66
64
almost all borrowers believe they will make their next payment on time. this situation is enforced by the high % of respondents who
almost all borrowers believe they will make their next payment on time. this situation is enforced by the high % of respondents who
Almost
are    all borrowers
       all
    convinced
almost                believe
                they can
           borrowers  believe they
                         control
                              they  will
                                  their   make their
                                    will financial
                                          make     situation
                                                their next payment
                                                      next    (section
                                                            payment   on
                                                                      on time.
                                                                        5.4).
                                                                         time.    the situation
                                                                              inthis             is
                                                                                                 is enforced
                                                                                       intervention          by
                                                                                                      group the the high
                                                                                                                 rate       of respondents
                                                                                                                          % of
                                                                                                                      of respondents       who
                                                                                                                                       uncertain
are convinced   they can control  their  financial situation  (section  5.4).     the situation
                                                                              inthis   intervention enforced by the
                                                                                                      group the     high
                                                                                                                 rate     %    respondents
                                                                                                                      of respondents       who
                                                                                                                                       uncertain
are
they
are convinced   they
     can makethey
    convinced        can
                      payment
                 nextcan control
                         controlontheir
                                    time
                                  their  financial
                                           increased
                                         financial situation
                                                      by 15%
                                                   situation  (Section  5.4).
                                                                in the 3rd
                                                              (section  5.4). In
                                                                           survey
                                                                              in  the
                                                                                  the  intervention
                                                                                     against          group
                                                                                               the previous
                                                                                       intervention   group  the
                                                                                                             survey.
                                                                                                             the rate
                                                                                                                 rate of
                                                                                                                      for
                                                                                                                      of respondents
                                                                                                                         respondents   uncertain
                                                                                                                          the control group this
                                                                                                                                       uncertain
they can make next payment on time increased by 15% in the 3rd survey against the previous survey. for the control group this
they can
parameter
they     make
            did
     can make    next
                not change.
                 next payment   on  time   increased  by   15%  in the 3rd survey    against   the  previous survey.  For the control
                      payment on time increased by 15% in the 3rd survey against the previous survey. for the control group this      group this
parameter   did not change.
parameter
parameter   did
            did not change.
the number    ofnot change.who think they will delay next loan payment is higher than the number of borrowers who delayed their
                 borrowers
the number of borrowers who think they will delay next loan payment is higher than the number of borrowers who delayed their
the number
previous
the           of borrowers
              of
         payment
    number       borrowers  who
                    across the
                            who  think   they will
                                 think they
                               intervention    group.
                                              will delay  next
                                                       in the
                                                   delay  next loan
                                                               loan payment
                                                              control  group this
                                                                     payment     is higher
                                                                                 is number
                                                                                    higher  than
                                                                                              is higher
                                                                                            than   the number
                                                                                                   the  in the 3rd
                                                                                                       number  of borrowers
                                                                                                               of             who delayed
                                                                                                                              who
                                                                                                                   survey only.
                                                                                                                  borrowers        delayed their
                                                                                                                                           their
previous payment    across the intervention    group.  in the control  group this   number    is higher in the 3rd survey only.
previous
previous payment
         payment
figuRe 5.5.3.       across
                    across
                 i Made    the intervention
                           the intervention
                         pRevious      payMent group.
                                               group.
                                                    andIn the
                                                       in the control
                                                              control
                                                            will   MaKegroup
                                                                       group
                                                                          neXt this number
                                                                               thispayMent    is higher
                                                                                    number is higher    in the
                                                                                                 My loan/debt  3rd survey
                                                                                                        in the 3rd survey  only.
                                                                                                                           only. naRyn
                                                                                                                    on tiMe.
figuRe 5.5.3. i Made pRevious payMent and will MaKe neXt payMent My loan/debt on tiMe. naRyn
figuRe 5.5.3.
FIGURe 5.5.3. I
inteRvention    MADe   pRevious pAYMent
                Made pReVIOUS
              i(n=108)                  and WILL
                                payMent AnD will MAKe neXt pAYMent
                                                 MaKe neXt payMent MY
                                                              contRol  loan/debt On
                                                                       LOAn/DeBt
                                                                   My(n=45)      on tIMe.
                                                                                    tiMe. nARYn
                                                                                          naRyn
inteRvention   (n=108)                                        contRol (n=45)
InteRVentIOn   (n=108)
inteRvention (n=108)                                          COntROL (n=45)
                                                              contRol (n=45)




figuRe 5.5.4.
       5.5.4. I
figuRe 5.5.4. i Made
              i MADe  pRevious
                Made pReVIOUS  payMent
                      pRevious pAYMent and
                               payMent AnD will
                                       and WILL MaKe
                                                MaKe neXt
                                           will MAKe neXt  payMent
                                                     neXt pAYMent  My
                                                           payMent MY loan/debt
                                                                   My LOAn/DeBt on tiMe.
                                                                                on tIMe.
                                                                      loan/debt On       talas
                                                                                         talas
                                                                                   tiMe. tALAS
FIGURe
inteRvention  (n=103)                            contRol (n=34)
figuRe 5.5.4. i Made
inteRvention (n=103)  pRevious payMent and will MaKe neXt  payMent
                                                 contRol (n=34)    My loan/debt on tiMe. talas
InteRVentIOn (n=103)                                               COntROL (n=34)
inteRvention (n=103)                                               contRol (n=34)




                                                                                                                    financial organization
                                    significant number (over 30%) of responders stated they consulted their financial
the basic survey indicates that a significant
the basic survey indicates that a significant number (over 30%) of responders stated they consulted their financial organization
about   debt
the basic     payment
            survey     postponement/restructuring.
                   indicates that a significant number   Later
                                                         later on
                                                           (over 30%)  number
                                                                  this of       decreased
                                                                          responders  statedacross the intervention
                                                                                              they consulted          group as
                                                                                                              their financial   well as the
                                                                                                                              organization
about   debt  payment  postponement/restructuring.       later on this number   decreased   across the intervention   group as  well as the
number
about debtof respondent   without  diffi culties
                                   difficulties
              payment postponement/restructuring.making  payments   increased  by   50%. Increase
                                                                                         increase of the number    of respondents
                                                                                                                            as well free of
number    of respondent   without difficulties making later    on this
                                                         payments      numberby
                                                                    increased   decreased   acrossof
                                                                                    50%. increase  the intervention
                                                                                                     the number of group
                                                                                                                      respondents    as the
                                                                                                                                    free of
difficulties
difficulties
number    of making  debt
             respondent   payments
                          without    observed
                                   difficulties  in the
                                                 making control group
                                                         payments      was  bigger.
                                                                    increased  by   50%. increase of the number    of respondents   free of
difficulties making debt payments observed in the control group was bigger.
FIGURe
difficulties
figuRe 5.5.5.     COnSULteD
                I consulted
             making
                i               WIth
                     debt payments
                                with    MY financial
                                     observed
                                        My   FInAnCIAL    InStItUtIOn
                                                 in the control group was
                                                          institution      (BAnK,
                                                                            bigger. Mfi)
                                                                           (banK,   MFI) about
                                                                                         ABOUt postponeMent/RestRuctuRing
                                                                                                 pOStpOneMent/ReStRUCtURInG
figuRe 5.5.5. i consulted with My financial institution (banK, Mfi) about postponeMent/RestRuctuRing
OF MY ACtIVe     DeBt In the pASt thRee MOnthS
of My active
of My
figuRe           debt
                 debt in
       5.5.5. i consulted
       active         in the past
                             pastMy
                           with   thRee Months
                                    financial
                                        Monthsinstitution (banK, Mfi) about postponeMent/RestRuctuRing
InteRVentIOn
inteRvention
of My  active  (n=211)
                 debt in the past thRee Months                    contRol (n=79)
                                                                  COntROL
inteRvention (n=211)                                              contRol (n=79)
inteRvention (n=211)                                                                  contRol (n=79)




                                                                                                                                              67
                                                                                                                                              67
                                                                                                                                              65
                                                                                                                                              67
Most respondents did not sell their property to repay the debts. there is a noticeable decline in the share of borrowers who sold
Most respondents did not sell their property to repay the debts. there is a noticeable decline in the share of borrowers who sold
their property for debt repayment in regards to the 2 groups in the second measurement.
their property for debt repayment in regards to the 2 groups in the second measurement.
FIGURe 5.5.6. I
figuRe        i SOLD
                sold MY
                     My pROpeRtY
                        pRopeRty FOR debt/loan RepAYMent
                                 foR DeBt/LOAn RepayMent
figuRe 5.5.6. i sold My pRopeRty foR debt/loan RepayMent
 InteRVentIOn (n=211)
 inteRvention                                                          contRol (n=79)
                                                                       COntROL
 inteRvention (n=211)                                                  contRol (n=79)




Dynamics of borrowers who are planning to take a new loan while repaying the current loan, or within 12 months after the
dynamics
dynamics of borrowers who are planning to take a new loan while repaying the current loan, or within 12 months after the
repayment of debt has a decreasing trend. the percentage of respondents planning to take a new loan while still repaying current
repayment of debt has a decreasing trend. the percentage of respondents planning to take a new loan while still repaying current
debt is slightly below the percentage of borrowers who are planning to take a new loan after closing previous one. Most likely this is
debt is slightly below the percentage of borrowers who are planning to take a new loan after closing previous one. Most likely this is
                                               difficulty of repaying several parallel loans. the percentage of respondents planning
due to the fact that borrowers understand the difficulty
due to the fact that borrowers understand the difficulty of repaying several parallel loans. the percentage of respondents planning
                                           as mentioned earlier it is impossible to fully assert that the respondents in the control
to take new loans has a decreasing trend. As
to take new loans has a decreasing trend. as mentioned earlier it is impossible to fully assert that the respondents in the control
                  influenced.
group were not influenced.
group were not influenced.
figuRe          plan to BORROW
       5.5.7. i pLAn                 (within 12 Months) AFteR
                        boRRow again (WIthIn                           this loan
                                                        afteR Repaying thIS
FIGURe        i plan tO
figuRe 5.5.7. I                again (within 12 MOnthS)
                     to boRRow AGAIn                          Repaying this LOAn
                                                Months) afteR RepAYInG      loan
inteRvention (n=211)                                                   contRol (n=79)
InteRVentIOn (n=211)
inteRvention                                                           contRol (n=79)
                                                                       COntROL




figuRe
FIGURe 5.5.8.
figuRe
              i pLAn
              i plan tO
       5.5.8. I
       5.5.8.
                        boRRow again WhILe
                plan to BORROW
                     to boRRow AGAIn
                                     while still RepAYInG
                               again while StILL
                                                 Repaying this LOAn
                                                               loan
                                           still Repaying thIS
                                                          this loan
inteRvention (n=211)
InteRVentIOn (n=211)                                                           (n=79)
                                                                       contRol (n=79)
                                                                       COntROL
inteRvention (n=211)                                                   contRol (n=79)




only about half (47%) of respondents in the intervention group said that they made family budget before baseline survey. percentage
Only about half (47%) of respondents in the intervention group said that they made family budget before baseline survey. percentage
only
of respondents who planned family budget is higher in the control group than in the intervention.
of respondents who planned family budget is higher in the control group than in the intervention.




66
68
68
figuRe 5.5.9. i have Made a faMily budget (wRitten down incoMes and eXpenses) in the past 3 Months
FIGURe 5.5.9. I
figuRe          have MADe
              i hAVe      a FAMILY
                     Made A faMily BUDGet
                                   budget (WRItten
                                          (wRitten DOWn
                                                   down InCOMeS and eXpenSeS)
                                                        incoMes AnD           in the pASt
                                                                    eXpenses) In     past 3 MOnthS
                                                                                            Months
inteRvention (n=211)                                                         contRol (n=79)
InteRVentIOn (n=211)
inteRvention
inteRvention (n=211)                                                         contRol (n=79)
                                                                             COntROL
                                                                             contRol (n=79)




in the 2nd  survey in naryn and talas, the share of respondents that made family budget in the aftermath of consultations has
In the
in
in     2nd survey
   the 2nd
       2nd  surveyin
            survey  innaryn
                    in naryn andtalas,
                                  talas, the
                       narynand
                             and  talas,       share of
                                          the share
                                          the  share of respondents
                                                         respondents that
                                                     of  respondents        made family
                                                                       that made
                                                                       that made  family budget
                                                                                  family budget in
                                                                                         budget   in the
                                                                                                     the aftermath
                                                                                                           aftermath of   consultations has
                                                                                                                      of consultations   has
increased. then by the 3rd measurement this level decreased in naryn (-21%) and continued to grow in talas (+ 6%). it can be
increased. then  by  the 3rd measurement      this level  decreased  in naryn (-21%) and  continued    to  grow
increased. then by the 3rd measurement this level decreased in naryn (-21%) and continued to grow in talas (+    in talas     6%). it
                                                                                                                           (+ 6%).    can be
                                                                                                                                   It can
                                                                                                                                   it     be
assumed that the consultation gave a more long-term effect on the respondents from talas than from naryn.
assumed that
assumed        the consultation
          that the              gave a
                   consultation gave  a more
                                        more long-term
                                                long-term eff     on the
                                                              ect on
                                                           effect
                                                           effect    the respondents
                                                                         respondents from
                                                                                     from talas  than from
                                                                                           talas than   from naryn.
                                                                                                              naryn.
figuRe 5.5.10. i have Made a faMily budget (wRitten down eXpenses and incoMes) in the past 3 Months,
FIGURe 5.5.10.
figuRe         I have
       5.5.10. i      MADe a
                 hAVe Made   FAMILY budget
                           A faMily BUDGet (wRitten
                                           (WRItten down
                                                    DOWn eXpenses  AnD incoMes)
                                                         eXpenSeS and           In the
                                                                       InCOMeS) in     pASt 3
                                                                                   the past 3 Months,
                                                                                              MOnthS,
naRyn
naRyn
nARYn
inteRvention (n=108)                                  contRol (n=45)
inteRvention
inteRvention (n=108)
InteRVentIOn (n=108)                                                         contRol (n=45)
                                                                             contRol (n=45)
                                                                             COntROL




figuRe         I have
FIGURe 5.5.11. i      MADe a
                 hAVe Made   FAMILY budget
                           A faMily BUDGet (wRitten
                                           (WRItten down
                                                    DOWn eXpenses AnD incoMes)
                                                         eXpenSeS and          In the past
                                                                      InCOMeS) in     pASt 3 Months,
                                                                                             MOnthS,
figuRe
talas
tALAS  5.5.11. i have Made a faMily budget (wRitten down eXpenses and incoMes) in the past 3 Months,
talas
inteRvention
InteRVentIOn (n=103)                                     contRol (n=34)
                                                         COntROL
             (n=103)
inteRvention (n=103)
inteRvention                                                     (n=34)
                                                         contRol (n=34)
                                                         contRol




Baseline survey
baseline          showed that
         survey showed     that 60%
                                 60% of   the respondents
                                       of the   respondents in   the intervention
                                                              in the                  group made
                                                                                              made finance
                                                                       intervention group                   planning, this
                                                                                                    finance planning,      percentage is
                                                                                                                      this percentage     higher
                                                                                                                                       is higher
baseline
baseline survey
         survey
   control
in control  group showed
                  showed   that
                           that 60%
                   constituting  60%
                                  76%. of
                                       of the
                                          the
                                         In     respondents
                                                respondents
                                             intervention     in the
                                                              in the
                                                            group   theintervention
                                                                       intervention
                                                                         proportion ofgroup
                                                                                      group  made
                                                                                      ofrespondents finance
                                                                                             made finance
                                                                                          respondents       planning,
                                                                                                            planning,
                                                                                                        whomade       this percentage
                                                                                                                      this percentage
                                                                                                             madefinance
                                                                                                                   finance  planningby
                                                                                                                                     byis higher
                                                                                                                                       is the
                                                                                                                                          higher
                                                                                                                                              2nd
in          group  constituting   76%.  in  intervention   group   the   proportion                    who                 planning      the 2nd
in
in control group
   control
measurement group  constituting
                   constituting
                sharply increased 76%.
                                  76%.  in intervention
                                        in  intervention
                                        naryn
                                    in naryn     (+ 20%)   group
                                                           group
                                                          and
                                                    20%) and       the proportion
                                                                   the
                                                               remained  proportion   of respondents
                                                                                      of respondents
                                                                                     unchanged
                                                                           virtuallyunchanged          whohowever,
                                                                                                       who
                                                                                                     talas.
                                                                                                  intalas.  made finance
                                                                                                            made  finance
                                                                                                                     bythe
                                                                                                                        theplanning
                                                                                                                           planning by the
                                                                                                                                    by   the 2nd
                                                                                                                                measurement
                                                                                                                            3rd measurement  2nd
                                                                                                                                               in
measurement     sharply increased   in           (+           remained     virtually             in        however, by     3rd                 in
measurement
measurement
naryn           sharply
                sharply
       this level       increased
                        increased
            level decreased
                  decreased by
                             by 19% in
                                    in naryn
                                       naryn
                                 19% and         (+
                                                 (+
                                       and increased20%)
                                                    20%)
                                              increased byand
                                                          and remained
                                                              remained
                                                         by 18%   in talas.
                                                             18% in        virtually
                                                                           virtually
                                                                      talas. in      unchanged
                                                                                     unchanged
                                                                                the control
                                                                             In the              in
                                                                                                 in
                                                                                    control group,  talas.
                                                                                                    talas.
                                                                                             group, the    however,
                                                                                                           however,
                                                                                                    the percentage  by
                                                                                                                    by
                                                                                                        percentage of  the
                                                                                                                       the 3rd
                                                                                                                           3rd
                                                                                                                    of people   measurement
                                                                                                                                measurement
                                                                                                                               who set
                                                                                                                       people who              in
                                                                                                                                               in
                                                                                                                                        financial
                                                                                                                                   set financial
naryn this
naryn  this
       thisalevel
narynhas
goals       level decreased
                  decreased
             decreasing      by
                             byin
                         trend   19%
                                 19%   and
                                       and
                                   naryn      increased
                                              increased
                                            and          by
                                                         by 18%
                                                  increasing 18%
                                                             trendin
                                                                  inintalas.
                                                                      talas. in the
                                                                             in
                                                                        talas.  the control  group, the
                                                                                    control group,      percentage of
                                                                                                    the percentage  of people
                                                                                                                       people who  set financial
                                                                                                                               who set financial
goals has a decreasing trend in naryn and increasing trend in talas.
goals has a
goals has    decreasing trend
           a decreasing  trend in
                                in naryn
                                   naryn and      increasing trend
                                            and increasing   trend inin talas.
                                                                        talas.




                                                                                                                                               69
                                                                                                                                               67
                                                                                                                                               69
                                                                                                                                               69
FIGURe 5.5.12. i
figuRe
figuRe         I have Set financial
                 hAVe set FInAnCIAL goals FOR the neXt
                                    GOALS foR               MOnthS, naRyn
                                                       FeW Months,
                                                       few          nARYn
       5.5.12. i
figuRe 5.5.12.   have set
               i have set financial
                          financial goals
                                    goals foR
                                          foR the neXt few
                                              the neXt      Months, naRyn
                                                       few Months,  naRyn
InteRVentIOn (n=108)
inteRvention                                      COntROL (n=45)
                                                  contRol
inteRvention
inteRvention (n=108)
             (n=108)                                                    contRol
                                                                        contRol (n=45)
                                                                                (n=45)




figuRe
figuRe 5.5.13.
       5.5.13. i have  set financial goals foR the neXt few Months. talas
figuRe
FIGURe         iI have
       5.5.13. i  have
                  hAVe
                       set
                       set
                       Set
                           financial
                           financial
                           FInAnCIAL
                                     goals
                                     goals
                                     GOALS
                                           foR
                                           foR
                                           FOR the neXt
                                               the neXt few
                                                        few
                                                        FeW
                                                            Months.
                                                            Months.
                                                            MOnthS.
                                                                    talas
                                                                    talas
                                                                    tALAS
inteRvention (n=103)
inteRvention (n=103)                               contRol(n=34)        contRol(n=34)
InteRVentIOn (n=103)
inteRvention                                                            contRol(n=34)
                                                                        COntROL(n=34)




the  percentage of       respondents who        discussed their    incomes and    expenses with      their families   is higher   in talas  than in  naryn.
the  percentage of
the percentage      of respondents
                         respondents who
                                       who discussed         their incomes
                                                discussed their    incomes and
                                                                             and expenses
                                                                                  expenses with      their families
                                                                                                with their            is higher
                                                                                                            families is   higher in
                                                                                                                                  in talas
                                                                                                                                      talas than  in naryn.
                                                                                                                                            than in  naryn.
this
this level
     level  has
            has  increased
                 increased    by
                              by 4%
                                 4%   by
                                      by   the
                                           the    second
                                                  second  measurement
                                                          measurement     in
                                                                          in  naryn
                                                                              naryn  and
                                                                                     and    remained
                                                                                            remained    virtually
                                                                                                        virtually  unchanged
                                                                                                                   unchanged     in
                                                                                                                                 in  talas.
                                                                                                                                     talas. but
                                                                                                                                            but by
                                                                                                                                                by  the
                                                                                                                                                    the 3rd
                 increased by
this level has increased          4% by
                              by 4%   by the       second measurement
                                            the second     measurement in  in naryn
                                                                              naryn and      remainedvirtually
                                                                                      andremained                   unchangedin
                                                                                                         virtuallyunchanged           talas.but
                                                                                                                                   intalas.  Butby   the3rd
                                                                                                                                                 bythe   3rd
                                                                                                                                                        3rd
measurement      it decreased    by 8%   in   naryn    and increased   by 8%  in talas. in  the  control  group   this figure  by  the  2nd  measurement
measurement
measurement it      decreased by
                 it decreased    by 8%
                                 by  8% in
                                    8%    in naryn
                                               naryn and
                                         in   naryn     andincreased
                                                       and  increasedby
                                                           increased    by8%
                                                                       by  8%in
                                                                          8%   intalas.
                                                                              in  talas.in
                                                                                 talas.  Inthe
                                                                                        in        controlgroup
                                                                                             thecontrol
                                                                                            the  control           thisfigure
                                                                                                           groupthis
                                                                                                          group   this   figure
                                                                                                                       figure  by
                                                                                                                                by
                                                                                                                               by  the
                                                                                                                                     the
                                                                                                                                   the   2nd measurement
                                                                                                                                        2nd
                                                                                                                                        2nd  measurement
decreased
decreased    by
             by 5%
                5%    in
                      in  naryn
                          naryn and
                                and  26%
                                     26%     in
                                             in  talas,
                                                 talas, while
                                                        while  by
                                                               by the
                                                                  the 3rd
                                                                      3rd measurement
                                                                          measurement       it
                                                                                            it reached
                                                                                               reached  previous
                                                                                                        previous    level
                                                                                                                    level  (56%)
                                                                                                                           (56%) in
                                                                                                                                 in   naryn
                                                                                                                                      naryn  and
                                                                                                                                             and increased
                                                                                                                                                 increased
decreased by 5% in naryn and         26%    in  talas, while  by the 3
                                and 26% in talas, while by the 3rd measurement it reached previous level (56%) in naryn and
                                                                      rd
                                                                         measurement     it reached   previous  level  (56%)  in naryn    and increased  by
                                                                                                                                                 increased
by
by 20%
   20%   in
         in talas
            talas  in
                   in  comparison
                       comparison   to
                                    to the
                                       the     2nd   measurement.
                                            nd 2nd measurement.
20%
by   in talas
   20%         in comparison
         in talas  in comparison to the 2 2nd
                                    to the     measurement.
                                                     measurement.
figuRe
figuRe 5.5.14. i  have discussed with My faMily ouR incoMes and eXpenses, naRyn
FIGURe 5.5.14.
figuRe 5.5.14. i  hAVe discussed
               iI have
                  have           WIth My
                       DISCUSSeD with
                       discussed with MY faMily
                                      My FAMILY ouR
                                         faMily OUR incoMes
                                                ouR InCOMeS and
                                                    incoMes AnD eXpenses,
                                                            and eXpenSeS, naRyn
                                                                eXpenses, nARYn
                                                                          naRyn
inteRvention
inteRvention (n=108)                                                               contRol (n=45)
InteRVentIOn (n=108)
inteRvention (n=108)                                                               COntROL (n=45)
                                                                                   contRol
                                                                                   contRol (n=45)




figuRe
figuRe 5.5.15. i  have discussed with My faMily ouR incoMes and  eXpenses. talas
FIGURe 5.5.15.
figuRe 5.5.15. i  hAVe discussed
               iI have
                  have           WIth My
                       DISCUSSeD with
                       discussed with MY faMily
                                      My FAMILY ouR
                                         faMily OUR incoMes
                                                ouR InCOMeS and
                                                    incoMes AnD eXpenses.
                                                            and  eXpenSeS. talas
                                                                 eXpenses. tALAS
                                                                           talas
inteRvention
inteRvention (n=103)                                    contRol(n=34)
InteRVentIOn (n=103)
inteRvention (n=103)                                                               contRol(n=34)
                                                                                   COntROL(n=34)
                                                                                   contRol(n=34)




Intervention group.
intervention
intervention  group. More than  70% of respondents indicated  in the baseline survey  that they spend enough   money for    family.
intervention         More than
              group. More than 70%  of respondents
                                70% of respondents indicated  in the
                                                                 the baseline
                                                    indicated in               survey that
                                                                     baseline survey  that they spend enough
                                                                                           they spend          money for
                                                                                                       enough money     for family.
                                                                                                                            family.
however,
however,  the percentage of respondents  who do not spend  enough  money   in the baseline survey was quite high (over 20%).  after
          the percentage of respondents
however, the percentage of respondents who do not spend enough money in the baseline survey was quite high (over 20%). after
                                         who do not spend  enough  money   in the baseline survey was quite high (over 20%).  After
                                                                                                                              after
68
70
70
70
           consultation by
providing consultation
providing                   the 2nd
                        by the   2nd  measurement
                                      measurementthe
                                 2nd measurement       the   share
                                                       theshare
                                                             shareofof borrowers
                                                                       borrowersin
                                                                    ofborrowers    in naryn
                                                                                      narynwho
                                                                                   innaryn      who    believe
                                                                                                whobelieve       that
                                                                                                       believe that     they
                                                                                                                 that they      spend
                                                                                                                        they spend     enough
                                                                                                                                       enough money
                                                                                                                                spend enough          for
                                                                                                                                              money for
providing
family has consultation
            increased byby
                         6%,the
                              in 2nd
                                 talasmeasurement
                                        by  9%.  then  thethe
                                                       by    share
                                                                 3rdof borrowers
                                                                     measurement   in naryn
                                                                                      this      who
                                                                                             indicator believe
                                                                                                          fell   that
                                                                                                               sharply  they
                                                                                                                          in    spend
                                                                                                                              naryn  byenough
                                                                                                                                        25%   money
                                                                                                                                             and grew for
                                                                                                                                                       in
       has increased
family has            by6%,
            increasedby  6%,inin talas
                               talas  byby  9%.
                                          9%.    then
                                              then   byby
                                                        the   3rd3rd
                                                            the      measurement
                                                                 measurement      thisthis   indicator
                                                                                       indicator          fell sharply
                                                                                                   fell sharply           in naryn
                                                                                                                   in naryn          by and
                                                                                                                                 by 25% 25%grew
                                                                                                                                             and grew  in
                                                                                                                                                 in talas
family
talas  has
      by    increased
         another  6%. by 6%,  in talas  by  9%.  then  by   the  3rd measurement      this   indicator    fell sharply    in  naryn  by 25%  and grew  in
by another
talas        6%. 6%.
      by another
talas by another 6%.
control
control group.
Control  group. the
                the percentage
                    percentage of    respondents who
                                  of respondents           spend sufficient
                                                     who spend                  money for
                                                                   sufficient money
                                                                   sufficient  money     for families
                                                                                        for   families in
                                                                                             families    innaryn
                                                                                                        in  narynfirst
                                                                                                           naryn     firstfell
                                                                                                                            fellby
                                                                                                                    first  fell  bythe
                                                                                                                                    the2nd
                                                                                                                                by the 2nd  measurement
                                                                                                                                        2nd measurement
control  group.
        and then
(-13%), and     the percentage
                  increased by
             then increased       of
                             by 27%. respondents
                                27%. Inin talas this who
                                                this level spend   sufficient
                                                     level increased    all the
                                                            increased all      money
                                                                            the time
                                                                                time andfor
                                                                                     and by  families
                                                                                                the fi
                                                                                            by the      in
                                                                                                    final  naryn    first
                                                                                                            survey reached
                                                                                                                     reached 100%.
                                                                                                                           fell by the
                                                                                                                                  100%.2nd  measurement
(-13%),                                in talas                                                     final
                                                                                                       nal survey
(-13%), and then increased by 27%. in talas this level increased all the time and by the final survey reached 100%.
figuRe 5.5.16. Ii
FIGURe
figuRe 5.5.16.    spend
                i SpenD enough
                  spend enOUGh Money
                        enough MOneY on
                               Money On food,
                                     on FOOD,
                                        food, CLOthInG,
                                              clothing, tRanspoRt
                                              clothing, tRAnSpORt to
                                                                  to Keep
                                                        tRanspoRt tO Keep MY
                                                                          My faMily
                                                                          My FAMILY well.
                                                                             faMily WeLL. naRyn
                                                                                          naRyn
                                                                                    well. nARYn
                i spend enough Money on food, clothing,
figuRe 5.5.16.(n=108)
inteRvention                                            tRanspoRt to Keep My faMily well. naRyn
                                                     contRol(n=45)
inteRvention (n=108)
InteRVentIOn                                                                     contRol(n=45)
                                                                                 COntROL(n=45)
inteRvention (n=108)                                                             contRol(n=45)




figuRe 5.5.17. i
figuRe 5.5.17.   spend enough
               i spend        Money on
                       enough Money on food,
                                       food, clothing,
                                             clothing, tRanspoRt to Keep
                                                       tRanspoRt to      My faMily
                                                                    Keep My        well, talas
                                                                            faMily well, talas
figuRe
FIGURe 5.5.17.
       5.5.17.
inteRvention   i
               I spend
                 SpenD
             (n=103)   enough
                       enOUGh Money
                              MOneY on
                                    On food,
                                       FOOD, clothing,
                                             CLOthInG, tRanspoRt
                                                       tRAnSpORt
                                                    contRol(n=34)to
                                                                 tO Keep
                                                                    Keep My
                                                                         MY faMily
                                                                            FAMILY       talas
                                                                                   well, tALAS
                                                                                   WeLL,
inteRvention (n=103)                                contRol(n=34)
             (n=103)
inteRvention (n=103)
InteRVentIOn                                                                     contRol(n=34)
                                                                                 COntROL(n=34)




level of
      of respondents
level of respondents inclined
         respondents inclined towards
                     inclined towards borrowing
                              towards borrowing rather
                                      borrowing rather than
                                                rather than saving in
                                                                   in advance
                                                       than saving
                                                            saving in advance is
                                                                      advance is higher
                                                                              is higher in
                                                                                 higher in naryn
                                                                                           naryn than
                                                                                        in naryn than in
                                                                                                 than in talas.
                                                                                                         talas.
                                                                                                      in talas.
Level
level of respondents inclined towards borrowing rather than saving in advance is higher in naryn than in talas.
figuRe 5.5.18. Ii
       5.5.18.
figuRe 5.5.18.    pRefeR
                i pReFeR to
                  pRefeR tO boRRow
                         to BORROW Money
                            boRRow MOneY
                                   Money (When
                                         (when Ii
                                         (when    need
                                                i neeD theM)
                                                  need theM) RatheR
                                                       theM) RAtheR
                                                             RatheR thAn
                                                                    than save
                                                                    than SAVe
                                                                         save In
                                                                              in advance,
                                                                              in ADVAnCe, naRyn
                                                                                          naRyn
                                                                                 advance, nARYn
FIGURe
figuRe 5.5.18.  i pRefeR to boRRow Money (when  i need theM) RatheR than save in advance, naRyn
inteRvention (n=108)
inteRvention (n=108)
             (n=108)                                    contRol(n=45)            contRol(n=45)
InteRVentIOn
inteRvention (n=108)                                                             COntROL(n=45)
                                                                                 contRol(n=45)




figuRe
figuRe 5.5.19.
FIGURe 5.5.19. Ii pRefeR
                i pReFeR to
                  pRefeR tO boRRow
                            boRRow MOneY
                         to BORROW Money (when Ii
                                         (when
                                   Money (When    need
                                                  need theM)
                                                i neeD theM) RAtheR
                                                             RatheR than
                                                             RatheR thAn save in
                                                                         save In
                                                                    than SAVe    advance,
                                                                                 advance, tALAS
                                                                              in ADVAnCe, talas
                                                                                          talas
figuRe 5.5.19.  i pRefeR
inteRvention (n=103)     to boRRow Money (when  i need theM) RatheR than save
                                                               contRol(n=34)  in advance, talas
inteRvention (n=103)
InteRVentIOn                                                                               contRol(n=34)
                                                                                           COntROL(n=34)
inteRvention (n=103)                                                                       contRol(n=34)




                                                                                                                                                       71
                                                                                                                                                       69
                                                                                                                                                       71
                                                                                                                                                       71
       The percentage
      The    percentage of respondents
                                    respondents who do                     know what to
                                                                 do not know               to do in            event of
                                                                                                      in the event        difficulties in payment
                                                                                                                       of difficulties        payment of
       The percentage of       of respondents who        who do not  not know what what to do   do in thethe event
                                                                                                               nd      of difficulties in in payment of    of
       loans    has   a  decreasing         trend     in  the    two   groups.      However,       in   the  2 nd measurement the intervention
      loans
       loans hashas a a decreasing
                         decreasing trend   trend in  in the
                                                          the two      groups. However,
                                                                 two groups.        However, in         the 2
                                                                                                   in the          measurement the
                                                                                                             2nd measurement           the intervention
                                                                                                                                             intervention
       group has
      group     has a     greater decrease
                      a greater        decrease (-9%)  (-9%) than        control group
                                                                  than control                (-5%). Also
                                                                                     group (-5%).                 percentage of
                                                                                                           Also percentage           respondents who
                                                                                                                                  of respondents        who
       group has
the percentage     of a   greater decrease
                       respondents      who do not     (-9%)
                                                         know whatthan tocontrol
                                                                          do in thegroup
                                                                                      event of(-5%).       Also
                                                                                                 difficulties     percentage
                                                                                                              in payment          of has
                                                                                                                           of loans  respondents
                                                                                                                                          a decreasing  who
                                                                                                                                                         trend
                                                                                                                                                            nd
       would
      would      apply
                apply     to
                          to   other
                               other     MFI
                                         MFI    for   new     loans     has   decreased:        this    reduction    in  intervention      group     by   2nd
       would     apply    to   other     MFI  ndfor
                                                for   new
                                                      new     loans
                                                              loans    has
                                                                        has   decreased:
                                                                              decreased:       this
                                                                                                this   reduction
                                                                                                        reduction    in
                                                                                                                     in intervention
                                                                                                                         intervention      group
                                                                                                                                           group     by
                                                                                                                                                     by  22 nd
        two groups. however,
in themeasurement                   in the 2 measurement
                             constituted         12%,      in   the the intervention
                                                                      control     group group
                                                                                            -   has a greater
                                                                                               10%.       The    decrease
                                                                                                                most       (-9%) than
                                                                                                                        popular         control
                                                                                                                                    source      ofgroup
                                                                                                                                                    help (-5%).
                                                                                                                                                           in
      measurement
       measurement          constituted
                             constituted        12%,
                                                 12%,apply in the
                                                           in   the   control
                                                                      control    group
                                                                                  group     -
                                                                                            - 10%.
                                                                                               10%.       The most
                                                                                                          The   most    popular
                                                                                                                        popular     source
                                                                                                                                    source      of
                                                                                                                                                of help
                                                                                                                                                    help   in
                                                                                                                                                           in
Also percentage
       solving the  of respondents
                  the    problems with    who would
                                          with    the payment
                                                         payment  to other
                                                                       is aaMFI  for
                                                                               loan  new   loans
                                                                                      institution  has   decreased:
                                                                                                       where         this reduction
                                                                                                                 respondents          in intervention
                                                                                                                                   obtain               group
                                                                                                                                                     loans.
                                                                                                                                              their loans.
      solving
       solving    the   problems
                         problems         with   the
                                                  the    payment       is
                                                                       is  a  loan
                                                                               loan  institution
                                                                                      institution      where
                                                                                                       where     respondents
                                                                                                                 respondents       obtain
                                                                                                                                   obtain    their
                                                                                                                                              their  loans.
by 2 The
     nd
        measurement       constituted
             total increase
                     increase           the
                                   in the  12%,  in the control
                                              percentage         of group    – 10%. the
                                                                     respondents          most
                                                                                        who       popular source
                                                                                               perceive             of help
                                                                                                             their loan
                                                                                                                    loan      in solving the
                                                                                                                           institution     as problems
                                                                                                                                                    advisor
                                                                                                                                                an advisor with
      The
       The   total
             total   increase      in
                                   in   the  percentage
                                              percentage         of
                                                                 of  respondents
                                                                     respondents        who
                                                                                        who    perceive
                                                                                               perceive      their
                                                                                                             their  loan   institution
                                                                                                                           institution    as
                                                                                                                                           as  an
                                                                                                                                                an  advisor
the payment
          the intervention
       in the   is a loan institution
                                    group  where
                                               was  respondents
                                                      31%, in        obtain
                                                                in the        their loans.
                                                                         control    group  the   total increase in the percentage of respondents who
                                                                                              27%.
       in the intervention
      in        intervention group  group was  was 31%,
                                                      31%, in the        control group
                                                                    the control     group 27%.27%.
perceive their loan institution as an advisor in the intervention group was 31%, in the control group 27%.
                                nd
       Results of
      Results          the 2
                   of the    2nd                 showed that
                                     survey showed
                                    survey                            lower percentage
                                                               that lower       percentage of     of respondents
                                                                                                       respondents in    in intervention
                                                                                                                             intervention group group will
                                                                                                                                                         will
Results  of the 2nd
       Results     of survey
                       the 2nd  showed
                                     survey       lower percentage
                                            thatshowed         that lower of respondents
                                                                                percentage   in intervention
                                                                                                  of respondentsgroup will
                                                                                                                         in part  with their assets
                                                                                                                             intervention       group to repay
                                                                                                                                                         will
              with their
       part with             assets to
                     their assets            repay some
                                         to repay      some part part of   their loans
                                                                        of their            than in
                                                                                   loans than            control group.
                                                                                                     in control    group.
somepartpart of their loans   than   in control    group.
       part with their assets to repay some part of their loans than in control group.
                         FIGURE 5.5.20.
                         FIGURE        5.5.20. “WHAT“WHAT WILL   WILL YOUYOU DO DO IN    THE EVENT OF
                                                                                     IN THE                      DIFFICULTIES WITH
                                                                                                            OF DIFFICULTIES          WITH LOAN LOAN
FIGURe 5.5.20. “WhAt     FIGURE WILL      YOU DO
                                       5.5.20.          In the
                                                    “WHAT          eVent
                                                                 WILL    YOU  OFDO   IN THE EVENT
                                                                                  DIFFICULtIeS   EVENT WIth OF LOAn    RepAYMent
                                                                                                                 DIFFICULTIES           In the
                                                                                                                                     WITH      LOANFUtURe?”
                                           REPAYMENT
                                          REPAYMENT            IN
                                                              IN    THE
                                                                   THE    FUTURE?”
                                                                          FUTURE?”       INTERVENTION
                                                                                         INTERVENTION             GROUP.
                                                                                                                  GROUP.      N=211
                                                                                                                             N=211
InteRVentIOn GROUp. n=211                  REPAYMENT IN THE FUTURE?” INTERVENTION GROUP. N=211
                                                             Baseline
                                                             Baseline                               Interim
                                                                                                   Interim                                Final
                                                                                                                                          Final
                                                             Baseline                               Interim                               Final
   II
    I
      will do
      will  do nothing
      will do
                nothing because          not know
                           because I do not
                nothing because II dodo not know
                                             know
    what
   what     to
            to  do
               do
    what    to  do
   II
    I
      will approach
      will  approach some
      will approach
                         some other
                         somea
                                      loan
                               other loan
                               other  loan
    institution
   institution     to obtain    new   loan
    institution to    obtain a
                   to obtain    new loan
                              a new   loan
   II            loan company as
      perceive loan
    I perceive
      perceive loan company
                                           adviser
                                   as my adviser
                        company as my  my adviser
   II
    I
      will part
      will       with some
            part with
      will part  with
                        some assets
                        some
                                       in order to
                               assets in
                               assets in order
                                                to
                                          order to
    repay
   repay     a part  of  loan
    repay a    part of
             a part  of loan
                         loan
    Seek
   Seek     an advice         my relatives
                        from my
           an  advice   from
    Seek an advice from my relatives
                                  relatives
          livestock, agricultural products
    Sell livestock,
   Sell                             products
    Sell livestock, agricultural
                       agricultural products
        difficulties
    No difficulties
   No
    No difficulties

   II will
       Report
    I will
           save more
           save
       Report
                more (cut Results
                on Main
                on Main
                     (cut       expenses)
                          down expenses)
                          down
                          Results of the
                                  of the Survey on
                                                on the Impact    Counseling on Knowledge,
                                                       Impact of Counseling    Knowledge, Feelings and
                                                                                                   and Actions of
                                                                                                               of Over-
      will save more (cut down
       Report on Main Results     of the Survey
                                         Survey on the
                                expenses)                     of Counseling on
                                                   the Impact of            on Knowledge, Feelings     Actions of Over-
                                                                                          Feelings and Actions    Over-           Borrowers, 2016
                                                                                                                         Indebted Borrowers,
                                                                                                                         Indebted Borrowers, 2016
                                                                                                                         Indebted            2016
                 FIGURE 5.5.21.
                 FIGURE 5.5.21. “WHAT  WILL YOU
                                “WHAT WILL   YOU DODO IN  THE EVENT OF
                                                       IN THE             DIFFICULTIES WITH
                                                                      OF DIFFICULTIES        LOAN
                                                                                       WITH LOAN
FIGURe 5.5.21. “WhAt WILL
                 FIGURE   YOU DO
                        5.5.21.   In the
                                “WHAT    eVent
                                       WILL  YOU  OF
                                                   DO  IN THE EVENT
                                                     DIFFICULtIeS WIth
                                                              EVENT   OF LOAn RepAYMent
                                                                          DIFFICULTIES   In the
                                                                                       WITH  LOANFUtURe?”
                             REPAYMENT
                             REPAYMENT    IN THE   FUTURE?”  CONTROL     GROUP. N=79                 64
                                                                                                     64
COntROL GROUp. n=79          REPAYMENT IN    THE FUTURE?”
                                          IN THE             CONTROL GROUP.
                                                   FUTURE?” CONTROL      GROUP. N=79
                                                                                N=79                 64
                                         Baseline
                                         Baseline                   Interim
                                                                   Interim                   Final
                                                                                             Final
                                         Baseline                   Interim                  Final
   II      do nothing
      will do
    I will
      will do
               nothing because
                       because I do not
               nothing because II do
                                     not know
                                  do not know
                                         know
    what
   what     to do
    what to to do
               do
   II
    I
      will approach
      will approach some
      will approach
                     some other
                     somea
                                  loan
                           other loan
                           other  loan
    institution
   institution  to obtain   new   loan
                to obtain
    institution to        a new
                   obtain a new loan
                                  loan
   II           loan company as
      perceive loan
    I perceive
      perceive loan company
                                        adviser
                                as my adviser
                      company as mymy adviser
   II
    I
      will part
      will      with some
           part with
      will part with
                      some assets
                      some
                                    in order to
                            assets in
                            assets in order
                                             to
                                       order to
    repay
   repay    a part of  loan
    repay a   part of
            a part of loan
                       loan
        an advice from
   Seek an
   Seek                   relatives
                  from my relatives
           advice from my
   Seek an advice      my relatives

         livestock, agricultural products
   Sell livestock,
   Sell                          products
   Sell livestock, agricultural
                    agricultural products


the issues discussed in this chapter describe the actions, activities that respondents have undertaken or plan to take in relation to
      The issues
     The     issues discussed
                      discussed in      this chapter
                                    in this     chapter describe
                                                            describe thethe actions,       activities that
                                                                              actions, activities     that respondents have  have
      The
financial             discussedwere
             issuesRespondents
          planning.                     this ed
                                    in classifi chapter     describe
                                                  into 3 groups         the actions,
                                                                 by the degree             activities that respondents
                                                                               of their action.             respondents have
      undertaken or
     undertaken      or plan to to take in in relation to  to financial planning.
                                                                           planning. Respondents were                      into 3
                                                                                                        were classified into
70    undertaken or plan plan to take           relation to financial
                                    take in relation           financial planning. Respondents                classified into 3
                                                                                        Respondents were classified               3
      groups
     groups     by the  degree   of  their action.
      groups by    the degree
                by the  degree of    their action.
                                 of their  action.
      Classification by
     Classification            degree of financial
                       by the degree        financial activity waswas based on            following questions:
                                                                                on the following
                          the degree of
      Classification by the                              activity was based
                                         of financial activity          based on thethe following questions:
                                                                                                     questions:
    The issues discussed in this chapter describe the actions, activities that respondents have
    The issues
    The                discussed in
             issues discussed               this chapter
                                       in this     chapter describe
                                                               describe the         actions, activities
                                                                             the actions,                   that respondents
                                                                                               activities that     respondents havehave
    undertaken or plan to take in relation to financial planning. Respondents were classified into 3
    undertaken or
    undertaken             plan to
                      or plan          take in
                                  to take          relation to
                                               in relation    to financial
                                                                   financial planning.       Respondents were
                                                                                 planning. Respondents               classified into
                                                                                                              were classified    into 3
                                                                                                                                      3
    groups by the degree of their action.
    groups by
    groups         the degree
                by the   degree of      their action.
                                    of their   action.
    Classification
classification          by theof
                by the degree     degree
                                   financial of financial
                                              activity      activity
                                                       was based       was
                                                                   on the    based questions:
                                                                           following  on the following questions:
    Classification
    Classification
Classifi cation by the by
classification          by the
                            theof
                       degree    degree
                                  degree
                                   financial
                                   financialof
                                             of financial
                                                financial
                                              activity     activity
                                                            activity
                                                       was based       was
                                                                       was
                                                                   on the    based
                                                                             based on
                                                                           following      the following
                                                                                      on the  following questions:
                                                                                      questions:           questions:
             I made my previous debt payment on time.
            I I made
                  made my       previous debt
                           my previous       debt payment
                                                     payment on  on time.
                                                                     time.
             I will make my next debt payment on time.
            I I will make my
                  will make     my next      debt payment
                                                    payment on
                                      next debt                 on time.
                                                                     time.
             I have consulted with my financial institution about restructuring/rescheduling my debt
            I I have consulted
                  have
                 during   consulted
                          last 3 months  with my
                                        with    my financial    institution about
                                                     financial institution              restructuring/rescheduling my
                                                                                about restructuring/rescheduling        my debt
                                                                                                                            debt
                 during last
                during    last 33 months.
                                   months
             I sold property in order to repay loans in the past 3 months
            I I sold   property in
                  sold property           order to
                                      in order    to repay   loans in
                                                      repay loans        the past
                                                                      in the   past 3 3 months.
                                                                                        months
             I plan to borrow again (within 12 months) after repaying this loan
            I I plan
                  plan to    borrow again
                         to borrow               (within 12
                                        again (within         months) after
                                                          12 months)               repaying this
                                                                            after repaying    this loan.
                                                                                                    loan
             I plan to borrow again while repaying this loan
            I I plan
                  plan to    borrow again
                         to borrow               while repaying
                                                        repaying this
                                        again while                  this loan.
                                                                           loan
             I have made a family budget (written down expenses and income) in the past 3 months
            I I have    made a
                  have made          family budget
                                   a family              (written down
                                               budget (written       down expenses
                                                                             expenses and and income)
                                                                                               income) in    the past
                                                                                                          in the       3 months.
                                                                                                                  past 3 months
             I have set financial goals for the future in the past 3 months
            I I have
                  have set     financial goals
                          set financial             for the
                                            goals for        future in
                                                        the future        the past
                                                                       in the   past 3 3 months.
                                                                                         months
             I have discussed with my family our income and expenses in the past 3 months
            I I have
                  have discussed
                          discussed with with mymy family
                                                     family our
                                                             our income
                                                                   income and and expenses
                                                                                    expenses in in the
                                                                                                   the past
                                                                                                        past 33 months.
                                                                                                                months
             I am spending enough money on food, clothing, transportation to keep my family well.
            I I am   spending enough
                  am spending        enough moneymoney on     food, clothing,
                                                          on food,                  transportation to
                                                                       clothing, transportation          keep my
                                                                                                      to keep       family well.
                                                                                                                my family  well.
             What will you do in the event of difficulties with loan repayment in the future?
               What will
             What      will you
                              you dodo in   the event
                                         in the   event of   difficulties with
                                                          of difficulties    with loan   repayment in
                                                                                   loan repayment         the future?
                                                                                                       in the  future?

percentage of respondents with active financial behavior is significantly higher in talas than in naryn.
                                          financial behavior is significantly
percentage of respondents with active financial                 significantly higher in talas than in naryn.
intervention group. by the 2nd measurement there is a greater growth of active respondents in naryn (+17%) than in talas (+9%).
Intervention group. by
intervention        By the 2nd measurement there is a greater growth of active respondents in naryn (+17%) than in talas (+9%).
however, later by the final survey this level decreased in naryn (-19%) and increased in talas (+13%). level of passive respondents in
                      final survey this level decreased in naryn (-19%) and increased in talas (+13%). level
however, later by the final                                                                                 Level of passive respondents in
naryn decreased after consultations by the 2nd measurement (-9%) and increased by 12% by the 3rd survey. there is a decreasing
naryn decreased after consultations by the 2nd measurement (-9%) and increased by 12% by the 3rd survey. there is a decreasing
trend in terms of passive respondents in talas and by the 3rd measurement there were no passive respondents.
trend in terms of passive respondents in talas and by the 3rd measurement there were no passive respondents.
control group. there were no significant changes in terms of financial activity. a growth in active respondents is observed in talas.
Control group. there were no significant
control                                                           financial activity. a
                               significant changes in terms of financial              A growth in active respondents is observed in talas.
figuRe 5.5.22. financial activity. naRyn
FIGURe 5.5.22. FInAnCIAL
figuRe                   activity. nARYn
               financial ACtIVItY. naRyn
inteRvention (n=108)                                                               contRol(n=45)
InteRVentIOn (n=108)
inteRvention                                                                       COntROL(n=45)
                                                                                   contRol(n=45)




                                                                                                                                    65
                                                                                                                                    65
                                                                                                                                    65




FIGURe 5.5.23. FInAnCIAL
figuRe                   activity. tALAS
               financial ACtIVItY. talas
figuRe 5.5.23. financial activity. talas
inteRvention
InteRVentIOn (n=103)                                                               contRol(n=34)
                                                                                   COntROL(n=34)
inteRvention (n=103)                                                               contRol(n=34)




                                                                                                                                          73
                                                                                                                                          71
                                                                                                                                          73
Findings of chapter 5.5.
As survey results have shown there is a positive dynamics in activities of respondents. Following represent main results in the
analysis of activities of borrowers:

      •   Majority (more than 70%) of respondents have made their previous debt repayment on time. This percentage is greater in
      intervention group than in control group.

      •   As the results of 3rd survey have shown the actual picture on making previous payments under loans turned out better than
      expected by respondents on carrying out these payments.

      •   There is a decrease in percentage of respondents who approached their financial institution for debt restructuring in both
      groups. Following from this background there is a growth in percentage of borrowers who did not experience difficulties in loan
      repayment.

      •   decrease is observed both in intervention and control groups. Level of respondents who are planning to obtain a loan while
      still repaying current loan is lower than the level of respondents who are planning to obtain a new loan after closing current loan.

      •   After conduction of consultations in intervention group there is a small growth in percentage of respondents who made
      their family budgets (+15%) in comparison to the decreased in control group (-5%). There is also a growing tendency in relation
      to questions on making family budget, discussing it with the family in Talas, whereas in Naryn this percentage increases more
      significantly by the 2nd measurement than in Talas, and then decreases.

      •    Baseline survey showed that about 60% of respondents in intervention group were doing financial planning, and this
      indicator in control group was greater – 76%. In intervention group by 2nd measurement the share of respondents who were
      making financial plans had a greater growth in Naryn (+20%) and remained virtually unchanged in Talas. However, in the 3rd
      measurement this level decreased by 19% in Naryn, and increased by 18% in Talas. In control group percentage of people who
      made financial plans has a decreasing trend in Naryn and increasing trend in Talas.

      •   Percentage of respondents who discussed their incomes and expenses with their families is greater in Talas than in Naryn.
      This level in intervention group increased by 4% by the 2nd measurement in Naryn and remained virtually unchanged in Talas.
      However, by the 3rd measurement it decreased by 8% in Naryn and increased by 8% in Talas. In control group this indicator by
      the 2nd measurement decreased by 5% in Naryn and by 26% in Talas. By 3rd measurement it reached previous levels in Naryn
      (56%), and increased in Talas by 20% in comparison to the 2nd measurement.

      •    Majority of respondents spend enough money for family maintenance: food, clothing, transportation etc. In intervention
      group level of respondents whose quality of life from this perspective has increased from 77% in baseline measurement to 92%
      in the 3rd measurement in Talas, however, this indicator has decreased from 70% to 51% in Naryn. In intervention group there is
      a growth of this indicator in both cities.

      •   Thus, one can conclude that in terms of making and discussing family budget, sufficient spending on family maintaining,
      setting financial goals there is a growing trend in Talas. The level of financial activity in Naryn rises significantly by the 2nd
      measurement than in Talas and then it starts declining. These differences allow to assume that consultations in Talas had a longer
      term effect on respondents than in Naryn.

      •   There are no significant changes in preference to save or borrow funding. More than half of respondents prefer to save money
      rather than borrow.

      •   Analysis of comprehensive indicator, characterizing financial activity of respondents showed that such activity is significantly
      higher in Talas than in Naryn. Respondents in Naryn have a more passive behavior. By the end of survey after consultations in
      intervention group the level of respondents in Talas with increased financial activity in comparison to baseline level has increased
      by 22%, whereas it declined in Naryn by 12%.
72	
6.	APPENDIXES
Appendixes contain tables which were not included into the main part of the report. Appendixes are divided in line with the report
chapters and are named accordingly.


APPENDIX 1. Degree of over-indebtedness

TABLE 1. DO YOU CURRENTLY HAVE A LOAN IN THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTION?
                                                   Intervention group                            Control group
                                             Naryn (n=108)     Talas (n=103)             Naryn (n=45)      Talas (n=34)
                             Yes                 94%               100%                     100%              100%
    1st survey
                             No                   6%                 0%                       0%                0%
                             Yes                 95%                84%                      93%               94%
    2nd survey               No                   4%                 6%                       4%                3%
                           No loan                1%                10%                      2%                 3%
                             Yes                 76%                71%                      62%               82%
    3rd survey               No                  14%                 4%                      11%                0%
                           No loan               10%                25%                      27%               18%


TABLE 2. DO YOU HAVE A LOAN WITH COLLATERAL?
                                                    Intervention group                          Control group
                                                                  Women                                     Women
                                               Men (N=66)                                 Men (N=66)
                                                                  (N=145)                                  (N=145)
                            Yes                  48%                58%                     53%              63%
                            No                   45%                40%                     47%              37%
    1st survey
                         Refused to
                                                    6%                   2%
                          answer
                            Yes                    45%                   47%                  56%                   56%
    2 survey
      nd
                            No                     47%                   49%                  44%                   40%
                          No loan                  8%                    4%                   0%                    5%
                            Yes                    36%                   32%                  39%                   40%
    3rd survey              No                     41%                   53%                  36%                   40%
                          No loan                  23%                   15%                  25%                   21%




                                                                                                                                73
TABLE 3. CAN YOU CALCULATE YOUR LOAN AND DEBT PAYMENTS AND YOUR HOUSEHOLD’S LOAN AND DEBT
PAYMENTS PER MONTH?”
                                                            Intervention group
                                       1 survey
                                          st
                                                                 2nd survey           3rd survey
                                   Naryn      Talas         Naryn         Talas   Naryn        Talas
 Significantly lower than the
                                   25%              30%     35%          21%      14%          12%
   monthly family income
   Slightly lower than the
                                   23%              17%     36%          23%      35%          24%
   monthly family income
    Equal to the monthly
                                   18%              18%     11%          22%      23%          18%
        family income
   Slightly higher than the
                                   14%              22%      8%          15%      12%          18%
   monthly family income
  Significantly higher than
                                   15%              11%      8%           8%       6%           2%
 the monthly family income
            No loan                                          1%           10%     10%          25%
          No answer                 6%               2%      0%           1%
                                   100%             100%    100%         100%     100%        100%
            Total
                                    108              103     108          103      108         103


TABLE 4. CAN YOU CALCULATE YOUR LOAN AND DEBT PAYMENTS AND YOUR HOUSEHOLD’S LOAN AND DEBT
PAYMENTS PER MONTH?”
                                              Control group
                                         1 survey
                                               st
                                                                2nd survey            3rd survey
                                     Naryn      Talas       Naryn        Talas    Naryn        Talas
    Significantly lower than the
                                      27%             9%      16%          9%      27%          9%
      monthly family income
 Slightly lower than the monthly
                                      49%            38%      44%         56%      24%         21%
           family income
   Equal to the monthly family
                                      11%            26%      27%         18%      9%          32%
               income
      Slightly higher than the
                                      4%             12%      11%          3%      13%         21%
      monthly family income
   Significantly higher than the
                                      9%             15%       0%         12%      0%          0%
      monthly family income
               No loan                                         2%          3%      27%         18%
             No answer
                                     100%            100%    100%         100%    100%        100%
             Total
                                      45              34      45           34      45          34




74	
APPENDIX 2. Determining Incomes and Expenses

TABLE 1. CAN YOU CALCULATE THE INCOME YOU AND YOUR HOUSEHOLD EXPECT TO MAKE THIS MONTH?
                                             Intervention group              Control group
                                        Men (N=66)     Women (N=145)   Men (N=66)    Women (N=145)
                    Yes, with great
                                           29%            41%             58%            40%
                       certainty
 1 survey
  st
                  With some certainty      58%            43%             39%            58%
                          No               14%            16%             3%             2%
                    Yes, with great
                                           44%            43%             47%            42%
                       certainty
 2 survey
  nd
                  With some certainty      41%            48%             39%            51%
                          No               15%            9%              14%            7%
                    Yes, with great
                                           33%            45%             47%            60%
                       certainty
 3 survey
  rd
                  With some certainty      56%            48%             47%            40%
                          No               11%            8%              6%             0%


TABLE 2. CAN YOU CALCULATE THE EXPENSES YOU AND YOUR HOUSEHOLD EXPECT TO PAY OUT THIS MONTH?
                                             Intervention group              Control group
                                        Men (N=66)     Women (N=145)   Men (N=66)    Women (N=145)
                      Yes, with great
                                           26%            36%             44%            21%
                        certainty
       1 survey
        st
                      Some certainty       53%            47%             47%            77%
                            No             21%            17%             8%             2%
                      Yes, with great
                                           33%            36%             39%            33%
                        certainty
   2 survey
       nd
                      Some certainty       56%            56%             53%            63%
                            No             11%            8%              8%             5%
                      Yes, with great
                                           33%            39%             36%            51%
                        certainty
   3rd survey
                      Some certainty       50%            50%             61%            47%
                            No             17%            10%             3%             2%




                                                                                                 75
TABLE 3. DO YOU KNOW HOW MUCH REPAYMENT YOU OWE ON YOUR OWN LOANS THIS MONTH?
                                      Intervention group                    Control group
                               Naryn    Talas     Men    Women   Naryn     Talas      Men   Women
                              (n=108) (N=103) (N=66) (N=145)     (n=45)   (n=34) (N=66)     (N=145)
                  Yes, with
                    great      70%      80%     77%      74%      87%      82%      86%      84%
        1    st   certainty
      survey        Some
                               18%      16%     12%      19%      13%      18%      14%      16%
                  certainty
                     No        12%      5%      11%      8%       0%       0%       0%        0%
                  Yes, with
                    great      85%      76%     75%      83%      71%      85%      78%      77%
                  certainty
        2nd         Some
      survey                   14%      12%     17%      11%      18%      9%       17%      12%
                  certainty
                     No         1%      3%       2%      2%       9%       3%       6%        7%
                   No loan      0%      9%       6%      3%       2%       3%       0%        5%
                  Yes, with
                    great      44%      68%     48%      59%      56%      65%      53%      65%
                  certainty
        3rd         Some
      survey                   41%      6%      26%      23%      16%      18%      19%      14%
                  certainty
                     No        6%       1%      3%       3%       2%       0%       3%       0%
                   No loan     10%      25%     23%      15%      27%      18%      25%      21%


TABLE 4. DO YOU KNOW HOW MUCH REPAYMENT YOUR HOUSEHOLD OWES THIS MONTH?
                                      Intervention group                   Control group
                               Naryn    Talas     Men    Women   Naryn     Talas     Men    Women
                              (n=108) (N=103) (N=66) (N=145)     (n=45)   (n=34) (N=66)     (N=145)
        Yes, with great
                               60%     67%      56%     67%       78%      68%     72%       74%
   1    stcertainty
 survey Some certainty         25%     21%      27%     21%       18%      24%     17%       23%
              No               15%     12%      17%     12%       4%       9%      11%       2%
        Yes, with great
                               59%     57%      43%     65%       49%      71%     56%       60%
          certainty
   2nd  Some certainty         29%     22%      37%     20%       40%      26%     39%       30%
 survey
              No               12%     13%      14%     12%       9%       0%      6%        5%
           No loan             0%      9%       6%      3%        2%       3%      0%        5%




76	
           Yes, with great
                                 43%    53%      38%    52%     36%       50%     36%       47%
             certainty
      3rd  Some certainty        42%    16%      35%    26%     31%       26%     28%       30%
    survey
                 Нет              6%     6%       5%     6%      7%        6%     11%       2%
            Нет кредита          10%    25%      23%    15%     27%       18%     25%       21%
 


APPENDIX 3. Perceptions
TABLE 1. HOW SURE ARE YOU THAT YOU WILL GET TO KEEP YOUR COLLATERAL (THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTION WILL
NOT TAKE IT AS A REPAYMENT OF THE DEBT)?
                                           Intervention group               Control group
                                        Men(N=66)    Women (N=145)    Men (N=66)    Women (N=145)
                   Absolutely sure        22%              36%          42%              37%
                     Mostly sure          22%              17%          26%              19%
                   Neither sure nor
                                          47%            36%             26%            37%
                      uncertain
     1 survey
      st
                   Mostly not sure         8%             6%             0%              4%
                  Absolutely not sure      0%             6%             5%              4%
                                          100%           100%           100%            100%
                         Total
                                            36             87             19              27
                   Absolutely sure         47%            50%            40%             42%
                     Mostly sure           20%            26%            40%             17%
                   Neither sure nor
                                          20%            22%             20%            29%
                      uncertain
    2 survey
      nd
                   Mostly not sure          3%            1%             0%              4%
                  Absolutely not sure      10%            0%             0%              8%
                                          100%           100%           100%            100%
                         Total
                                            30             68             20              24
                   Absolutely sure         38%            57%            43%             35%
                     Mostly sure           21%            22%            21%             53%
                   Neither sure nor
                                          38%            17%             36%            12%
                      uncertain
     3rd survey
                   Mostly not sure         4%             4%             0%              0%
                  Absolutely not sure      0%             0%             0%              0%
                                          100%           100%           100%            100%
                         Total
                                           24             46             14              17




                                                                                                  77
TABLE 2. I PUT THE MONEY I BORROW TO PURPOSES THAT ARE GOOD/BENEFICIAL
                                                     Intervention group              Control group
                                                                  Women                        Women
                                                   Men (N=66)                   Men (N=66)
                                                                  (N=145)                      (N=145)
                    Only for a short term after
                                                      50%          60%                47%          44%
                         receiving a loan
      1st survey     For a long term (several
                                                      36%          26%                42%          47%
                               years)
                           I don’t know               14%          14%                11%          9%
                    Only for a short term after
                                                      44%          50%                42%          47%
                         receiving a loan
      2nd survey     For a long term (several
                                                      45%          43%                53%          47%
                               years)
                           I don’t know               11%           7%                6%           7%
                    Only for a short term after
                                                      32%          45%                47%          65%
                         receiving a loan
      3rd survey     For a long term (several
                                                      55%          47%                47%          30%
                               years)
                           I don’t know               14%           8%                6%           5%


TABLE 3. I PUT THE MONEY I BORROW TO PURPOSES THAT ARE GOOD/BENEFICIAL					
                                              Intervention group                    Control group
                                        Naryn (n=108) Talas (N=103)         Naryn (n=45)      Talas (n=34)
                     Only for a short
                         term after          54%             60%                53%              35%
                     receiving a loan
       1st survey
                     For a long term
                                             29%             29%                38%              53%
                      (several years)
                       I don’t know          18%             11%                 9%              12%
                     Only for a short
                         term after          41%             56%                49%              38%
                     receiving a loan
       2nd survey
                     For a long term
                                             53%             34%                42%              59%
                      (several years)
                       I don’t know           6%             10%                 9%               3%
                     Only for a short
                         term after          22%             60%                60%              53%
                     receiving a loan
       3rd survey
                     For a long term
                                             66%             32%                33%              44%
                      (several years)
                       I don’t know          12%              8%                 7%               3%

78	
TABLE 4. I PUT THE MONEY I BORROW TO PURPOSES THAT ARE GOOD/BENEFICIAL

                                  Intervention group                        Control group
                           Naryn    Talas     Men    Women       Naryn      Talas     Men   Women
                          (n=108) (N=103) (N=66) (N=145)         (n=45)    (n=34) (N=66)    (N=145)
              For me
                           11%       11%      11%       11%       18%          6%   22%         5%
             personally
             For myself
   1st                     50%       52%      52%       51%       58%       59%     56%         60%
          and my family
 survey
            Only for my
                           27%       36%      30%       32%       24%       32%     19%         35%
               family
           I don’t know    12%       1%        8%       6%        0%           3%   3%          0%
              For me
                           16%       3%       18%       7%        18%          0%   14%         7%
             personally
             For myself
   2nd                     49%       68%      53%       60%       53%       85%     72%         63%
          and my family
 survey
            Only for my
                           28%       24%      20%       28%       27%          9%   11%         26%
               family
           I don’t know     7%       6%        9%       5%        2%           6%   3%          5%
              For me
                           28%       1%       15%       14%       20%          3%   14%         12%
             personally
             For myself
   3rd                     45%       75%      61%       59%       64%       71%     75%         60%
          and my family
 survey
            Only for my
                           22%       17%      15%       22%       16%       24%     8%          28%
               family
           I don’t know     5%       7%        9%       4%        0%           3%   3%          0%


TABLE 5. I CHOOSE TO BORROW, BECAUSE IT IMPROVES MY LIFESTYLE

                                      Intervention group                   Control group
                                 Men (N=66)      Women (N=145)      Men (N=66)      Women (N=145)
         Absolutely agree          36%                34%             47%                33%
          Partially agree          50%                41%             44%                53%
1 survey
 st
            Absolutely
                                    11%              19%                  8%              14%
              disagree
           I don’t know              3%               6%
         Absolutely agree           42%              37%                  44%             40%
          Partially agree           47%              48%                  33%             49%
    2nd
 survey     Absolutely
                                    11%              14%                  22%             12%
              disagree
           I don’t know             0%                1%

                                                                                                      79
               Absolutely agree         24%              28%                 42%               49%
                Partially agree         55%              51%                 56%               49%
        3rd
      survey      Absolutely
                                        21%              21%                 3%                2%
                    disagree
                 I don’t know


TABLE 6. MY FINANCIAL SITUATION, ABILITY TO SAVE AND INDEBTEDNESS ARE UNDER MY CONTROL

                                            Intervention group                   Control group
                                                          Women                             Women
                                        Men (N=66)                         Men (N=66)
                                                          (N=145)                           (N=145)
                        Absolutely
                                           50%             50%                61%              60%
                           agree
                      Partially agree      42%             36%                33%              37%
       1st survey
                        Absolutely
                                              3%           10%                6%               2%
                         disagreeн
                       I don’t know           5%           4%
                        Absolutely
                                           64%             63%                61%              53%
                           agree
                      Partially agree      30%             29%                22%              37%
       2nd survey
                        Absolutely
                                              6%           7%                 17%              9%
                          disagree
                       I don’t know           0%           1%
                        Absolutely
                                           45%             58%                61%              51%
                           agree
                      Partially agree      38%             32%                33%              44%
       3rd survey
                        Absolutely
                                           17%             10%                6%               5%
                          disagree
                       I don’t know

TABLE 7. I FEEL CONFIDENT MAKING FINANCIAL PLANS

                                      Intervention group                       Control group
                               Naryn    Talas     Men    Women      Naryn      Talas     Men    Women
                              (n=108) (N=103) (N=66) (N=145)        (n=45)    (n=34) (N=66)     (N=145)
                Absolutely
                               45%      65%        62%    52%        58%       59%      58%         58%
                   agree
                  Partially
    1st                        42%      19%        24%    34%        42%       38%      39%         42%
                   agree
  survey
                Absolutely
                                7%       9%        6%      9%        0%           3%    3%           0%
                  disagree
               I don’t know     6%       7%        8%      6%
80	
           Absolutely
                          51%      70%      65%       58%      36%      50%      44%     40%
              agree
             Partially
   2nd                    43%      27%      33%       36%      56%      29%      42%     47%
              agree
 survey
           Absolutely
                           6%       2%       0%       6%        9%      21%      14%     14%
             disagree
          I don’t know     0%       1%       2%       0%
           Absolutely
                          59%      86%      71%       73%      44%      65%      47%     58%
              agree
   3rd       Partially
                          31%      13%      23%       21%      49%      35%      47%     40%
 survey       agree
           Absolutely
                          10%       1%       6%       6%       7%        0%       6%      2%
             disagree


TABLE 8. I HAVE NO MAJOR DIFFICULTIES IN ALLOCATING MONTHLY FUNDS FOR LOAN REPAYMENT

                                 Intervention group                     Control group
                          Naryn    Talas     Men    Women     Naryn     Talas     Men   Women
                         (n=108) (N=103) (N=66) (N=145)       (n=45)   (n=34) (N=66)    (N=145)
           Absolutely
                          16%      30%      18%       25%      47%      12%      39%     26%
              agree
             Partially
   1st                    52%      50%      64%       45%      40%      56%      42%     51%
              agree
 survey
           Absolutely
                          24%      19%      14%       26%      13%      32%      19%     23%
             disagree
          I don’t know     8%       1%       5%       5%
           Absolutely
                          27%      45%      30%       38%      38%      24%      42%     23%
              agree
             Partially
   2nd                    53%      44%      58%       44%      53%      56%      44%     63%
              agree
 survey
           Absolutely
                          19%      11%       9%       18%      9%       21%      14%     14%
             disagree
          I don’t know     1%       1%       3%       0%
           Absolutely
                          19%      36%      29%       27%      40%      21%      33%     30%
              agree
   3rd       Partially
                          56%      55%      55%       56%      42%      71%      50%     58%
 survey       agree
           Absolutely
                          25%       9%      17%       17%      18%       9%      17%     12%
             disagree




                                                                                               81
TABLE 9. EVEN IF MY EXPENSES ON FOOD, TRANSPORTATION, CLOTHING INCREASE SLIGHTLY, I BELIEVE MY LIFESTYLE
WILL REMAIN AT THE SAME LEVEL

                                        Intervention group                   Control group
                                 Naryn    Talas     Men    Women   Naryn     Talas     Men     Women
                                (n=108) (N=103) (N=66) (N=145)     (n=45)   (n=34) (N=66)      (N=145)
                Absolutely
                                 23%     47%      32%     36%       49%      26%       44%      35%
                   agree
                  Partially
        1st                      48%     39%      47%     42%       40%      44%       44%      40%
                   agree
      survey
                Absolutely
                                 20%      9%      14%     15%       11%      29%       11%      26%
                  disagree
               I don’t know       8%      6%      8%       7%
                Absolutely
                                 34%     39%      36%     37%       40%      29%       33%      37%
                   agree
                  Partially
        2nd                      44%     46%      48%     43%       49%      47%       53%      44%
                   agree
      survey
                Absolutely
                                 21%     16%      15%     20%       11%      24%       14%      19%
                  disagree
               I don’t know
                Absolutely
                                 25%     57%      36%     43%       42%      21%       31%      35%
                   agree
        3rd       Partially
                                 50%     34%      48%     39%       42%      74%       61%      51%
      survey       agree
                Absolutely
                                 25%      9%      15%     18%       16%      6%        8%       14%
                  disagree


TABLE 10. DO YOU THINK CAN YOU BE MORE COST EFFICIENT?

                                        Intervention group                   Control group
                                 Naryn    Talas     Men    Women   Naryn     Talas     Men     Women
                                (n=108) (N=103) (N=66) (N=145)     (n=45)   (n=34) (N=66)      (N=145)
                I surely can      31%      44%      35%     39%     36%      21%       31%       28%
               Most likely I
                                 42%      38%     38%     41%       56%      56%       56%       56%
                     can
        1st
               Most likely I
      survey                     14%      11%     14%     12%       4%       21%       11%       12%
                    can't
               I surely can't     6%      6%      9%       5%       4%        3%       3%        5%
               I don't know       6%      2%      5%       4%




82	
               I surely can     32%      50%     45%      39%       31%          38%     36%      33%
              Most likely I
                                49%      28%     42%      37%       40%          29%     47%      26%
                    can
      2nd
              Most likely I
    survey                      16%      15%     8%       19%       27%          29%     14%      40%
                   can't
              I surely can't    3%       6%      5%       4%         2%          3%      3%        2%
              I don't know      0%       2%      0%       1%
               I surely can     36%      76%     64%      52%       33%          65%     56%      40%
              Most likely I
                                52%      21%     27%      41%       60%          26%     39%      51%
      3rd           can
    survey    Most likely I
                                 9%      2%      8%        5%        4%          6%      6%        5%
                   can't
              I surely can't     3%      1%      2%        2%        2%          3%      0%        5%


TABLE 11. I BELIEVE I WILL BE BETTER OFF FINANCIALLY NEXT YEAR THAN THIS YEAR

                                       Intervention group                        Control group
                                Naryn    Talas     Men    Women    Naryn         Talas     Men   Women
                               (n=108) (N=103) (N=66) (N=145)      (n=45)       (n=34) (N=66)    (N=145)
             Absolutely
                                33%     62%      47%      48%       53%          29%     47%      40%
                agree
      1st  Partially agree      49%     31%      44%      39%       42%          56%     47%      49%
    survey   Absolutely
                                11%      5%      5%       10%        4%         15%      6%       12%
               disagree
            I don’t know         6%      2%      5%        4%
             Absolutely
                                50%     53%      52%      52%       40%          35%     44%      33%
                agree
      2nd  Partially agree      39%     39%      42%      37%       49%          59%     53%      53%
    survey   Absolutely
                                10%      7%      5%       10%       11%          6%      3%       14%
               disagree
            I don’t know         1%      1%      2%        1%
             Absolutely
                                34%     77%      64%      51%       58%          65%     67%      56%
                agree
      3rd  Partially agree      56%     22%      30%      44%       33%          29%     25%      37%
    survey   Absolutely
                                 9%      1%      6%        5%        9%          6%      8%        7%
               disagree
            I don’t know
 




                                                                                                        83
APPENDIX 4. Actions
TABLE 1. I MADE MY PREVIOUS DEBT PAYMENT ON TIME

                             Intervention group                       Control group
                      Naryn    Talas     Men    Women     Naryn      Talas     Men       Women
                     (n=108) (N=103) (N=66) (N=145)       (n=45)    (n=34)    (N=66)     (N=145)
             Yes       74%     86%       79%     81%       89%       82%        86%        86%
             No        18%     13%       18%     14%       11%       18%        14%        14%
    1st
  survey No loan
          Refused
                       8%        1%        3%       6%
         to answer
             Yes      82%       81%       79%       83%    76%       76%       81%        72%
             No       17%        9%       14%       12%    22%       21%       19%        23%
    2nd
  survey No loan      1%        10%       8%        4%     2%        3%        0%         5%
          Refused
                       0%        1%        0%       1%
         to answer
             Yes      67%       71%       65%       70%    64%       79%       67%        74%
    3rd
             No       23%        4%       12%       14%     9%        3%        8%         5%
  survey
          No loan     10%       25%       23%       15%    27%       18%       25%        21%


TABLE 2. I WILL MAKE MY NEXT DEBT PAYMENT ON TIME

                              Intervention group                       Control group
                       Naryn    Talas     Men    Women     Naryn      Talas      Men     Women
                      (n=108) (N=103) (N=66) (N=145)       (n=45)    (n=34)     (N=66)   (N=145)
           Yes          75%     85%       74%     83%       89%       91%        92%       88%
           No           14%     10%       17%     10%       11%        9%         8%       12%
   1st
 survey  No loan
        Refused to
                       11%        5%        9%       8%
         answer
           Yes         80%       85%       80%      83%     71%       94%       78%        84%
           No          19%       3%        12%      11%     27%        3%       22%        12%
   2nd
 survey  No loan        1%       10%        8%       4%      2%        3%        0%         5%
        Refused to
                        0%        2%        0%       1%
         answer
           Yes         41%       74%       53%      59%     49%       76%       58%        63%
   3rd
           No          49%       1%        24%      26%     24%        6%       17%        16%
 survey
         No loan       10%       25%       23%      15%     27%       18%       25%        21%



84	
TABLE 3. I MADE MY PREVIOUS DEBT PAYMENT ON TIME AND WILL MAKE MY NEXT DEBT PAYMENT ON TIME

                                         Intervention group                   Control group
                                                       Women                             Women
                                     Men (N=66)                         Men (N=66)
                                                       (N=145)                           (N=145)
            I have made and will
                                        68%             75%                81%              77%
              make payment on
 1st survey    I have not made
               or will not make         32%             25%                19%              23%
                   payment
            I have made and will
                                        71%             77%                72%              70%
              make payment on
               I have not made
 2nd survey
               or will not make         21%             19%                28%              26%
                   payment
                   No loan                 8%           4%                 0%               5%
            I have made and will
                                        44%             52%                53%              58%
              make payment on
               I have not made
 3rd survey
               or will not make         33%             33%                22%              21%
                   payment
                   No loan              23%             15%                25%              21%


TABLE 4. I HAVE CONSULTED WITH MY FINANCIAL INSTITUTION (BANK, MFI) ABOUT RESTRUCTURING/
RESCHEDULING MY DEBT
                                    Intervention group                      Control group
                             Naryn    Talas     Men    Women     Naryn      Talas     Men    Women
                            (n=108) (N=103) (N=66) (N=145)       (n=45)    (n=34) (N=66)     (N=145)
                 Yes          30%      34%      27%     34%       58%       26%       47%      42%
   1st
                 No           61%      65%      70%     60%       42%       74%       53%      58%
 survey    Refused to
                              9%      1%        3%      6%
              answer
                 Yes         24%     12%        17%    19%        11%       12%      11%         12%
                 No          28%     17%        20%    24%        20%       26%      25%         21%
             No loan          1%     10%        8%     4%         2%        3%       0%          5%
   2nd       I did not
 survey    experience
          difficulties in                                         67%       59%      64%         63%
          repaying the
                loan
           Refused to
                             47%     61%        56%    53%
              answer

                                                                                                       85
                      Yes             16%        16%     11%    18%     24%      15%       22%      19%
                      No              19%        23%     20%    21%     20%      32%       22%      28%
                  No loan             10%        25%     23%    15%     27%      18%       25%      21%
                  I did not
    3rd         experience
  survey       difficulties in                                          29%      35%       31%      33%
               repaying the
                     loan
                Refused to
                                      56%        36%     47%    46%
                   answer


TABLE 5. I SOLD PROPERTY IN ORDER TO REPAY THE DEBT/LOAN

                                   Intervention group                            Control group
                            Naryn    Talas     Men    Women           Naryn     Talas      Men     Women
                           (n=108) (N=103) (N=66) (N=145)             (n=45)   (n=34)     (N=66)   (N=145)
                 Yes         38%     27%       41%     29%             62%      35%        56%       47%
                 No          56%     73%       58%     67%             38%      65%        44%       53%
        1st
      survey   Refused
                  to                                   2%      4%
               answer
                 Yes         25%             4%        15%     15%     27%       6%       19%       16%
        2nd
                 No          74%            86%        77%     81%     47%      76%       56%       63%
      survey
               No loan        1%            10%         8%      4%     27%      18%       25%       21%
                 Yes         31%             6%        27%     15%     33%      18%       39%       16%
        3rd
                 No          58%            69%        50%     70%     64%      79%       61%       79%
      survey
               No loan       10%            25%        23%     15%     2%       3%        0%        5%


TABLE 6. I PLAN TO BORROW AGAIN (WITHIN 12 MONTHS) AFTER REPAYING THIS LOAN

                                   Intervention group                            Control group
                            Naryn    Talas     Men    Women           Naryn     Talas      Men     Women
                           (n=108) (N=103) (N=66) (N=145)             (n=45)   (n=34)     (N=66)   (N=145)
                 Yes         56%     58%       59%     56%             73%      41%        69%       51%
                 No          39%     42%       39%     41%             27%      59%        31%       49%
        1st
      survey   Refused
                  to             6%         0%         2%      3%
               answer
                 Yes         42%            45%        46%     42%     44%      44%       50%       40%
        2nd
                 No          57%            45%        46%     53%     53%      53%       50%       56%
      survey
               No loan       1%             10%        8%      4%      2%       3%        0%        5%
86	
             Yes       47%       35%         41%     41%     53%         12%        31%        40%
   3rd
             No        43%       40%         36%     43%     20%         71%        44%        40%
 survey
           No loan     10%       25%         23%     15%     27%         18%        25%        21%


TABLE 7. I PLAN TO BORROW AGAIN WHILE REPAYING THIS LOAN

                              Intervention group                           Control group
                       Naryn    Talas     Men    Women       Naryn        Talas      Men      Women
                      (n=108) (N=103) (N=66) (N=145)         (n=45)      (n=34)     (N=66)    (N=145)
              Yes       40%     38%       42%     37%         69%         15%        50%        42%
   1st
              No        56%     61%       56%     59%         31%         85%        50%        58%
 survey    Refused
                        5%        1%         2%       3%
          to answer
              Yes      37%       29%         38%     31%      53%         12%       33%           37%
              No       62%       60%         52%     65%      44%         85%       67%           58%
   2nd
 survey    No loan     1%        10%         8%      4%       2%          3%        0%            5%
           Refused
                        0%        1%         2%       0%
          to answer
              Yes      32%       23%         26%     29%      33%          9%       17%           28%
   3rd
              No       57%       51%         52%     56%      40%         74%       58%           51%
 survey
           No loan     10%       25%         23%     15%      27%         18%       25%           21%


TABLE 8. I HAVE MADE A FAMILY BUDGET (WRITTEN DOWN EXPENSES AND INCOME) IN THE PAST 3 MONTHS

                                       Intervention group                    Control group
                                  Men (N=66)     Women (N=145)        Men (N=66)     Women (N=145)
                    Yes             36%                52%              72%               65%
                    No              64%                44%              28%               35%
  1st survey
                 Refused to
                                       0%              3%
                  answer
                    Yes                62%             61%               69%                 58%
                    No                 38%             39%               31%                 37%
  2nd survey
                 Refused to
                                                                         0%                  5%
                  answer
                    Yes                53%             54%               64%                 74%
  3rd survey
                    No                 47%             46%               36%                 26%




                                                                                                        87
TABLE 9. I HAVE SET FINANCIAL GOALS FOR THE NEXT FEW MONTHS

                                            Intervention group                Control group
                                        Men (N=66)    Women (N=145)    Men (N=66)    Women (N=145)
                          Yes             58%               61%          69%               65%
                          No              39%               32%          31%               35%
       1st survey
                       Refused to
                                           3%             7%
                        answer
                          Yes              76%            68%             72%            67%
                          No               24%            32%             28%            28%
      2nd survey
                       Refused to
                                                                          0%              5%
                        answer
                          Yes              67%            71%             56%            63%
      3rd survey
                          No               33%            29%             44%            37%


TABLE 10. I HAVE DISCUSSED WITH MY FAMILY OUR INCOME AND EXPENSES
                                             Intervention group               Control group
                                         Men (N=66)    Women (N=145)    Men (N=66)    Women (N=145)
                           Yes             68%               74%          58%              77%
      1 survey
       st
                           No              26%               21%          42%              23%
                    Refused to answer       6%                6%
                           Yes             82%               70%           61%            49%
      2 survey
       nd
                           No              18%               29%           39%            47%
                    Refused to answer       0%                1%            0%             5%
                           Yes             73%               74%           67%            65%
      3rd survey
                           No              27%               26%           33%            35%


TABLE 11. I AM SPENDING ENOUGH MONEY ON FOOD, CLOTHING, TRANSPORT TO KEEP MY FAMILY WELL
                                            Intervention group                Control group
                                        Men (N=66)    Women (N=145)    Men (N=66)    Women (N=145)
                           Yes            74%               73%          50%               67%
      1st survey           No             23%               22%          50%               33%
                    Refused to answer      3%                5%
                           Yes            88%               78%           72%            51%
      2 survey
       nd
                           No             12%               21%           28%            44%
                    Refused to answer      0%                1%           0%             5%
                           Yes            73%               70%           92%            93%
      3rd survey
                           No             27%               30%           8%             7%


88	
TABLE 12. I PREFER TO BORROW (WHEN I NEED IT) RATHER THAN SAVE IN ADVANCE
                              Intervention group                           Control group
                       Naryn    Talas     Men    Women        Naryn       Talas      Men     Women
                      (n=108) (N=103) (N=66) (N=145)          (n=45)     (n=34)     (N=66)   (N=145)
              Yes       41%     23%       36%     30%          62%         9%        44%       35%
              No        53%     76%       62%     65%          38%        91%        56%       65%
   1st
 survey     Refused
               to       6%         1%       2%        5%
            answer
   2nd        Yes      33%         31%     33%       32%       44%          18%     31%       35%
 survey       No       67%         69%     67%       68%       56%          82%     69%       65%
   3rd        Yes      38%         18%     33%       26%       49%          15%     31%       37%
 survey       No       62%         82%     67%       74%       51%          85%     69%       63%

TABLE 13. FINANCIAL ACTIVITY
                                         Intervention group                  Control group
                                     Men (N=66)    Women (N=145)       Men (N=66)    Women (N=145)
                Active behavior        42%               54%             39%              49%
   1st survey   Neutral behavior       44%               37%             56%              49%
                Passive behavior       14%               8%               6%               2%
                Active behavior        62%               65%             50%              49%
  2nd survey    Neutral behavior       36%               32%             50%              44%
                Passive behavior        2%                3%              0%               7%
                Active behavior        55%               55%             47%              49%
  3rd survey    Neutral behavior       36%               37%             47%              49%
                Passive behavior        9%                8%              6%               2%




                                                                                                    89
July, 2016




This report can be obtained in print or electronic format
at the following address:

Business Centre Orion, 4th Floor
Erkindik boulevard, 21
Bishkek, Kyrgyz Republic 720040
Tel.: +(996 312) 62 61 62
www.ifc.org




in partnership:
