REMEDIATION FINANCING
in Bangladesh’s Ready Made Garment Sector
An Overview
June 2016

The contents of this report were prepared by Emerging Markets Consulting (EMC) for the
International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the International Labour Organization (ILO), through its
Improving Working Conditions in the Ready Made Garment Sector Programme funded by Canada,
the Netherlands and the United Kingdom. The responsibility for opinions expressed in this study
rests solely with EMC, and as such does not constitute an endorsement by IFC and/or the ILO.
Copyright © International Labour Organization / International Finance Corporation 2016

About the ILO
Since 1919 the International Labour Organization has brought together government, employers
and workers representatives of 187 member States, to set labour standards, develop policies and
devise programmes promoting Decent Work for all women and men. For more information, visit
www.ilo.org


About IFC
IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global development institution focused on
the private sector in emerging markets. Working with more than 2,000 businesses worldwide, we
use our capital, expertise, and influence, to create opportunity where it’s needed most. In FY15, our
long-term investments in developing countries rose to nearly $18 billion, helping the private sector
play an essential role in the global effort to end extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity. For
more information, visit www.ifc.org
         REMEDIATION FINANCING
in Bangladesh’s Ready Made Garment Sector

                              An Overview
Acronyms



ADB		      Asian Development Bank
BDT		      Bangladeshi Taka
BTC		      Bangladesh Textile Competitiveness
CAP		      Corrective Action Plan
EMC		      Emerging Markets Consulting
EU		       European Union
IFC		      International Finance Corporation
ILO		      International Labour Organization
JICA		     Japan International Cooperation Agency
NBFI		     Non-Bank Financial Institution
NGO		      Non-Governmental Organization
NTPA		     National Tripartite Plan of Action on Fire Safety and Structural Integrity
RMG		      Ready-Made Garment
US		       United States
USD		      United States Dollars
Table of Contents


Executive Summary								1

Background: Establishment of the Initiatives 					   4

Methodology									5

Factory Segmentation								9

Remediation Overview								13

Analysis of Remediation Cost							19

Access to Remediation Financing						26

Conclusions										44

Key Areas of Intervention								47
List of Figures

Figure 1 - Study Methodology and Timeline	         					5

Figure 2 - Sample Size Selection Formula	 						5

Figure 3 - Number of RMG Factories, #	       						9

Figure 4 - Size & Relationship Matrix, # of factories	   				11

Figure 5 - Multi Factory Buildings, % of factories						12

Figure 6 - Multi-Purpose Buildings, % of Factories					12

Figure 7 - Remediation Urgency, % of identified issues					13

Figure 8 - Accord Factories Remediation Status, % of Remediated Issues		 16

Figure 9 - Alliance Remediated Issues, % of Factories					17

Figure 10 - Alliance Factories Remediation Status, % of Remediated Issues		   17

Figure 11 - Total Initial Cost of Remediation, USD						24

Figure 12 - Initial and Remaining Remediation Value, USD Millions			25

Figure 13 - Remaining Remediation per Category, USD Millions	 			25

Figure 14 - Trade Financing Interest Rates, Yearly %					28

Figure 15 - Working Capital Interest Rates, Yearly %					28

Figure 16 - Term Loan Interest Rates, Yearly %						28

Figure 17 - IFC Credit Facility Actors							37

Figure 18 - USAID USD 18 Mil Guarantee Structure					38

Figure 19 - USAID USD 4 Mil Guarantee Structure					38

Figure 20 - JICA Financing Scheme’s Structure	     					39

Figure 21 - AFD Credit Facility’s Structure	 						40

Figure 22 – RMG Factory Types matched against Banks’ Risk Appetite			42

Figure 23 - Segmentation of Remaining Remediation Value, USD			45

Figure 24 - Remediation Financing Gap, USD Millions					46

Figure 25 - G2G facilities Interest Rates	   						47
List of Tables

Table 1 - Sample Breakdwon, # and % of completed reports				6

Table 2 - Stakeholder Interviews								7

Table 3 - Factory Size, % of factories							10

Table 4 - Average Frequency of Non-Compliance Issues Common to All Factories,

	        # of issues / Factory								14

Table 5 - Average Frequency of Non-Compliance Issues Common to Nearly All

	        Factories, # of issues / Factory							15

Table 6 - Accord’s Remediation Status Update, % of CAP Issues				                 16

Table 7 - Factory Cost Estimates Distribution, USD and % Frequency			             20

Table 8 - Distribution of Fire Costs, USD							20

Table 9 – Costing of Most Common Fire Remediation Activities, BDT & USD		         20

Table 10 - Distribution of Electrical Costs, USD						21

Table 11 - Costing of Most Common Electrical Remediation Activities, BDT & USD	   21

Table 12 - Distribution of Structural Costs, USD						22

Table 13 - Costing of Most Common Structural Remediation Activities, BDT & USD	   22

Table 14 - Number of Factories, #								23

Table 15 - Factory Split, Number of Factories						23

Table 16 - Total Initial Cost of Remediation, USD						24

Table 17 - Banks Assetts, BDT and %							27

Table 18 - Banks’ Credit Ratings, % of Banks per Category				27

Table 19 - Loan Application Required Documents						29

Table 20 - Specific Borrower’s Requirements						30

Table 21 - Types of Collateral and Related Documentation				31

Table 22 - Environmental Guidelines Summary						33

Table 23 - EnvRR Checklist Example							34

									
Acknowledgements

The authors of this report wish to acknowledge the input of multiple stakeholders who
contributed to this study, including Alliance Capital Asset Management Limited, Sumerra
Engineering Consulting, as well as the sector stakeholders that provided guidance and
information about the sector: IFC, the ILO, BGMEA, DIFE, GIZ, AFD, JICA, USAID, WRAP,
Accord, Alliance, international brands, local commercial banks, RMG manufacturers.

The study was coordinated by Eleonore Richardson and Naveed Noor from IFC, and Nyske
Janssen from the ILO. We want to express our appreciation to George Faller (ARUP),
Stephanie Sarta (ARUP), Brad Loewen (Accord), Mark Jones (Alliance) for their technical
input into the report, and acknowledge our colleagues who provided peer-review:
Nabeera Rahman (IFC), Marie Bouvet (IFC), Rehan Rashid (IFC), Steven Needham (ILO).
Final thanks to Patrick Carpenter (IFC) for the editing and layout work.


About the study


IFC and the ILO jointly commissioned this study on remediation financing to assess the
needs and constraints faced in Bangladesh’s Ready Made Garment (RMG) sector. The
study was to analyze both the cost of safety remediation for structural, electrical and
fire safety work in RMG factories, and the factory’s ability to finance this work - either
through their own resources, through buyers’ support, or through accessing loan capital.
Within this analysis would be an overview of financing options available to RMG factories,
including a review of Bangladesh’s banking sector and the credit facilities recently
developed by international organizations specifically for RMG remediation. Lastly, the
study would identify key challenges to remediation by looking at bottlenecks in the
availability and cost of safety inputs, as well as the capacity of sector stakeholders to
provide the necessary services.

The study is intended to:

1) Contribute to the development and capacity building of the Bangladesh regulatory
framework in relation to building and fire safety and to contribute to the implementation
of the National Tripartite Plan of Action Plan on Fire Safety and Structural Integrity in the
Bangladesh RMG sector signed by industry partners on 25 July 2013.

2) Help catalyze investments in safety upgrades by RMG factories by presenting a
realistic overview of the scale of opportunities for financial institutions in this area, and
by recommending sector-level interventions that can mitigate the constraints banks and
factories face accessing remediation finance.
Executive Summary


The April 2013 Rana Plaza tragedy in Savar, Bangladesh spurred an unprecedented
collaboration between local stakeholders, buyers, and the international community to
address worker safety in the country’s ready-made garment (RMG) sector. Three initiatives
were established to carry out structural, electrical and fire safety inspections in over 3,500
export factories: the Accord on Fire and Building Safety in Bangladesh (Accord), the Alliance
for Bangladesh Worker Safety (Alliance), and the ILO-supported National Tripartite Plan
of Action (National Initiative). Results of the inspections prompted corrective action plans
including time-bound remediation actions factories would have to implement to improve
worker safety.

With remediation needs clearly mapped and remediation efforts underway, IFC and the
International Labour Organization (ILO) jointly commissioned this study to provide an
analysis of the overall cost of safety remediation that RMG factories must pay for structural,
fire and electrical work, and a corresponding overview of a factory’s ability to finance these
operations - either through their own resources, buyers’ support, or through accessing loan
capital. The study included a detailed review of financing options available to RMG factories
through the Bangladeshi banking sector and credit facilities recently developed specifically for
RMG remediation by international organizations. In addition, the study identified a number
of challenges to remediation by studying the cost of safety inputs and services, bottlenecks
to their availability, and the capacity of enabling sector stakeholders to conduct factory
assessments and inspections.

Fire, electrical and structural safety reports from a sample of 100 RMG factories were
analyzed in order to evaluate the types and unit costs of issues identified during inspections.
Cost estimates were compiled to establish a total cost of remediation for the sector.
Subsequently, interviews were conducted with a selection of industry stakeholders, including
RMG factory managers, business associations and development organizations, government
bodies, and banks to validate and share study findings. The study concluded with a
presentation of the preliminary research findings to stakeholders to validate and update the
initial findings.


                                                                                                   1
    SAFETY REMEDIATION

    The study focused on all RMG factories involved in at least one of the three remediation
    initiatives (Alliance, Accord, and National Initiative) at the time of research. This criterion
    resulted in a total number of 3,778 RMG exporting factories identified. While most factories
    in the sector (62%) employ fewer than 1,000 workers, the general characteristics of the
    factories as separated by the three initiatives vary considerably. Alliance and Accord factories
    are generally larger, with European and American brand (buyers) business partners. Factories
    in the National Initiative tend to be smaller in size and export mostly to smaller international
    brands that exhibit comparatively less concern for safety and labor law compliance.

    According to the surveyed factories, remediation efforts are highly dependent on international
    buyers’ requests and the strength of the relationship between the RMG factory and the
    buyers. A second factor is factory size (workforce and turnover), which is an important
    consideration for local lending banks in approving factory loan applications.

    Inspections across the sector revealed an average of 59 noncompliance issues per factory,
    most of which (51%) fall under electrical safety. Electrical safety issues, including unsafe cabling
    and wiring, distribution boards and grounding systems, tend to be the cheapest, quickest, and
    therefore most likely to be fixed; study results show 45% and 56% of all electrical issues within
    the Alliance and Accord initiatives, respectively, already addressed.

    Fire safety issues (30%) received the highest prescribed urgency of remediation due to the
    direct danger they pose to worker safety. These issues tend to be more expensive than the
    electrical, with most common items including installation of fire barriers, doors, alarms, and
    emergency exit pathways. Higher costs have resulted in slower remediation progress, with
    study estimates showing 42% of all Accord and 35% of Alliance fire issues already addressed.

    Structural safety (19%) has shown the least remediation progress, due to the significant costs
    of extensive remedial work necessary for the factories. Also significant to the pace of progress
    is the fact that a number of actions in the remediation plans first require factory managers
    to hire engineers to conduct in-depth investigations to determine whether the factory needs
    additional work.

    Study results show costs of remediation vary greatly from factory to factory. For those
    factories not needing extensive structural retrofitting, total costs can range from USD
    20,000 (10% of factories) to USD 900,000 (10% of factories). Total remediation costs for the
    majority of factories (80%) are estimated to be between USD 100,000 and USD 250,000.
    Approximately 75% of factories will not require structural retrofitting; the 25% that will require
    retrofitting are facing total remediation costs that in extreme cases can reach USD 1.5 Million.
    Most factories (80%), however, are expected to require between USD 120,000 and USD
    320,000 worth of remediation repair.

    Total cost of remediation in the RMG sector prior to implementation, according to study
    analysis, is estimated to be USD 929 Million. However, the last two years have seen
    remediation activities begun in earnest, reducing the remaining remediation costs to around
    USD 635 Million, with USD 262 Million in structural, USD 201 Million in electrical, and USD 171
    Million in fire related issues.

    Challenges to remediation identified by this study are largely related to the costs and the
    willingness of factory managers. Cost per factory can be all but prohibitive, and entrepreneurs
    can be unwilling to spend large amounts of capital on investments that will not increase
    their productivity, efficiency, or product quality. Further challenges are in the capacity of
    multiple sector stakeholders (e.g., RAJUK, DIFE, etc.), as well as in the lack of quality product
    certification mechanisms for safety equipment.
2
ACCESS TO REMEDIATION FINANCE

Until recently, there were no financial products specifically available to the RMG sector for
remediation. Factory owners faced a long bureaucratic loan application process and could only
accept available term loans with high interest rates. (Interest rates for loans in local currency can
range from 11% to 18% for smaller enterprises, and from 9% to 16% for larger enterprises.) One
significant disadvantage for many factories is their inability to present proper, reliable audited
financials to banks; this has a direct effect on the amount of collateral requested by financial
institutions to guarantee the loan. Banks can ask for up to 100% of the value of the loan to be
guaranteed by collateral in the form of land, buildings, or other assets. Larger factories with strong
business relationships to international brands are most likely to be awarded loans, as they can
provide long term purchase orders to prove future cash flow; smaller factories with less regular
and less strategic business relationships are perceived as risky investments by banks.

Bangladesh’s recently launched RMG credit facilities have increased the amount of capital
available for remediation activities. These facilities have clear advantages and disadvantages.
“Pure Credit Facilities”, such as the one launched by IFC, increase the amount of lower-cost capital
to local banks but do not reduce the credit risk banks incur and therefore leave riskier factories
without any real access to finance. “Risk Reducing Facilities”, such as the one launched by USAID,
reduce the risk of lending to the RMG sector with a guarantee and therefore encourage banks
to consider riskier client profiles. This facility alone does not have a direct impact on the amount
of money available in the market specifically for remediation. However, the guarantee does act
as a very effective risk reduction mechanism. “Government to Government Facilities”, such as
those designed by JICA and AFD, provide loans through the Government to a much larger group
of participating banks, thereby expanding the number of RMG factories that can access credit. A
disadvantage of such facilities is that they tend to result in higher interest rates charged to the
final clients.

It can be estimated that through the capital made available by these facilities, the total remaining
financing gap for factory remediation in Bangladesh is around USD 448 Million.




                                                                                                         3
    BACKGROUND: ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INITIATIVES
    Since the April 2013 Rana Plaza disaster, attention has been directed at improving structural,
    electrical, and fire safety in Bangladesh’s RMG factories. In an unprecedented effort to help prevent
    the occurrence of such tragedies, international aid organizations (e.g., the ILO) alongside European
    and American buyers created three initiatives to ensure and verify safety conditions in their
    supplier factories:

    •	 The Accord on Fire and Building Safety in Bangladesh (Accord) was signed on May 15, 2013. It
       is a five-year, independent, legally binding agreement between between brands and retailers
       from over 20 countries in Europe, Asia, North America and from Australia.
    •	 The Alliance for Bangladesh Worker Safety (Alliance) is a group of 28 American global retailers
       formed to develop and launch the Bangladesh Worker Safety Initiative, a binding, five-year
       undertaking. Alliance members represent the majority of North American imports of ready-
       made garments from Bangladesh.
    •	 The Government of Bangladesh’s National Initiative under the Tripartite Plan of Action,
       supported by the International Labour Organization (ILO) with backing from Canada, the
       Netherlands, and the United Kingdom, covers RMG factories that are not being inspected by
       the Alliance or the Accord.

    Considerable progress had been made by the time of completion of the study, but a vast number
    of local manufacturers still struggle to afford the capital necessary to make their factories
    compliant.


    In Bangladesh, IFC implements the Bangladesh Textile Competitiveness program to strengthen the
    competitiveness of the sector through strategic interventions. The ILO launched a US$31.4 million,
    three-and-a-half year program to support implementation of the National Tripartite Plan of Action
    on fire safety and structural integrity.




4
METHODOLOGY
The study was divided into three components, starting with a review of all available information
on the sector and a full review of assessments reports (fire, electrical and structural) from 100
factories to estimate individual costs of remediation activities for a statistically representative
number of RMG factories. The second component consisted of interviews of sector stakeholders.
The final component was devoted to analyses and reporting.

Figure 1 - Study Methodology and Timeline




1. REVIEW OF 100 INSPECTION REPORTS

The three initiatives provided factory reports covering fire, electrical and structural analysis for
each of their assessed factories. To estimate average costs of remediation activities per factory, a
sample of 100 remediation reports (Fire/Electrical/Structural) was taken and the cost of each cor-
rective action was analyzed. The sample size was statistically representative of the total number
of RMG factories in Bangladesh (estimated at 4,296 factories). The selection sample methodology
is defined in Figure 2, where n is the sample size, t is the value that defines the level of confidence
desired, p is an estimate of the proportion that one is trying to estimate in the population, and d is
the acceptable error within the responses given by the sample:

Figure 2 - Sample Size Selection Formula




A sample of 100 over a population of 4,296 allows for a confidence level of 95%, and a confidence
interval of approximately 10%. Factory selection in the sample intentionally included reports from
all three initiatives, and was based on the number of completed factory assessments reports by the
initiatives at the time 1 of selection. As Table 1 attests, the final sample contained 44 factory reports
                      25




from Accord, 31 from National Initiative, and 25 from Alliance.
1 August 2015


                                                                                                            5
    Table 1 - Sample Breakdown, number and percentage of completed reports

    Completed Assessments
                                Total   Percentage (%)                       Data Source
    Accord                      1,281             44%
    Alliance                     737              25%    http://database.dife.gov.bd/ as of August 2015
    NI                           893              31%

    Results are presented in accordance with categorization based on electrical, fire and structural
    issues. In some instances there can be overlap between the three. For example, an electrical report
    from one initiative might indicate the need for fire protection barriers to be applied to a generator
    room. However, the same action identified in a different location (e.g. on a production line or
    stairs), might end up in the fire safety report and therefore categorized under fire issues. This study
    therefore follows the categorizations as they appear in the assessment reports.

    The 100 (Fire/Electrical/Structural) reports were reviewed by the study’s team of structural,
    electrical, and fire engineers. The Alliance and Accord reports were downloaded from their
    websites; the National Initiative made a selection of their reports available. After the estimation
    analysis was completed, an engineering team joined the research team for eight factory visits
    (selected out of the 100) and on-site inspections to check the accuracy of the study estimations .




6
2. PRIMARY INTERVIEWS IN DHAKA

A total of 32 interviews were carried out with local sector stakeholders. These included interviews
with safety input providers, experts, industry associations, government bodies, local financial
institutions, international buyers, international organizations and RMG factories (see Table 2).

Table 2 - Stakeholder Interviews

Group                        Organization
                             Grand Arch
Safety Input Providers
                             Electrical Advising Engineers
Safety Experts               ARUP
                             BGMEA
                             Accord
Industry Association
                             Alliance
                             National Initiative
                             Department of Inspections
Government Body
                             for Factories and Establishments
                             City Bank
                             Prime Bank
Banks                        Mutual Trust Bank
                             IDLC (NBFI)
                             Standard Chartered
                             H&M
                             TESCO
Buyers
                             Walmart
                             VF Corporation
                             Better Work
                             IFC
                             JICA
International Organization   AFD
                             USAID (In Dhaka)
                             WRAP
                             GIZ
                             DK Globals
                             Flash Apparels
                             Plummy fashions limited
                             Prime Garments Ltd
RMG Factories                Mascot Fashion
                             Mahdi knit design ltd
                             Coit (Pvt) ltd
                             Columbia Garments
                             Smug Sweaters




                                                                                                      7
3. VALIDATION MEETINGS

The final step was to conduct a series of validation meetings in Dhaka with multiple sector
stakeholders. Participants were presented with preliminary study findings from the analysis
and collected feedback on key research hypothesis, market analyses and cost estimates. These
meetings were conducted with:

•	   ILO and IFC Staff
•	   Alliance, Accord and the Department of Inspection for Factories and Establishments.
•	   RMG Factories
•	   International Organizations

These findings were additionally presented at the January 2016 IFC Buyers’ Forum. The final
findings were presented in April 2016 to a group of twenty stakeholders, including development
organizations and representatives from BGMEA and BKMEA. In addition to validating the results of
the study, the group agreed on five key areas of action that the sector should implement to move
forward. These areas of action are detailed in the section on Identified Areas of Need, page 47.




8
FACTORY SEGMENTATION

This section introduces the key characteristics and dynamics of garment factories. Information
presented here will be matched later in this report with data on average remediation values and
access to finance in order to estimate the market need for remediation financing.


In order to quantify the total need for remediation financing in the RMG sector, it was necessary to
first quantify the number of factories likely to need and apply for financial products to remediate
safety conditions.

The Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA) estimates that there
are around 4,296 2 active garment factories in Bangladesh. This includes factories of all sizes that
                    25




may (or may not) be members of different remediation initiatives, work with international brands,
and export to a number of different countries or produce for the local market.

As of December 2015, 3,778 factories were enrolled in one of the three remediation initiatives, and
had therefore received or were in the process of receiving a compliance assessment. It should be
noted that this number recognizes the possibility of double counting a factory in more than one
initiative; this can happen with factories that are shared between Alliance and Accord (working
with both American and European brands) or between either of the Western initiatives and
the National Tripartite Initiative, as some factories are in the process of being transferred from
the former to the latter. Figure 3 shows the number of reported active factories in each of the
initiatives.

Figure 3 - Number of RMG Factories




	

Accord covers the largest number of factories, followed by the National Initiative and then Alliance.
In order to estimate the cost of remediation, this report will only focus on the 3,778 factories
included in one of the three initiatives. It should however be acknowledged that the actual number
of existing factories is difficult to quantify, as there are many that either produce solely for the
local domestic market, or engage in sub-contracting activities, and therefore lack the international
standards incentive to remediation. BGMEA, with the support of the ILO, is in the process of
streamlining and confirming its large member directory.
2 BGMEA Trade Data Accord Dec. 2015 Report, ILO Sept. 2015 Report, Alliance Sept. 2015 Report.


                                                                                                        9
 The study intentionally divides factories by initiative because the different initiatives offer different
 types of incentives and support towards remediation:

 •	 Factories under Alliance and Accord: have working relationships with reputation-conscious
    buyers who prioritize working conditions and impose strict remediation requirements on
    the factories. The buyers create the greatest impetus for structural, electrical and fire safety
    remediation. In addition, some factories (those strategic to buyers) may receive financial
    support from buyers towards remediation.
 •	 Factories under National Initiative: do not receive the same type of buyer pressure to
    remediate as those under Alliance and Accord, and tend not to have long-term relationships
    with buyers who either push or support their efforts at remediation.
 •	 RMG factories in Bangladesh tend to be large-scale enterprises. Therefore this study uses a
    classification of Small, Medium and Large Enterprises based on size trends observed in the
    sector, as well as feedback received by key industry stakeholders:

 Small: fewer than 1,000 employees
 Medium: Between 1,000 and 3,999 employees
 Large: More than 4,000 employees

 Table 3 shows the distribution of factories by size between the initiatives. An estimated 67% of the
 total number of RMG factories in Bangladesh employ fewer than 1,000 workers, while 29% employ
 between 1,000 and 4,000 workers; only 4% of factories employ over 4,000 workers.

 Table 3 - Factory size by percentage (%) in Accord, Alliance, and National Initiative 3               26




                                            Small                Medium                         Large
                                    (Below 1,000)      (1,000 < x < 4,000)       (Above 4,000 Workers)
     Accord                                     57%                     38%                                 5%
     Alliance                                   47%                     46%                                 7%
     National Initiative                        82%                      16%                                2%
     Total                                     67%                      29%                                 4%

 An additional factor useful to classify and describe the sector is the relationship between a factory
 and the brands they work with. Both buyers and factories interviewed during the primary research
 of this study confirmed that brands tend to financially support their most strategic factories
 (those factories they either have or intend to have long-term relationships with). Interviews also
 noted that the strength of the buyer–factory relationship is a strong indicator of a given factory’s
 maturity and willingness to invest in remediation.

 One way of classifying these relationships is to use data directly produced by Accord, which
 records and classifies the business relationships between a single factory and international brands.
 Relationships are classified along three tiers, depending on the amount of production ordered by
 the buyer in the single factory:

 Tier 1: “Facilities representing, in the aggregate, not less than 30%, approximately, of each
 signatory company’s annual production in Bangladesh by volume.” These factories will be referred
 to as strategic suppliers. 4  27




 3 The breakdown for Alliance and Accord’s factories is directly calculated from their full factory lists. The data for
 National Initiative comes from the 31 factories in the sample of remediation report analysis utilized by this study, and an
 assumption has been made that the remaining factories in the market would follow a distribution similar to factories in
 the National Initiative.
 4 Accord, March 2013




10
Tier 2: “Together, Tier 1 and Tier 2 factories shall represent not less than 65%, approximately, of
each signatory company’s production in Bangladesh by volume.” These factories will be referred to
as regular suppliers.

Tier 3: These factories represent no more than 35% of a signatory’s production. Tier 3 includes
facilities with occasional orders and where the buyer has limited leverage with the factory. These
factories will be referred to as minor suppliers. Factories subject to limited initial inspections to
identify high risks. 5     28




According to Accord data, 75% of enlisted factories are classified as either Tier 1 or Tier 2, with the
remaining 25% classified as Tier 3. Alliance does not report such data; however, for the purpose of
this analysis it will be assumed that its factories follow a similar split. Conversations with industry
stakeholders regarding National Initiative factories revealed that 10% of their factories could be
classified as strategic suppliers, followed by 30% as regular suppliers and 60% as minor suppliers.
Applying this additional information to the total number of factories in the three initiatives enables
the study to distribute factories along a matrix, represented in Figure 1 - Study Methodology and
Timeline. On the horizontal axis, factories are distributed in relation to their estimated relationship
to international brands, from weak to strong. On the vertical axis, factories are distributed along
their workforce size.

The results show an overall market dominated by two large groups: small factories with weak ties
to international brands (around 754), and small size factories with average relationships (around
693). Both types are likely to have challenges in accessing finance, but the former will be less likely
to receive support from international brands for remediation than the latter. The third largest
group is comprised of small factories characterized by strong ties to brands. These are likely to
receive support from their buyers.

Bangladesh’s medium and large sized factories show a similarly even distribution in terms of
strength of relationships with international brands, with medium factories registering weak (~319),
average (~394) or strong relationships (~366) and larger enterprises (~150) showing weak (~44),
average (~54) and strong (~50).

Figure 4 - Size & Relationship matrix, number of factories

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Relationship	  to	  Buyers
                                                                                                   Weak	                                                                                                                                                                                                               Medium                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Strong




                                                         Minor	  Suppliers                                                                                                                                                                                                     Regular	  Suppliers                                                                                                                                                                                                   Strategic	  Suppliers
Factory	  Size   Small
                                         	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  884               	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  813              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  641

                  Medium
                                         	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  375               	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  462              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  429

                  Large
                                         	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  52    	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  64   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  59



5 Accord, “Meeting of the Brand Caucus”, January 2015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           11
 OTHER FACTORY CHARACTERISTICS

 It is important to determine whether production occurs in a single or multi-factory building;
 Figure 5 shows that 19% of all factories operate in multi-factory buildings, where there are
 immediate complications related to responsibilities for safety and remediation efforts. Issues
 relating to the entire building may have to be divided among factory owners sharing the
 premises. An example would be remediation of all staircases for fire safety compliance. If two or
 more factories are operating in the same building, then remediation would have to be agreed by
 all, which could make payment and implementation potentially more challenging.

 Figure 5 - Multi-factory buildings, percentage (%) of factories 6 		          25




 Factories operating in multi-factory buildings are often renting from the building owner. This
 presents an additional challenge to remediation, as disputes may arise between entities as to
 who should be responsible for the remedial work. Interviews with factory managers confirmed
 that they are likely to be unwilling to invest sizable amounts of money into improving conditions
 of premises they do not own. This was also confirmed by interviews with buyers, who set strict
 policies against working with suppliers located in rented premises for this reason. Buyers also
 tend not to work with factories located in multi-factory locations; an exception is when multiple
 factories on different floors of the same building have the same owner, and therefore the
 remediation activities are the responsibility of a single entity, or single group of companies.

 A similar issue is posed by factories operating in multi-purpose buildings. As shown in Figure 6,
 approximately 9% 7 of garment factories across the three initiatives are currently operating in
                        26




 buildings not originally designed for garment factories. It is not unusual that garment factories
 and completely different types of enterprises operate on different floors of the same building.
 The concern is that the weight of a large amount of equipment, fabric, inputs, finished garments,
 and staff may exceed structure bearing capacities. Furthermore, structural requirements specific
 to a garment factory might differ considerably from the requirements of a different type of
 establishment (operating on a different floor); in such cases, building owners have a less of an
 incentive to remediate the building to satisfy the needs of only one of their tenants.

 Figure 6 - Multi-purpose buildings, percentage (%) of factories 8                  27




 6,7,8: Alliance and Accord’s numbers are calculated from their factory lists. Data for National Initiative comes from the
 31 factories in the sample of remediation report analysis utilized by this study. The value for National Initiative factories
 is calculated on a small sample, and stakeholder consultations indicated the percentages of multi-factory and multi-
 purpose are expected to be higher.
 	

12
REMEDIATION OVERVIEW

ISSUES IDENTIFIED IN THE FACTORIES


Any meaningful analysis of all remediation issues first must solve a lack of standardization of
recommended activities in the remediation reports. The sample reports from the 100 factories
contained approximately 6,000 individual remediation activities that had been developed by
different engineering teams under different remediation initiatives and covered factories with
different remediation needs. It was therefore a challenge to categorize remediation activities into
specific, universally acceptable categories. The following section presents the study’s best overview
of the non-compliance issues common to all (or nearly all) factories.

The analysis carried out in the safety assessments indicates that factories average 59 identified
issues needing remediation. More than half of these are related to electrical safety (51%), followed
by fire (30%) and structural (19%) safety. As shown in Figure 7 below, Corrective Action Plans
(CAPs) require most (41%) of issues to be solved within two months, followed by 31% within six
months and 13% immediately. Fire (19%) and Electrical issues (9%) are the categories more likely to
require short-term action.

It is important to note that electrical issues tend to be both easier to remediate and cheaper than
fire and structural issues. Structural issues are likely to revolve around one significant procedural
aspect: most require factories to conduct further investigations on their buildings, but do not
necessarily require immediate remediation activities. This means that in order to estimate the
cost of structural remediation (as presented later on in this report), the engineering team had to
postulate how many of these initial structural investigations would result in additional, necessary
remediation work.

Figure 7 - Remediation urgency, percentage (%) of identified issues




                                                                                                        13
     Table 4 shows the average frequency per factory of electrical, fire and structural non-remediation
     issues common to all 100 factories included in the sample of this analysis.

     Electrical items are the largest set of non-compliance issues in terms of numbers. Out of around
     3,000 electrical items in the samples, cabling and wiring were the most commonly cited issues.
     In these instances, factories have been requested to carry out a variety of activities including,
     but not limited to, sealing cable penetrations with fire- and water-resistant elements, replacing
     group wiring of cables with individual circuits, replacing flexible cables with fixed, soldering,
     crimping and insulating exposed cables, as well as other activities. The second most common
     category of electrical issues was earthing systems, related to ensuring that all panels are
     provided with proper and separate earth connections, providing each generator with an earthing
     connection, digging earth pits, as well as other activities.

     Fire issues are the second most prevalent, are usually characterized by the highest urgency
     of remediation, and tend to be more expensive than electrical issues. An average factory can
     have around five separate non-compliance issues connected to fire barriers (i.e., protective
     walls between buildings, designed isolation of building sections for better fire containment).
     All factories feature an average of nearly two non-compliance issues connected to fire alarms.
     These are related to automatic detection of fire and smoke hazards, as well as reliable methods
     of alerting workers in case of a fire emergency. Fire alarms encompass all systems and activities
     necessary for reliable automatic detection of fire and smoke hazards. This includes the installation
     of fire alarm systems, the installation of detectors across factory property, and their connection
     to a centralized and computerized system.

     Structural Items are most commonly connected to load-bearing potential, whereby the current
     structure of the factory is either not able or suspected to not be able to support the factory’s
     weight. A second structural issue common to all factories is excessive stress on and inadequate
     support (injections, bracing, etc.) for the columns of a building. Missing documents on the
     building and its maintenance were also a common issue.

     Table 4 - Average frequency of non-compliance issues common to all factories, Number of issues
     per factory

     Area          Action                            Issues / Factory
                   Cabling / Wiring                        6.4
                   Earthing System                          3
                   Distribution Board / Panels              2
                   Circuit Breakers                        1.8
                   Planned Periodical Inspections          1.8
     Electrical    Generator                               1.2
                   Lighting Protection System               1
                   Clearance                                1
                   Single Line Diagram                      1
                   Transformer                              1
                   Marking                                 0.9




14
             Fire Barriers                           5.3
             Automatic Fire Alarm                    1.8
             Emergency Signals, Pathways and
                                                     1.4
             Isle Marking
Fire
             Side-hinged swinging doors              1.3
             Fire Doors                              1.3
             Illumination                            1.1
             Handrails                               0.8
             High Loads                              2.3
Structural   Column Stress                           1.4
             Missing Documents                        1

Table 5 shows a second set of non-compliance issues that, while not common to all factories,
were nevertheless noteworthy.

Table 5 - Average frequency of non-compliance Issues common to nearly all factories, Number of
Issues per Factory

Area          Action                            Issues / Factory
              Light Fixtures                          0.6
              Phase Separators                        0.6
              Neutral                                 0.6
Electrical    Rubber Mats                             0.5
              Ventilation                             0.5
              Thermographic scanning                  0.5
              Safety Training and Equipment           0.5
              Stand Pipe and Hose System              0.7
Fire          Engineer to design passage ways
                                                      0.5
              and exits
              Discrepancies                           0.6
              Water Infiltrations                     0.6
Structural    Bracing System                          0.6
              Testing                                 0.4
              Beam Cracks                             0.4




                                                                                                 15
     REMEDIATION ALREADY COMPLETED

     The study also researched ongoing factory activity/progress with remediation. Creation of
     the initiatives effectively launched sector-wide remediation efforts, and both Alliance and
     Accord publish updates on their factories’ progress. Both show greatest progress made in
     electrical remediation, largely due to lower costs and less time required. As previously noted,
     fire compliance issues usually require the installation of expensive equipment, and structural
     remediation is by far the most complex, with the need for engineers to first investigate and verify
     compliance issues and estimate the length of time needed for implementation.

     Accord publishes regular status updates on the progress of the CAPs, categorizing the total
     number of electrical, fire and structural issues by: “Corrected”, “Pending Verification” and “In
     Progress”. Table 6 shows this breakdown.

     Table 6 - Accord’s remediation status update, percentage (%) of CAP Issues 9  25




                               Electrical    Fire Structural      Total
      In Progress                    39%     54%          62%       49%
      Pending Verification           23%      22%         27%       23%
      Corrected                      37%     24%           11%      28%

     “Corrected” designates issues remediated by factories and approved by Accord. Issues “Pending
     Verification” have been reported as corrected by factories but still must be verified by Accord
     engineers. Conversations with Accord indicate that around 80% of these issues have been
     confirmed as correctly remediated, with 20% to be requiring further repair. “In Progress” Issues
     are those still undergoing remediation by the factories.

     Varying degrees of progress have been made in implementing remediation plans across all
     compliance categories within the Accord factories. Figure 8, illustrates the study’s estimates that
     56% of electrical issues, 42% of fire issues and 32% of structural issues in Accord factories had been
     remediated by date of publication.

     Figure 8 - Accord Factories Remediation Status, % of Remediated Issues




     Alliance also publishes status updates of the remediation progress implemented by their member
     factories. Figure 9 shows that most Alliance factories (45%) have remediated between 21% and
     41% of their non-compliance issues. Approximately 28% have remediated less than 20% of their
     overall issues, and 24% of factories have implemented between 41% and 60%. Only 3% of Alliance
     factories have remediated more than 80% of their issues.




     9 As of 1 February 2016



16
Figure 9 - Alliance Remediated Issues, % of Factories


                                3%	  

                                           28%	                                     <20%	  
                     24%	  
                                                                                     21	  -­‐	  40%	  

                                                                                     41	  -­‐	  60%	  

                                                                                     61%	  -­‐	  80%	  

                                                                                     >	  80%	  
                                45%	  



From consultations with Alliance, estimates can be made on progress made in the three
remediation categories. As shown in Figure 10, Alliance factories have so far remediated 45% of
their electrical issues, 35% of their fire issues and 15% of their structural issues.

Figure 10 - Alliance Factories Remediation Status, % of Remediated Issues




No data is available on the remediation status of National Initiative factories, but interviews with
key stakeholders in the industry, including BGMEA, indicate that around 80% of those factories
have not implemented remediation plans; the remaining 20% have at least begun remediation
(though no data exists on progress levels of implementation). The study therefore uses these
estimates to help calculate the value of remediation still to be implemented in the sector.

ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORKS AND AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE PROVIDERS

Factory interviews indicate that the lack of a single unified set of safety requirements was an
impediment to progress during the time when Accord and Alliance were still developing their
frameworks. Factories were requested to simultaneously comply with multiple and occasionally
conflicting safety requirements from multiple international buyers. This issue of multiple
compliance frameworks was resolved in 2013 with acceptance of the first harmonized standards
by Accord, Alliance and National Initiative through the Technical Committee of the National
Tripartite Working Group on the Plan of Action on Fire Safety and Structural Integrity for the
RMG Sector in Bangladesh.




                                                                                                             17
     Interviews with initiative representatives also indicate that the three Initiative’s frameworks
     are largely harmonized, and except for a few procedural differences, assessments are based
     on the same framework. Interviews with international brand representatives found that they
     only apply and enforce the requirements from their own initiative. Interviews with factory
     managers confirmed this, but also shed light on an additional issue: Factory managers are
     confident that once they have received, reviewed and agreed to their factory’s CAP, the CAP will
     constitute the backbone of their remedial activities, and they will not be subject to additional
     requirements; however, it is not easy to find certified fire and electrical equipment, or installation
     and construction service providers that can meet the international standards required by
     the initiatives. It is evidently common for a factory to purchase equipment (e.g. fire doors)
     that appears to be legitimate, only to realize after inspection by initiative engineers that the
     equipment is actually not certified, and ultimately a financial drain.

     In response to such issues, initiatives now review quotes that factory managers receive from
     input and service providers to ensure the proper quality of equipment is purchased. Reportedly 10,       25




     initiatives also specify which input and service providers they should be sourcing from. For
     example, Accord has a list of 55 providers on their website for factory consideration (without
     explicitly endorsing any). Factory managers confirmed that the number of suppliers is not an
     issue, as demand has risen sharply and products are now easily available. However, price is a
     factor, as most fire safety and advanced electrical equipment must be of international quality
     standards and therefore imported. The Government of Bangladesh granted duty-free import
     status to safety input importers in 2014, thereby reducing their costs. However, the price in terms
     of affordability is still significant.

     Two European producers of fire equipment are currently looking into opening production
     facilities in Bangladesh to tap into the large domestic market at lower prices. However, the lack
     of availability in Bangladesh of a few key intermediate products necessary to manufacture fire
     equipment is impeding greater foreign investment/interest. Fire doors, for example, require
     latches that are not available in-country, and a manufacturer would have to either establish
     production in-country or accept steep import costs, since the duty-free status for fire equipment
     only applies to finished products.




     10 http://www.dhakatribune.com/business/2014/aug/31/accord-now-dictates-fire-safety-equipment-sources	




18
ANALYSIS OF REMEDIATION COST

This section estimates the total financial amount necessary for factories to carry out the remaining
remediation work based on the assessment reports of the 100 factory sample. Each reported
compliance issue was analyzed for estimated cost. This allowed for a break down of total cost
of remediation into the three categories of electrical, fire and structural compliance work. These
results were then applied proportionately to the entire Bangladesh RMG sector, minus the value
of the remediation work already implemented, in order to determine the total remaining cost of
remediation.

COST ESTIMATES PER FACTORY

The average cost of remediation for the 100 factories in the report is around USD 189,000. It was
however observed that the distribution of the cost estimates were not symmetrically distributed
(there were more factories with low total costs than high). The team then proceeded to calculate
how the individual costs were distributed from the minimum value (min), first quartile (Q1),
Median, third quartile (Q3) and maximum (max).

One important analytical item previously mentioned is that in roughly 30% of all cases, the list
of structural remediation actions was limited to investigations or testing of equipment and/or
structural elements. It was therefore necessary to estimate the total potential cost for each factory
in case the listed investigative work resulted in additional structural or retrofitting work. From
the study’s sample, it can be estimated that the cost of the investigations or testing only accounts
for 28% of the total structural remediation work if retrofit/additional structural work is deemed
necessary. From interviews with engineers and construction service providers, it can be estimated
that approximately 25% of all factories will have to undergo additional retrofitting work on their
buildings as a result of their assessment reports.

Table 7 shows the cost estimates for structural retrofitting work, and categorizes the sample
factories by cost required. Estimates for factories that do not need retrofit work (75% of factories)
vary from a minimum of around USD $20,000 for factories with low levels of non-compliance, up
to a maximum of over USD $900,000 for factories with larger non-compliance issues reported.
Estimates for factories that will require retrofitting work (25% of factories) vary from a minimum of
USD 24,000 to a maximum of USD 1.1 Million.

For certain factories, the total cost of remediation will be prohibitive compared to the size of their
factories’ business operations. In these situations, a factory manager might compare the total cost
of remediation to the factory’s annual turnover and decide that implementing the remediation
work makes less commercial sense than relocating the factory, or tearing down the existing
building to build a new (safety compliant) one. The estimates presented in this report do not take
into consideration the cost of relocating the factory to a new building or the cost of building a new
one. Instead they focus on the cost of remediation issues stated in the assessment reports.




                                                                                                         19
     Table 7 - Factory cost estimates distribution, USD and percentage (%) frequency

                                                    Minimum          Quartile 1      Median       Quartile 3     Maximum
      USD Value of remediation without
                                                         20,155         96,029       160,578          253,416       909,167
      retrofit work
      USD Value of remediation with
                                                         24,503          121,367     203,366          319,160       1,577,297
      retrofit work
      Frequency                                            10%             30%              30%          20%            10%

     The cost of fire related remediation activities can range from a minimum of USD $5,000 to a
     maximum of USD $197,000, with a median value of USD $72,000, as illustrated in Table 8.

     Table 8 - Distribution of fire costs, USD

                               Minimum             Quartile 1             Median              Quartile 3         Maximum
      Fire                           5,678               43,127             72,736                 116,196           197,728

     The cost of fire safety compliance is mostly driven by the cost of the equipment. As shown in
     the table below, fire safety items tend to have a high unit cost multiplied by the number of units
     needed across the factory compound, which can result in significant expenditure. Fire doors are
     quoted as the one of the key cost drivers, as a single fire door can cost USD 1,300.

     Table 9 – Cost of most common fire remediation activities, BDT & USD

      Remediation Action / Item                                                    Unit       Rate (BDT)        Rate (USD)
      Outwards swinging side hinged doors                                          Each            23,500           305.50
      Handrails                                                                      sft.            1,400           18.20
      Fire Doors                                                                   Each           100,000         1,300.00
      Design of fire rating smoke proof enclosure                         Person Day               50,000          650.00
      Fire rated construction at unprotected
                                                                                     cft.              150         1.95.00
      window adjacent to external staircase
      Design and plan for automatic detection                     Design of fire alarm
      system with addressable fire alarm and                       control main panel             200,000        2,600.00
      control panel                                                          (FACMP)
      Install Manual activation call point at all exit
                                                                                   Each             3,500            45.50
      routes.
      Smoke Detectors                                                              Each             5,000           65.00
      1.5 inch hose pipe and 2 inches stand pipe                                   Each            35,000          455.00
      Prepare plan and design dedicated storage
                                                                                     cft.             550              7.15
      tank for firefighting operation
      Aisle marking guiding to evacuation pathways                                   rft            2,700            35.10
      Egress path illumination                                                     Each                 36            0.47

     Electrical costs per factory tend to be driven by installation or services rather than equipment costs. Cost
     per factory can range from USD 11,000 to USD 268,000.




20
Table 10 - Distribution of electrical costs, USD

                          Minimum           Quartile 1              Median         Quartile 3      Maximum
Elecrical                    11,598                36,122             59,505           93,681         268,968

The lower cost of electric inputs (cables, switches, etc.) means that expenditure is largely for
payment of installation and testing of equipment by electrical engineers and technicians.

Table 11 - Cost of most common electrical remediation activities, BDT & USD

Remediation Action / Item                                         Unit         Rate (BDT)       Rate (USD)
Updated SLD matching existing installation at
                                                                   sqft                10              0.13
factory
Substation illumination                                           each            20,000            260.00
Rubber mats                                                       each              2,500             32.50
Modify generator room to meet requirements                         sqft            2,000             26.00
Distribution boards                                               each            20,000            260.00
Individual fuse protection                                        each               250               3.25
Switchboards made of nonflammable materials                       each             25,000           325.00
Provide cable connections with properly soldered/
                                                                  each              1,000             13.00
welded lugs at DB's
Conductors and MCCB/MCB adequate sizing
without exceeding permissible current carrying                    each             10,000           130.00
capacity for insulation
Use individual circuit and over current device
for every incoming and outgoing circuit at the                each DB              15,000           195.00
distribution boards
Provide circuit diagram/circuit list with proper
                                                                  each              1,000             13.00
current ratings and fuse size
Seal cable penetrations through walls with fire
                                                                  each             5,000             65.00
resistive elements.
Replace all flexible cables/wires with fixed wiring            per feet              300              3.90
Seal cable entry-exit points of DB's with
                                                                  each             6,000             78.00
non-flammable materials.
Generator earthing/grounding                                      each            30,000            390.00
DBs and doors earthing/grounding                                  each             16,000           208.00
Planned periodical inspection and testing                           lot           225,000          2,925.00
Silica gel refill                                                  sft.            2,000             26.00
Provide and maintain clear and legible
identifications numbers on all incoming and                    per DB                300              3.90
outgoing circuits of HT and LT panel.
Caution Boards at DBs                                          per DB                300              3.90
Vertical shaft of 200 x 400 mm for every 1500
                                                                   sft.              450               5.85
sq.m. of floor area, (For buildings > 20m high)
Provide proper height of panel board (< 2m from
                                                            each board             5,000             65.00
floor level).
Circuit Breakers                                                  each              1,000             13.00
Neutral                                                         per sft              300              3.90


                                                                                                                21
 The minimum value for structural remediation per factory ranges from a minimum of USD $2,700
 for factories not needing any retrofitting work (but still requiring structural repair), to above USD
 $1.1 Million, for large factories in need of extensive retrofitting.

 Table 12 - Distribution of structural costs, USD

                                     Minimum             Quartile 1           Median           Quartile 3           Maximum
     Without Retrofit Work                $2,879            $16,780               $28,336            $43,539          $442,471
     With Retrofit Work                   $7,227             $42,119              $71,124           $109,283         $1,110,601

 As previously mentioned, factory assessment reports frequently require factories to hire qualified
 engineers to conduct tests and investigations that may result in the factory having to carry out
 additional remedial work. A factory can therefore be requested to hire engineers to carry out a
 Detailed Engineering Assessment (DEAs) to verify structural issues (e.g., cracks in the structure
 or dampness in roofs and walls, as well as checks to the building loading plans and bracing
 structures).

 Table 13 - Cost of most common structural remediation activities, BDT & USD

                                                                                                         Rate            Rate
     Type of work                                                                           Unit
                                                                                                        (BDT)           (USD)
     Plaster removal to investigate dampness penetration in building walls                   sft           20             0.26
     Cement sand plaster with sand cleaning & scaffolding                                    sft           30             0.39
     Plaster removal at joint point between brick wall and columns                            rft              15         0.20
     Joint point refilling (If cracks do not penetrate into building structure)               rft         350             4.55
     Plastic emulsion paint                                                                  sft           35             0.46
                                                                                            man
     Investigation of cracks by qualified structural engineer                                         50,000          650.00
                                                                                            day
                                                                                            man
     Investigation of dampness occurring by qualified structural engineer                             50,000          650.00
                                                                                            day
     Design, loads and columns stresses review                                               sft               8          0.10
     Verify insitu concrete stresses either by 100mm dia. core, or existing
                                                                                             No.       18,000          234.00
     cylinder strength data
     Produce and actively manage a loading plan with consideration to
                                                                                             sft               8          0.10
     floor capacity and column capacity
     Inspect joint steel structure and bracing system to ensure structure                   man
                                                                                                      50,000          650.00
     stability by building engineer                                                         day
     Cable bracing system                                                                     rft         250             3.25
     Steel bracing system                                                                     rft        400              5.20
     Join steel structures if joint needs to be replaced or strengthened                     ton     140,000         1,820.00
     Install water proofing and drainage system                                              sft           125             1.63
     Detail engineering assessment                                                           sft               8          0.10
     Prepare machine layout plan                                                             Sft               2          0.02
     Floor load plan with necessary calculation                                              sft               2          0.03




22
ESTIMATION METHODOLOGY

This section estimates the total value of remediation work in the Bangladesh RMG sector as well
as the total value of remediation work still to be implemented by factories.

Total cost of remediation work first requires an estimate of the total number of factories in the
RMG sector; for the purposes of this study, the total number of factories in the sector was agreed
to be all factories registered in any of the three initiatives at the time of this evaluation.

As shown in Table 14 this study considers the Bangladesh RMG sector as composed of 3,778
factories potentially in need of remediation, with most of them being registered in Accord (1,641),
National Initiative (1,475) and Alliance (662). As previously mentioned, this study also assumes that
25% of these will be in need of additional structural work.

Table 14 - Retrofitting work in number of factories

                                               Total Number      Not Needing Retrofit      Needing Retrofit
                                               of Factories      Work (75%)                Work (25%)
     Market   Total Number of Factories                 3,778                    2,834                        945
      Size    Accord Factories                          1,641                     1,231                       410
              Alliance Factories                         662                       497                        166
              National Initiative Factories             1,475                     1,106                       369

The cost of remediation per factory is not symmetrically distributed across the sample 100
factories. The best approach to estimating the total value of remediation is therefore to divide cost
estimates into five sub-categories and multiply the cost of remediation of each sub-category by
the number of factories inside, as follows:

•	    Minimum:		          Factories between 0 and Q1 - Minimum			                           10%
•	    First Quartile:	    Factories between Q1 – Minimum and Median – Q1	                   30%	
•	    Median:	 	          Factories between Median – Q1 and Q2 – Median	                    30%	
•	    Third Quartile:	    Factories between Q2 – Median and Maximum – Q2 	                  20%	
•	    Maximum:	           Factories between Maximum – Q2 and Maximum	                       10%	

This is represented in terms of number of factories in Table 15.

Table 15 - Factory retrofitting need, number of factories

                                    Minimum         Quartile 1       Median    Quartile 3       Maximum
 Factories Needing
                                              94          283            283              189          94
 Retrofitting Work
 Factories NOT Needing
                                              283         850            850            567           283
 Retrofitting Work




                                                                                                                    23
     TOTAL VALUE OF REMEDIATION IN THE BANGLADESH RMG SECTOR

      The total value of the cost of remediation in the Bangladesh RMG sector, prior to any remediation
     efforts, was around USD 929 Million. As Figure 11 illustrates, if no remediation efforts had occurred,
     the cost of remediation for factories in Accord would amount to ~USD 403 Million, followed by
     ~USD 362 Million for factories in the National Initiative and finally by ~USD 162 Million in factories
     in the Alliance.

     Figure 11 - Total initial cost of remediation, USD




     Table 16 breaks this total initial cost estimate into expenditure by remediation issue and initiative.
     Structural remediation accounted for the greatest expense (~USD 347 Million), followed by fire
     related issues (~USD 295 Million) and finally by electrical remediation (~USD 285 Million).

     Table 16 - Total initial cost of remediation, USD

                          Total Remediation
                                     Total           Accord          Alliance    National Initiative
     Fire                    $295,963,744       $128,553,866      $51,860,243          $115,549,635
     Electrical               $285,166,611     $123,864,058       $49,968,316           $111,334,238
     Structural               $347,524,901     $150,949,805      $60,895,046          $135,680,050
     Total                    $928,655,257     $403,367,728      $162,723,605          $362,563,924

     It is important to reiterate that these estimates are for the total cost, based on the CAPs, if no
     factory had begun remediation. As mentioned previously, a number of factories have started and/
     or completed remedial work and therefore these costs must be subtracted from the estimates.

     TOTAL REMAINING VALUE OF REMEDIATION IN THE BANGLADESH RMG SECTOR

     It is clear that varying levels of progress have been made in remediating electrical, fire and
     structural non-compliance issues. By removing the non-compliance issues that have already
     been remediated from the total cost estimates, it is possible to establish a remaining value of
     remediation work to be implemented.

     As evident in Figure 12, this study estimates that from the starting remediation value of ~USD 929
     Million, ~USD 635 Million remains to be implemented. Most are connected to National Imitative
     factories (~USD 290 Million), followed by Accord factories (USD~232 Million) and finally by Alliance
     factories (~USD 113 Million). This appears logical, since factories in the National Initiative were
     assessed later and have fewer incentives to remediate than others (i.e. international buyers’
     requests). While Accord factories appear to have remediated the most in terms of percentage
     of remediated issues, Accord is the largest initiative and therefore the value of its remaining
     remediation can be expected to be larger than the one for the Alliance factories.


24
Figure 12 - Initial and remaining remediation value, USD Millions




Figure 13 provides a further breakdown of this estimate, showing the largest outstanding amount
of remediation costs, some ~USD 262 Million, connected to structural items. The second largest
category is fire non-compliance, amounting to ~USD 201 Million, and finally electrical non-
compliance, for a total value of ~USD 171 Million.

Figure 13 - Remaining remediation per category, USD Millions




                                                                                                  25
 ACCESS TO REMEDIATION FINANCING

 BANKING SECTOR OVERVIEW

 The Bangladesh financial sector can be divided into the formal sector, the semi-formal sector and
 the informal sector. For the purpose of this study, the focus is on the formal sector and its actors,
 to the exclusion of the semi-formal and informal sectors. The formal sector consists of:

 •	 The Money Market: banks, non-banking financial institutions (NBFIs).
 •	 The Capital Market: investment banks, stock exchanges, credit rating companies.
 •	 The Foreign Exchange Market

 Bangladesh Bank, the country’s central bank, oversees the financial sector, which consists of
 56 scheduled and 4 non-scheduled banks, as well as 31 NBFIs 11. Bangladesh Bank also oversees
                                                                          25




 18 Life and 44 Non-Life insurance companies, multiple stock exchange players and 599 Micro-
 finance Institutions. The sector is characterized by a large number of operating banks and
 financial institutions, and overall a low level of service sophistication, high interest rates, and long
 bureaucratic processes for obtaining loans.

 The banking sector is regulated by the Banking Companies Act of 1991 (Amended in 2013), the
 Financial Institutions Act of 1993, the Financial Institution Regulation of 1993 and the Money Loan
 Court Act of 2003. An additional series of guidelines and regulations have been developed over
 the years to regulate more specific dynamics of the sector, and include: prudential regulations
 for banks, guidelines on credit risk management for banks, Environmental Risk Management
 Guidelines for Banks & Financial Institutions, policy guidelines for green banking and foreign
 borrowing procedures and guidelines.

 As previously stated, there are 56 scheduled banks operating in the country:

 •	 Six State Owned Commercial Banks, fully or majorly owned by the Government of Bangladesh
 •	 Two Specialized Banks, also largely owned by the Government, but tasked with specific
    activities (agriculture and industrial development).
 •	 39 Private Commercial Banks (PCBs), mainly owned by private parties. These can be further
    divided into:
    - 31 Conventional PCBs
    - Eight Islami Shariah Based PCBs
 •	 Nine Foreign Commercial Banks (FCBs) operating as branches of banks incorporated abroad.

 As shown in Table 17, 59.5% of total banking assets and 59.4% of total deposits in Bangladesh are
 concentrated in national and foreign private commercial banks.




 11 Bank of Bangladesh, Overview of the Financial Sector. Following the definition of Bangladesh Bank, scheduled banks
 are those institutions which “get license to operate under Bank Company Act, 1991 (Amended in 2013)”, while non-
 scheduled banks are “established for special and definite objective and operate under the acts that are enacted for
 meeting up those objectives”.




26
Table 17 - Bank assetts, BDT and percentage (%)

 Bank Type                           Branches         Total Assets             % of Total          Deposits          % of Total
                                                      (Billion BDT)                Asset                              Deposits
 National Commercial Banks                 3,384                   786                 33%              654                35%
 Government Owned Finance
                                            1,354                   187                    8%           100                 5%
 Institutions
 Private Commercial Banks                   1,776                 1,148                48%              956                51%
 Foreign Commercial Banks                     48                   285                     12%           151                8%
 Total                                     6,562                  2,407               100%             1,860             100%

From available data published by Bangladesh Bank, it is possible to analyze the credit rating
of each bank in Bangladesh. From Table 18 below, it’s easy to see that foreign banks have the
highest credit ratings, followed by privately-owned commercial banks, Islamic banks, State owned
commercial banks and specialized banks.

Table 18 - Bank credit ratings, percentage (%) of banks per category

                                                    AAA     AA            A          BBB         BB      B     CCC    Unrated
 Foreign Banks                                      33%     11%      44%               -         11%      -      -            -
 Islamic Banks                                        -   50%         25%            13%          -       -      -          13%
 Privately Owned Commercial Banks                     -    68%            6%         26%          -       -      -            -
 Specialized Banks                                    -       -       25%              -          -    25%     25%         25%
 State Owned Commercial Banks                         -   50%              -         50%          -       -      -            -

There are four non-scheduled banks operating in the country:

•	   Ansar VDP Unnayan Bank
•	   Karmashangosthan Bank
•	   Probashi Kollyan Bank
•	   Jubilee Bank

Non banking financial institutions (NBFIs) are specifically regulated under the Financial Institution
Act of 1993 and are not allowed to issue cheques, receive demand deposits, be involved in foreign
exchange financing or operate in diversified financing modes 12.                25




AVAILABLE FINANCING PRODUCTS

This study aims to provide an analysis of the ability of RMG factories to access financing products.
This first requires a review of the currently available products that enterprises can access from
banks in the country. While no product specifically designed solely for RMG factories has been
identified, a variety of standard financial products are available. They are as follows:

Trade financing. Trade financing includes Letters of Credit (LCs), Back to Back LCs, and Export
Financing through the Export Development Fund (EDF). LCs are designed to help enterprises
import raw materials. The bank guarantees payment in full to the supplier provided certain
conditions are met. The bank assumes the risk of the purchaser defaulting on payment. In
Bangladesh, repayment terms are usually between 90 to 180 days, depending on the individual
enterprise’s cash cycle.

12 These include syndicated financing, bridge financing, lease financing, securitization instruments, and private
placement of equity.


                                                                                                                                  27
     Back to Back LCs are specialized LCs issued by a bank against a proof of an enterprise exporting
     a stated amount of goods. The bank’s client obtains two letters of credit (back to back), with one
     covering the purchase of inputs and the other linked to export operations; this allowing them
     to match repayment time with payment delivery by the clients. Back to Back LC value tends to
     be lower than the total value of the client’s export, and in Bangladesh it can be up to 90% of this
     total value. Repayment times can (occasionally) be extended up to a maximum of 270 days (with
     approval from Bangladesh Bank). Figure 14 shows the average interest rates charged by four banks
     (SCB, City Bank, Eastern Bank, Mutual Trust Bank) in Bangladesh for Back to Back LCs, when trade
     capital is provided in BDT.

     Figure 14 - Trade financing interest rates, yearly percentage (%) 13
                                                                       26




     In 1989, in order to make interest more competitive on foreign currency loans, the Government of
     Bangladesh created a facility called the Export Development Fund (EDF). The goal was to support
     exporters trying to diversify into higher value products. The fund makes foreign currency available
     to scheduled banks in Bangladesh, with the provision that they lend to exporting manufacturers.
     Under this initiative, banks offer trade financing products to their clients at an interest rates
     between LIBOR +1.5% and LIBOR+2.5%. An exporter is allowed to request letters for amounts not
     higher than USD $500,000 in a single case, and the total outstanding exposure of one client to the
     bank should not be higher than USD $1,000,000.

     Working capital financing to RMG factories often comes via packing credit products; these are
     designed to help support manufacturers with their production processes. These products are
     usually short term financing, utilized solely for expenses relating to shipping goods under letters of
     credit mentioned in the packing credit letter. A packing credit is granted once an RMG company
     receives a purchase order from a client, and tends to be in the form of a revolving credit facility
     between the manufacturer and its long-term bank. The usual value of packing credit lines is ~10%
     of the Freight on Board (FOB) value of the export. Figure 15 shows the industry rates charged by
     five local banks to their clients, depending on size of enterprise. The interest rates, spanning from
     9% (for larger enterprises) to 17% (for smaller) are related to working capital loans provided in BDT.

     Figure 15 - Working capital interest rates, yearly % 14
                                                          27




     13 Bank of Bangladesh, December 2015
     14 Bank of Bangladesh, December 2015
28
Figure 16 - Term loan interest rates, yearly percentage (%) 15
                                                            25




Applying for and obtaining a loan in Bangladesh is a lengthy bureaucratic process, whereby the
applicant must submit up to 20 documents, including personal identification, previous credit risk
assessment, and a statement of personal net worth, as indicated in Table 19.

Table 19 - Loan application required documents

Application Steps & Documents

1.	 Demand Promissory Note
2.	 Letter of Authority
3.	 Letter of Arrangement
4.	 Letter of Disbursement
5.	 Letter of Revival
6.	 Personal Net Worth statement
7.	 Copy of National ID
8.	 Credit Approach in Business Pad of the Borrower
9.	 Credit Application in prescribed format duly filled in
10.	 Photograph of the Borrower
11.	 Up to date CIB Report
12.	 Credit report of the Borrower/Supplier
13.	 Liability Declaration of the borrower along with an Undertaking that they have no liability with
     any bank or financial institution except as declared.
14.	 Undertaking stating that, they will not avail any credit facility from any other bank or financial
     institution without prior consent of the bank.
15.	 Undertaking stating that customer does not have any relationship as Director or Sponsor with
     the bank.
16.	 Undertaking stating that customer shall not sell or transfer the ownership of the business/
     factory/shop until all amounts due to the bank are fully paid or without NOC of the bank.
17.	 Credit Risk Grading Score Sheet (CRGS)
18.	 Post-dated cheque covering the credit facility
19.	 Acceptance by the Borrower of the Sanction Letter
20.	Proper Stamping

Applicants also have different specific documentation requirements, depending on whether
they apply as individuals, simple firms or limited companies, as listed in Table 20. The actual time
needed to undergo these procedures can vary. A factory with a more sophisticated accounting
department applying for a loan from their current bank will take days, whereas a smaller, less
financially literate entrepreneur might take a much longer time to apply for a loan from a bank
where he/she has no previous banking relations.


15 Ibid

                                                                                                          29
 Table 20 - Specific borrower requirements

     SL   Type of Borrower      Document
     1    Individual Borrower   •	   Letter of Guarantee of a Third Person
                                •	   Personal Net-Worth Statement (PNS) of Guarantor
                                •	   Personal Net-Worth Statement (PNS) of the Borrower
                                •	   Letter of Guarantee of the Spouse of the Borrower
     2    Proprietorship Firm   •	   Trade License (up to date)
                                •	   Personal Net-Worth Statement (PNS) of Proprietor
     3    Partnership Firm      •	   Trade License (up to date)
                                •	   Registration of Farm with RJSC&F
                                •	   Partnership Deed (Registered with Sub-Registrar)
                                •	   Letter of Guarantee of the partners
                                •	   Personal Net-Worth Statement (PNS) of Partners
                                •	   Letter of Partnership.
                                •	   Partnership Account Agreement.
     4    Limited Company       •	   Trade License (up to date)
                                •	   Memorandum and Articles of Association (Certified by RJSC)
                                •	   List/Personal profile of the Directors
                                •	   Certificate of Incorporation
                                •	   Form XII Certified by RJSC (Particulars of Directors)
                                •	   Board Resolution in respect of availing loans and execution
                                •	   of document with Bank
                                •	   Letter of Guarantee of the Directors
                                •	   Personal Net-Worth Statement (PNS) of Directors
                                •	   Deed of Mortgage and Hypothecation for creation of Charge
                                •	   on fixed & floating assets (existing & future) with RJSC
                                •	   Modification of charge with RJSC through form 19.
                                •	   Certified copy of charge creation certificate from RJSC
                                •	   Undertaking stating that the borrower shall not make any amendment
                                     or alteration in Memorandum and Article of
                                •	   Association without prior approval of Bank.
                                •	   Approval of the Bank for any inclusion or exclusion of
                                •	   Directors in and from the company
                                •	   Certificate of Commencement (In case of Public Limited Company)
                                •	   Joint venture Agreement (In case of Joint Venture company)
                                •	   BOI Permission (In case of Joint venture company)

 It is important to note that multiple sector stakeholders, including RMG managers, bank
 representatives and industry associations, have indicated that this process is a challenge to RMG
 manufacturers. Many RMG managers are unable to submit all documentation themselves, or
 do not have the time. Factory managers and banking representatives indicated that there are a
 number of available service providers (mainly individuals) that support RMG managers in their loan
 applications for a fee. Often times, these individuals are staff of the banks where the borrower
 is applying for a loan. In these instances, such staff may be in a position of conflict of interest,
 either against the factory or against the bank. As discussed later in the recommendations section,
 remediation stakeholders may wish to consider support for RMG factories by providing access to
 reliable independent consultants to guide them through the application process.

 Finally, documentation requirements also vary depending on the various types of collateral that the
 borrower is able to provide in order to offset the risk (and cost) of the loan they are applying for.
 Table 21 gives an extensive list of possible typologies of collateral to be provided, and the associated
 documentation. From interviews with factory owners and bank representatives, it appears that
 banks usually ask for the collateral provided to be valued at around 90% to 100% of the total value of
 the loan disbursement. This represents a major challenge to manufacturers, especially smaller ones
 with less property or fewer purchase orders to offset the risk/cost of the loans.
30
Table 21 - Types of collateral and related documentation

 SL   Type of Security   Document
  1   Corporate          •	   Corporate Guarantee of Guarantor Company on Non-Judicial Stamp
      Guarantee          •	   Resolution of the Board of the Guarantor Company (Memorandum of the Guar-
                              antor company must permit to do so.) regarding Guarantee.
  2   Hypothecation of   •	   Letter of Hypothecation
      Stock/             •	   GPA to sell hypothecated Stock / Receivables
      Receivables        •	   Letter of disclaimer form the owner of Rented Warehouse
  3   Pledge of goods    •	   Letter of Pledge
      in trade           •	   IGPA to sell pledged goods
                         •	   Letter of disclaimer form the owner of rented Warehouse
  4   Assignment         •	   Assignment of Bill by the beneficiary through IGPA
      of Bill            •	   Letter of Acceptance of Assignment by the work giving authority
                         •	   Original Work Order
  5   Lien on            •	   The Instrument duly discharged on the back of it.
      Financial          •	   Letter of Lien (1st Party Lien‘ - if the Borrower is the owner of the Instrument, 3rd
      Instrument              Party Lien‘- if the Owner of the Instrument is one other than Borrower)
      like FDR etc.      •	   Letter of Authority to encase the instrument as and when needed by the Bank
                         •	   Confirmation of Lien (Marking of Lien) from the issuing Bank.
  6   Lien on            •	   NOC of the Company in case of Sponsor‘s Share
      Demated            •	   Confiscate Request Form (Form19-1) duly signed by the pledge.
      Stock/Shares       •	   Pledge Request form (By Law 11.9.3) duly signed by the holder of the share.
                         •	   Pledge setup Acknowledgement from Brokerage House
                         •	   CDBL generated copy of Pledge Setup
  7   Pari-Passu         •	   Pari Passu Security Sharing Agreement among lenders.
      Security           •	   NOC from existing lenders if property/assets already under pari passu sharing.
                         •	   Certificate of RJSC on creation of charge on Fixed & floating assets of company.
                         •	   Form XIX for modification of charge on Fixed and floating assets with RJSC
  8   Mortgage           •	   Original Title Deed of the property
      of Landed          •	   Certified copy of Purchase Deed along with Deed – Delivery receipt duly
      Property                endorsed (In absence of original Title Deed)
                         •	   Registered Partition Deed among the Co-owners (if required)
                         •	   Mortgage Deed duly Registered along with Registration Receipt duly discharged
                         •	   Registered IGPA favoring Bank to sell the property
                         •	   Bia Deeds of the mortgaged property
                         •	   Certified Mutation Khatian along with DCR
                         •	   Record of Rights i.e. CS, SA, RS Parcha, Mohanagar Jorip parcha (if within
                              Mohannagar Area)
                         •	   Affidavit to be sworn by the owner of the property before 1st class Magistrate
                              that he has valid title in the property and not encumbered otherwise
                         •	   Up-to-date Rent Receipt
                         •	   Up-to-date Municipal Tax Payment Receipt (if property within Municipal Area)
                         •	   Up-to-date Union Parishad Tax Payment Receipt (if property within UP)
                         •	   Approved Plan of Construction from concerned authority (if there is any
                              construction upon the land)
                         •	   Original Lease Deed (In case of Lease hold property)
                         •	   Allotment Letter favoring Lessee (in case of Leasehold Property)
                         •	   Mutation letter favoring Lessee (in case of Leasehold Property)
                         •	   NOC of the competent Authority for Mortgage.
                         •	   NEC along with search fee paid receipt
                         •	   Board Resolution of the Mortgagor company duly supported by the provision
                              of Memorandum and Article of Association (when one company mortgages on
                              behalf of the loan of other company)
                         •	   Photograph of the Mortgaged Property
                         •	   Location Map
                         •	   Survey Report from professional Surveyors
                         •	   Physical Visit Report by Bank Officials
                         •	   Lawyer‘s opinion in respect of acceptability of the property as collateral security
                         •	   Lawyer‘s satisfaction certificate regarding appropriateness of mortgage
                              formalities
                                                                                                                 31
 LOANS IN FOREIGN CURRENCY

 Interest rates for loans in foreign currency (USD) are much lower than loans issued in BDT. For
 this product, interest rates are supposed to be set at LIBOR + 4.5%, but banks are actually able to
 apply a sub-set of fees and commissions to the loans, thereby making the effective rate paid by the
 borrower around 6% above LIBOR. Under the Companies Act of 1994, enterprises are allowed to
 raise financing in foreign currency from different sources 16:     25




 •	 International banks, international capital markets, multilateral financial institutions (such as
    IFC, WB, ADB, CDC, DEG, FMO, OPIC, OPEC Fund)
 •	 Export credit agencies
 •	 Suppliers of Equipment
 •	 Foreign equity holders.

 Foreign lending is only allowed in the industrial sector for activities such as import of capital
 goods for new projects, or modernization/expansion of existing production units. While access
 to financial products in foreign currency is advantageous owing to lower interest rates, it also
 requires additional approvals by the Bangladesh Board of Investment (BOI) 17. From interviews with
                                                                                          26




 both bank representatives and factory managers, it appears that this additional step of application
 approval can take up to six months. The process involves the following 18:          27




 i)	         Application form
 ii)	        MOU signed by both parties. In case of a draft agreement, the borrowing company must 	
 	           submit a consent letter from the non-resident lender summarizing major terms and 		
 	           conditions (e.g., principal amount, rate of interest, repayment period, fees and expenses)
 iii)	       Copy of BOI project registration (full set)
 iv)	        Board’s resolution relating to proposed borrowing
 v)	         Repayment period along with repayment schedule
 vi)	        Grace period if any for repayment
 vii)	       Calculation of all-in-cost with schedule as defined in the application form
 viii)	      Feasibility report
 ix)	        Financial analysis
       a.	   Internal Rate of Return (IRR)
       b.	   Year of achieving break-even point with break-even analysis
       c.	   Pay-back period
       d.	   Sensitivity analysis in terms of IRR
       e.	   Debt Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR)
 x)	         Track record of past foreign borrowing
 xi)	        Track record of past FDI
 xii)	       Credential of sponsors
 xiii)	      Certified copy of Memorandum & Articles of Association of the company along with 		
 	           schedule X and form XII
 xiv)	       Certificate of incorporation with Registrar of Joint Stock Companies & Firms
 xv)	        As to collect CIB report from Bangladesh Bank, the relevant inquiry forms and undertaking 	
 	           from the Sponsors Director
 xvi)	       Bank certificate as to indebtedness and creditworthiness of borrowing company and 	
 	           its sponsors from the nominated bank/designated bank
 xvii) 	     Undertakings/consent from the L/C opening bank for opening 4C in favor of the project (in 	
 	           case of suppliers credit only)
 16 Board of Investment, Existing Procedure and Guidelines for approval of Foreign Private Loan. Stakeholders have
 also indicated that some more sophisticated factories might be able to source foreign currency financing off-shore at
 competitive rates.
 17 BOI was established by the Investment Board Act of 1989 to promote investment in the private sector from domestic
 and overseas sources with a view to contribute to socio-economic development. It is headed by the Prime Minister and
 is part of the Prime Minister’s Office.	
 18 Board of Investment, Existing Procedure and Guidelines for approval of Foreign Private Loan

32
BANKS’ DECISION MAKING PROCESS

Banks value a prospective borrower along four main criteria: profitability, efficiency, leverage and
liquidity. In order to determine whether a borrower qualifies for the loan, and the correct pricing,
they apply a methodology called Risk-Based Pricing, based on seven key analytical dimensions:

1.	 Cost of funds: The rate at which the bank is able to attract funds of equivalent tenor to the
    loan in question. In banks that apply funds transfer pricing, this rate is a wholesale rate, usually
    the swap rate (fixed or floating, depending on whether the loan is fixed or floating) of an
    equivalent tenor.
2.	 Expected Loss: The number of basis points that corresponds to the expected loss on the loan,
    which will be higher on loans with more credit risk and lower on loans with less credit risk.
3.	 Cost of Allocated Capital: The cost of allocated capital is the amount of capital the bank has
    allocated to the loan as coverage for unexpected loss, multiplied by the target return on equity
    for the bank as a whole, and expressed in terms of basis points.
4.	 Term cost of liquidity: The number of basis points that captures the cost arising from the fact
    that loans of longer tenor require stable funding, which will be costly for the bank above and
    beyond any interest-rate risk considerations
5.	 Cost of liquid asset buffer: A liquid asset buffer must be held in case any extremely adverse
    situation a run on deposits may occur and the bank may be forced to sell assets quickly at low
    prices or seek additional deposits or other funds at high rates.
6.	 Loan administration costs: For any loan, big or small, there are staff costs involved in
    origination and monitoring. Some of these costs are up-front and some are ongoing, but they
    all must be expressed in terms of basis points over the life of the loan.
7.	 Competitive margin: Given its funding and expense structure, this margin may even be
    negative, if the bank desires to gain a temporary competitive advantage. However, it should
    not be negative on any kind of loan product for an extended period of time.

Following the Environmental Conservation Act of 1995, banks and financial institutions are also
expected to apply an additional rating and screening to their clients based on their environmental
risk exposure. These “Environmental Risk Management Guidelines for Banks & Financial
Institutions” request banks and NBFIs to calculate the Environmental Risk Rating (EnvRR) of any
client that features specific potential environmental impacts within the enterprise’s operations.

Table 22 - Environmental guidelines summary

Area         Description
Policy       Under Environmental Conservation Act (ECA) 1995 and Environmental Conservation Rule
             (ECR) 1997.
Goal         To understand and manage risks that arise from environmental concerns and to integrate
             credit risk with environmental risk.
Targets      Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) for financing above USD 32,500
             Corporate for financing above USD 130,000
             Real estate financing above USD 130,000
Effect       Banks need to manage the environmental risk of their borrowers within tier credit risk man-
             agement. Therefore if a borrower has a high environmental risk, borrowing will be more
             difficult and the process will be lengthier.

Banks and financial institutions are therefore to evaluate prospective and current clients via a
checklist that assesses potential environmental impact, as exemplified in Table 23. This is directly
relevant to garment manufacturers due to the operational risk of contaminating water (through
chemical coloring and dyeing), and factory exposure to fire related disasters.


                                                                                                           33
 Table 23 - EnvRR checklist example




 BANKS MARKET SHARE IN THE RMG SECTOR

 The RMG sector is a key source of employment, destination of foreign investment, and contributor
 to GDP. Manufacturers vary in size from small to massive, and it is therefore to be expected
 that most banks operating in Bangladesh have a portfolio of garment clients. However, due to
 insufficient data, it is challenging to assess what the total market share of each bank in the RMG
 sector is.

 BGMEA’s online database of members provides information records of each factory’s main
 banking relation, however this is not necessarily representative of the market share held by banks
 in the sector, as RMG manufacturers in Bangladesh can by law have up to three active banking
 relationships concurrently. In other words, it is possible that they have accounts and loans active
 with three banks simultaneously, making the market extremely fragmented.




34
AVAILABLE FINANCIAL OPTIONS SPECIFIC TO RMG REMEDIATION FINANCING

Until recently, there were no available financial products on the market that were specifically
designed to target RMG factories in their need to carry out fire, structural and electrical
remediation work. RMG factories paid for the cost of remediation activities through their own
resources, through standard term loans from banks, or alternatively through support from
international buyers. Today there are a few RMG-specific products available from Bangladesh
Bank, local banks, and the international community. The section gives an overview of these
products.




                                                                                                  35
 GREEN RE-FINANCING MECHANISM THROUGH BANGLADESH BANK

 In 2009, Bangladesh Bank set up a revolving green re-financing scheme 19 of BDT 2 Billion (~USD
                                                                                       25




 25.6 Million) as a financing option for green products (solar energy, bio-gas, effluent treatment
 systems, etc.). In 2013, Bangladesh Bank expanded the amount of products that could be re-
 financed under the facility to 16 products, which was then further extended in 2015 20, to 47 21,  26       27




 including products specifically designed for the RMG sector.

 Members of BGMEA, of the Bangladesh Garment Accessories and Packaging Manufacturers
 and Exporters Association (BGAPMEA) and Bangladesh Terry Towel and Linen Manufacturers
 and Exporters Association (BTTLMEA) now have access to the re-financing mechanism. In the
 garment sector, the re-financing facility is open to any “green initiative” (solar panels, waste water
 treatment, etc.) but as far as safety remediation is concerned, the facility is currently only targeting
 issues related to fire safety. However, as previously mentioned, a variety of electrical and structural
 CAP issues are easily connected to fire safety and therefore garment manufacturers have some
 flexibility in applying for financing.

 Under this scheme, banks and NBFIs will provide financing (in BDT currency) to an RMG factory,
 using capital previously sourced by the bank at higher interest rates. Banks and NBFIs will then
 submit a request to Bank of Bangladesh for re-financing. If the loan is approved within the
 mandate of the scheme, Bangladesh Bank then re-finances the financial institution at an interest
 rate of 5%. One key condition for the bank to obtain re-financing is that the interest rate charged
 to the borrower should not exceed 9%.

 The maximum amount that a RMG factory is allowed to borrow under the facility is BDT
 10,000,000 (~USD 128,000); higher limits are allowed for other activities. At the latest review, 35
 Banks and financial institutions were enrolled in the scheme, each having set up a specific “Green
 Banking Unit” (GBU) within their institutions to properly manage their participating clients.

 IFC CREDIT FACILITY

 In July 2015, International Finance Corporation (IFC) announced the launch of a credit facility
 specifically targeted at supporting financing of electrical, fire and limited structural remediation in
 RMG factories in Bangladesh. The total value of the facility is USD 40 Million, distributed among
 four participating banks. Under this facility, each participating bank borrows USD 10 Million directly
 from IFC and commits to using the funds to finance RMG factories to pay for the remediation
 work necessary in their factory as identified in the corrective action plan (CAP) from either an
 Accord or Alliance inspection.

 There are four main actors involved in the facility:

 •	   IFC: provided four loans of USD 10 Million to four local banks for a total amount of USD 40
      Million. IFC is responsible for conducting Due Diligence on participating banks.




 19 Bangladesh Bank, Sustainable Banking Regulatory Framework, 2014
 20 Dhaka Tribune, BB to refinance RMG factories in green scheme
 21 products include biomass based large bio-gas plant, poultry and dairy based large bio-gas plant, 1-mw or above solar
 PV plant, solar cooker assembly plant, solar water heater assembly plant, solar air heater and cooling assembly plant,
 solar driven cold storage, bio-energy driven power generation plant, power switch assembly plant for power saving, hy-
 brid cook stove assembly plant, LED bulb or tube light assembly plant, power generation from municipal waste, compost
 generation from municipal waste, recyclable non-oven polypropylene yarn and baggage manufacturing, palm oil produc-
 tion plant, supplying and purifying of surface water project, pumping through solar pumps, establishing green industry
 and ensuring work environment and safety in the textile and garment industries.	


36
•	   Participating Banks: consists of Prime Bank, City Bank, Eastern Limited Bank and United
     Commercial Bank. These banks are responsible for sourcing and identifying clients, executing
     the loan agreements, distributing the loan amounts, collecting re-payment, and monitoring the
     execution of the remedial work according to the loan application. Banks are also able to liaise
     with the initiatives to discuss remediation updates undergoing in the factories.

•	   RMG Factories: under the facility, RMG factories receive financing at a competitive rate, and
     implement the corrective actions included in their CAP. They are responsible for reporting the
     implementation of these remediation actions to both the agent bank and their lead buyer.

•	   Buyers: international brands are responsible for promoting the loan product among
     their suppliers, and are also responsible (under either Alliance or Accord) to monitor the
     implementation of the remediation actions.

Figure 17 - IFC credit facility actors


            • Contribute	                                                           • Provide	  ﬁnancing	  
             corporate	                                                              in	  USD	  at	  
             guarantee	  to	                                                        compe;;ve	  rates	  
             Credit	  Facility	                                                     against	  the	  buyers'	  
             Fund.	                                                                  guarantee.	  
            • Marke;ng	  of	  the	                                                • Carry	  out	  Agent	  
             facility	  to	  their	                                                Bank	  Due	  
             suppliers.	  	                   Interna;onal	                        Diligence.	  
                                                                        IFC	  
            • Monitoring	  of	  CAP	            Brands	                          • Repayment	  
             implementa;on.	                                                         Collec;on.	  




                                                    RMG	  	      Par;cipa;ng	  
                                                  Factories	         Banks	  

            • 	  Implementa;on	  of	  	                                          • 	  RMG	  client	  
             CAP	  ac;ons.	  	                                                     sourcing.	  
            • 	  Loan	  repayment.	                                               • 	  Fund	  
            • 	  Repor;ng	  to	  both	                                            disbursement.	  	  
             Banks	  and	  Buyers.	                                               • 	  Repayment	  to	  IFC.	  



IFC provides the credit facility to the four banks in USD at competitive international interest rates.
Under this facility, banks agree to provide loans to RMG factories at an all-in price that aims not to
exceed the current commonly accepted threshold of 4.5% for loans in USD. However, as previously
mentioned, the actual cost of the loan to RMG factories (including banking fees and charges) is
closer to LIBOR + ~6%. Banks under the facility are also allowed to distribute loans in BDT, depending
on the client’s requirements, and in that case interest rates are expected to hover around 9%, but
could rise to 12% depending on client risk profile.

Loans can span from USD 100,000 to USD 2 Million. A key point of the facility is to ensure that no
market distortive mechanism is brought to the system, and therefore selection of qualifying RMG
factories is completely left to the four participating banks.

A shortcoming in the mechanism design is that banks are naturally inclined to select only the least
risky clients, avoiding financing factories with high cash flow volatility, or factories with weaker
business relationships to their buyers (and therefore less regular purchase orders). Another feature
of the facility constitutes a potential challenge. The 4 participating banks were not selected because
of the size of their garment sector portfolios, but rather only on their credit worthiness (due
diligence).
                                                                                                                         37
 USAID GUARANTEE SCHEME

 In September 2015, the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) launched
 two credit guarantee schemes providing USD 22 Million for loans to RMG factories for remediation
 work. The first facility of USD 18 Million is a guarantee given to local banks to increase their
 willingness to provide loans to RMG factories belonging to the Alliance. As depicted in Figure
 18, two banks (Prime Bank and UCB Bank) have already received 6 USD Million each, with the
 remaining USD 6 million still to be allocated.

 Figure 18 - USAID USD 18 Million guarantee structure 22    25




 The goal of this 50% guarantee on RMG loans provided by these two banks is to expand their
 willingness to provide loans to smaller and medium sized factories that banks would otherwise
 perceive as too risky. Alliance is also financially involved in the guarantee, and committed to cover
 potential losses from loans for up to USD 1.5 million. The commercial banks involved will then
 distribute loans (expected to average at USD 250,000) in either USD or BDT, with fewer collateral
 requirements and longer repayment terms (expected to span from 2 to 5 years) for factories. The
 length of the guarantee itself is 6 years, and has a guarantee ceiling of USD 9 Million.

 Figure 19 - USAID USD 4 million guarantee structure 2326




 22 USAID and Alliance, 2015
 23 Ibid	

38
The second guarantee designed by USAID is similar in structure, but varies in target and size. The
target of the second facility is to support those RMG factories belonging either to the Accord or
the National Initiative. The total size is USD 4 Million.

The selected bank for this second facility is United Commercial Bank Limited; the length of the
guarantee is 8 years, with a total guarantee ceiling of USD 2 Million. Except for these differences,
the guarantee follows the structure of the first one, with the goal to guarantee up to 50% of the
value of loans provided to RMG factories, in order to increase the bank willingness to loan to
smaller and riskier garment manufacturers.

JICA CREDIT FACILITY

The Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) launched a financing facility to support the
RMG sector in financing the retrofitting, rebuilding and relocating of factory buildings. The USD
13 Million facility was made available through a Government to Government Loan (G2G) between
Japan and Bangladesh at an annual rate of 0.01%. Participating financial institutions (banks and
NBFIs) obtain a sub-loan from the Bangladesh Bank at 5% interest, then loan to factories at an
additional rate of up to 5%. This means qualified factories receive loans at an annual interest rate
between 5 and 10%. It should be noted that this facility is specifically targeting small and medium
garment factories (employing up to 2,000 workers) that are members of BGMEA or BKMEA.
JICA is already planning a second phase for this facility, with expectations for financing to grow up
to USD 100 Million (The Urban Building Safety Project, signed on 13 December, 2015). JICA is also
providing technical assistance (assessment, design, drawing and construction supervision) to the
eligible factories.

Figure 20 - JICA Financing Scheme’s Structure




Operating as a G2G organization grants the JICA facility one key advantage and one key
disadvantage. The advantage is that JICA does not carry out the due diligence of the participating
banks; Bangladesh Bank advertises and disburses the facility and bears the responsibility for the
due diligence. Currently, there are 25 commercial banks and 21 NBFIs participating, all of whom
qualified by demonstrating the strength of their garment portfolios, and manage the loans
through an SME specific unit within their organizations (or have developed a specific unit to
operate these loans).

The disadvantage is that there are numerous steps and entities between the provider of the initial
capital (JICA) and the final receivers (RMG factories). This tends to keep interest rates high, with
transaction and risk management costs at every step. This is especially true for the interest rates
charged to Bank of Bangladesh by the Ministry of Finance.

The credit facility 24 allows participating banks to apply for the fund in two ways:
                   25




•	 A Pre-Finance scheme allows banks and NBFIs to obtain the funds before the date of
   disbursement to the SMEs. To do this, the financial institution must submit all documents
   to the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within the SME & Special Program Department
   (SMESPD) of Bangladesh Bank. This process allows the commercial bank to obtain capital
24 JICA, Medium – Long Term Investment Loans for SMEs.

                                                                                                        39
     before the disbursement, and therefore to avoid using its own resources, but it is also a longer,
     more complicated procedure.

 •	 A Re-Finance scheme allows banks and NBFIs to receive loans after they disburse loans to
    RMG factories out of their own resources. This process has a negative effect on the commercial
    banks, but allows them to obtain permission from the PIU within two to three weeks, therefore
    allowing them to distribute funds quickly to clients who urgently need funding.

 AFD CREDIT FACILITY

 The Agence Française de Développement (AFD) is currently in the process of securing capital to
 launch a new credit facility that will add on to the aforementioned IFC, USAID and JICA programs.
 AFD is expecting to secure funding by mid-December 2015, and to be able to launch its facility by
 mid-2016.

 The AFD facility will include a variety of components and supporting partnerships (e.g., the
 European Union (EU), the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) and the Gesellschaft für
 Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ)). The basis of the credit facility will be a total fund of EUR
 50 Million, of which tentatively 67% (EUR 33.5 Million) will target safety remediation work, and 33%
 (EUR 16.5 Million) will target environmental activities. Funds will be distributed following the same
 G2G approach as the JICA facility, with AFD lending to the Ministry of Finance (in Euros), who will
 provide sub-loans to Bangladesh Bank (in BDT), which then on-lends to RMG factories (in BDT).

 Figure 21 - AFD Credit Facility’s Structure




 AFD expects the average loan size for safety remediation activities to be ~USD 300,000. Similar
 to JICA, the final interest rate charged to factories will be relatively high (9% to 10% in BDT), but
 the AFD facility has been designed to include two additional grants provided by the EU and KfW
 for a total amount of USD ~10 Million that will be part of the overall program, out of which USD
 ~7 Million will be structured as a performance-based investment grant mechanism. This will be
 used to incentivize factories to complete the remediation work properly and on time. If a factory
 is successful, it will be able to apply for deductions from the original loan. This means that, once a
 factory is approved to access the investment grant, its implied interest rate over the entire life span
 of the loan will be below 7% (in BDT). The incentive is even higher for environmental upgrades.

 The remaining ~EUR 3 Million from the KfW and EU contributions will support technical assistance
 (TA) programs and activities implemented by GIZ to develop the capacity of Bangladesh Bank,
 RMG factories (to improve industry standards), and service providers (i.e. consulting and auditing).




40
BUYERS’ SUPPORT

Buyers with Accord have signed a binding agreement to support their suppliers in case the
suppliers are not able to independently sustain remediation expenses. Under article 22 of the
Accord:

“In order to induce Tier 1 and Tier 2 factories to comply with upgrade and remediation
requirements of the program, brands and retailers will negotiate commercial terms with their
suppliers which ensure that it is financially feasible for the factories to maintain safe workplaces
and comply with upgrade and remediation requirements instituted by the Safety Inspector.”
This approach has been confirmed by brands and suppliers, who have acknowledged the following
arrangements in support of suppliers implementing remediation work:

•	 Improved supplier payment times: a buyer might reduce the payment time for specific orders
   from a maximum of 60 days to a lower minimum of 21 days, to help the suppliers better
   manage cash flow.
•	 Longer commitments: if a buyer considers a specific supplier to be strategic, it will consider
   committing to purchase orders from that supplier with one or two years in advance, which
   improves its financial standing and therefore its access to loan products.
•	 Modifications to FOB Prices of inputs and outputs

Also from article 22 of the Accord:

“Each signatory company may, at its option, use alternative means to ensure factories have the
financial capacity to comply with remediation requirements, including but not limited to joint
investments, providing loans, accessing donor or government support, through offering business
incentives or through paying for renovations directly.”

The support of the initiatives fall under this type of support from international buyers. For example,
Alliance has several members working directly with factories in their supply chains to help them
access affordable finance. The cooperation between VF Corporation and IFC, for example, is a
program under which IFC extends credit to VF suppliers, backed by a VF corporate guarantee, for
building and fire safety improvements that have been identified during the inspections. Another
example is Walmart, an Alliance Member, which created a facility25 separate from those launched
by donors and the initiatives. Through Standard Chartered Bank, Walmart created a credit facility
able to cover up to USD 50 Million in remediation financing specifically targeted at their suppliers.
Walmart will assess the remediation need stemming from its suppliers’ CAPs, and recommend
the factory to carry out specific remediation activities. If the factory agrees, then Walmart will
recommend them to apply for a BDT currency loan from Standard Chartered Bank, with an
average life span of two years.




25 http://corporate.walmart.com/our-commitment-to-the-workers-of-bangladesh



                                                                                                       41
 STAKEHOLDER FEEDBACK ON CREDIT FACILITIES

 Interviews with local bank representatives have indicated that the injection of money through a
 facility such as the ones launched by IFC, the AFD or JICA, increases the amount of money that
 banks are able to distribute to the sector, but it does little to decrease the risk they incur in lending
 to this sector.

 Banks consider the money provided by the IFC, the AFD and JICA appealing, as it represents
 financing at rates lower than the ones otherwise available in the market. However, they are still
 exposed to the risk that the borrower might default on the loan. This means that through these
 facilities alone, banks will tend to lend to either the most financially solid (constant cash flow,
 proper financial records, long term advanced buyer’s orders) and they prefer to lend to their
 existing clients.

 The preference to lend to existing bank clients is driven by two main reasons; the first being that
 banks have existing relations with these factories, are aware of their financials, and are able to
 track their liquidity on their bank accounts and ultimately to freeze their assets in case of default.
 The second reason is the fact that enterprises in Bangladesh are limited to a maximum of three
 banking relations. Therefore, marketing new, cheaper loans to other factories is challenging, as it
 would likely force RMG factories to close a previously existing banking relation in order to open a
 new account with the new lending bank.

 Interviewed banks have indicated their preference for financial products that reduce risk, and
 therefore would largely prefer a product that offers a combination of the loans available through
 the IFC credit facility (loans at a lower cost) and the guarantee offered by USAID (which reduces
 risk).

 Figure 22 – RMG Factory Types matched against Banks’ Risk Appetite




42
From the information provided by banking sector stakeholders, it is possible to group garment
factories 26, based on their business characteristics and the corresponding levels of bank willingness
         25




to lend them money.

The first group consists of the strongest manufacturers in the country. These are sophisticated
enterprises with strong financials, long term strategic relationships to western buyers and easy
access to credit for remediation even without credit facilities being made available. These are often
the first preference for banks.

The second group is composed by factories that show continued profitability but may not be
long term strategic suppliers of large western buyers. Like most businesses, they experience cash
flow issues and some degree of business risk. Banks are willing to loan to them, especially due to
the new credit facilities which reduce bank cost of capital. Because of their slightly higher level of
business risk, banks are able to charge slightly higher interest rates.

The third group is composed of factories that play a peripheral role in the supply chain of
international brands. These enterprises are financially weaker, as they rely on season-to-season
orders and are unlikely to have well-documented financial records. These enterprises are unlikely
to receive financing from banks even with the credit facilities offered from IFC, JICA and the AFD,
and consequently are currently left out of the positive effects of credit facilities that do not provide
guarantees or other mechanisms to offset bank risk.

The fourth and final group is the one facing the largest challenges. These are outside bank risk
preferences. The only way to increase their access to financing is to develop specific financial
products that target them specifically. The JICA credit facility, specifically targeted at facilities with
less than 250 employees is a good example of this.




26 Factory grouping depending on business and banks’ appetites was based on one-on-one conversations with banking
representatives.



                                                                                                                    43
     SUMMARY OF FINDINGS

     REMAINING REMEDIATION VALUE

     The results of this research indicate that progress has been made in remediating the structural,
     electrical and fire safety of factories, but a significant amount of remediation work still needs to be
     implemented.

     At the time of this research, it is possible to estimate that the cost of the remaining remediation
     work to be implemented at around USD 635 Million, with factories in the National Initiative
     requiring around USD 290 Million in remediation work, followed by factories in the Accord (~USD
     232 Million) and finally by factories in the Alliance (~USD 113 Million). The largest part of the total
     amount is for remediating structural non-compliance (~USD 262 Million), followed by fire issues
     (~USD 201 Million) and finally by electrical non-compliance (~USD 171 Million).
     Following the same factory segmentation presented in Figure 4, which distributed all factories
     belonging to one of the three initiatives into two groups (factory size and factory relationship to
     international buyers), it is possible to segment the value of remaining cost of remediation, and
     estimate which factories will have an easier or more difficult time accessing financing. Figure 23
     shows this distribution:

     •	   Minor Suppliers: will have an overall need for remediation which collectively may cost up
          to ~USD 220 Million. These factories have weaker relationships to their buyers than regular
          or strategic suppliers and will therefore likely have a harder time in remediating. In addition,
          they are more likely to be financially weaker, and thus not able to have enough resources to
          invest, and are also unlikely to receive business support from international brands, as brands
          do not consider them as strategic suppliers. Finally, banks may not view them as a worthwhile
          investment, as these factories do not have long term, stable business relationships with brands,
          and therefore their cash flow may not appear strong enough.

     •	   Regular Suppliers: will have an overall need for remediation of ~USD 224 Million. These
          factories are characterized by average business relationships with their brands. This means
          they will receive requests from their buyers to remediate, and will be expected to follow
          through, given the incentive of expanding relations with brands and the possibility of becoming
          strategic suppliers. Banks will consider these factories risky, though some are financially strong
          enough (i.e. land or assets to use as collateral) to qualify for loans from financial institutions –
          though at higher interest rates and greater collateral.

     •	   Strategic Suppliers: will have an overall need for remediation of ~USD 189 Million. From
          primary research, this group is currently the banks’ primary target for lending as they feature
          a lower risk profile (i.e. longer term purchase orders from brands and therefore stronger cash
          flow statements).




44
Figure 23 - Segmentation of Remaining Remediation Value, USD

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Relationship	  to	  Buyers


                                                                       Minor	  Suppliers                                                                                                                                               Regular	  Suppliers                                                                                                                                        Strategic	  Suppliers




Factory	  Size   Small
                                                                                                                                                                148,532,554.99
                               $	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                                                                                                                                                                      136,484,488.81
                                                                                                                                                                                                       $	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                                                                                                                                                           107,713,040.92
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    $	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

                  Medium
                                                                                                                                                                            62,905,547.14
                               $	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                                                                                                                                                                      77,574,976.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                       $	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                                                                                                                                                           71,980,527.90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    $	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

                  Large
                                                                                                                                                                                        8,747,422.29
                               $	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                                                                                                                                                          10,723,512.77
                                                                                                                                                                                                       $	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                                                                                                                                                                       9,924,305.89
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    $	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  



As the data suggests, it is likely that the majority of these required investments will not be
financed from factory revenues, therefore indicating the need for external financing in the
Bangladesh remediation space.

EFFECTS OF CREDIT FACILITIES

Cost is the largest impediment to factory remediation. To fill the financing gap, various
development organizations have attempted to increase the amount of capital available. The
following are key advantages of the various types of credit facilities that have recently been
launched:

•	 Pure Credit facilities without risk reducing programs: IFC’s credit facility provides a sizable
   amount of lower cost capital to local banks. This facility is well appreciated by banks since they
   can obtain foreign capital at competitive international rates. However, the current facility does
   not reduce the operational risk incurred by banks, who will not be willing to provide loans to
   riskier factories. Additionally, IFC’s facility is working with only a few participating banks, who
   reach a combined market share in the garment sector of approximately 10%.

•	 Loan Guarantee Facilities: A facility such as the one launched by USAID reduce bank lending
   risk in the RMG sector. This should encourage banks to lend to riskier clients, as their overall
   business risk is mitigated by the guarantee. This facility alone does not have a direct impact
   on the amount of money available in the market for remediation specifically. However, the
   guarantee can be an effective risk reduction mechanism when used in combination with the
   IFC’s credit facility. One key issue of the facility is the fact that it primarily targets Alliance’s
   factories (USD 18 million) with also a low amount of non-Alliance factories (USD 4 Million). An
   additional limitation is that the credit guarantee is only currently available to a limited number
   of banks (two for the first facility and one for the second one).

•	 G2G Credit facilities: Credit facilities that provide loans through the Government of Bangladesh
   manage to provide loans to a much larger group of participating banks, therefore expanding
   the number of RMG factories that can access credit. A disadvantage of such facilities is that
   they tend to result in higher interest rates charged to the final clients.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            45
          o JICA’s facility has an additional focus, as it manages to reach a specific sub-segment of the
          RMG market (SMEs with less than 250 employees), thereby ensuring that factories which
          otherwise would not be able to access such financing are actively targeted by the banks,
          through their existing (or specifically created) SME loan departments.

          o AFD’s facility has the additional benefit of featuring a compensation incentive mechanism
          for factories that complete the remediation properly. This mechanism manages to reduce
          to effective interest rate paid by RMG factories. Additionally, the TA component has the
          additional benefit of developing capacity of multiple stakeholders, including Bangladesh Bank
          and Service Providers among others.

     Figure 24 shows the impact of these facilities on the RMG sector, with the remediation financing
     gap estimated to decrease to ~USD 448 Million. The USAID facility is not considered in these
     calculations as it does not provide an influx of capital, but rather it allows banks to lend to “riskier”
     factories that would in other ways not receive loans.

     Figure 24 - Remediation Financing Gap, USD Millions




46
IDENTIFIED AREAS OF NEED

This section presents a set of five key areas of intervention that sector stakeholders should focus
on in order to support efforts towards safety and remediation in the Bangladesh RMG sector.
These areas of intervention were identified by local and international stakeholders in April 2016
during a workshop to present the findings of the study.

I. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE

There is a need for further technical assistance to be provided across the multiple actors of the
sector:

•	   RMG Factories: need multiple types of technical assistance. First and foremost, they need
     financial literacy and accounting support to be able to present banks and to prospective
     investors proper balance sheets, profit and loss statements and cash flow projections. Factories
     also need support in their loan application process, as the current level of bureaucracy prevents
     some of them from either applying or from being selected.

•	   Public Actors: National inspection bodies such as RAJUK and DIFE lack the resources
     necessary to carry out the whole of the activities that compose their mandates (monitoring,
     inspections, approvals, etc.).

•	   Banks: local banks involved in remediation financing need support to be able to properly
     read and verify the extendibility of cost estimates provided by factories (i.e. engineering and
     construction work, as well as fire equipment).

II. IMPLEMENT THE STEERING COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATION

The current interest rates for BDT loans provided through facilities such as the Green Re-Financing
Scheme and the JICA facility (and the AFD facility in the future) are still prohibitive. As shown
in Figure 25 below, a key driver of this interest rate is the transfer of the money between the
Bangladesh Ministry of Finance and the Bangladesh Bank (4%).

Figure 25 - G2G facilities Interest Rates




                                                                                                       47
 The Standing Committee of the Bangladesh Ministry of Industry and Commerce, in order to ease
 access to the existing remediation financing facilities, has submitted a proposal to Ministry of
 Finance to lower the refinancing rate from GoB to BB from 4% to 1%. If this proposal were to be
 accepted by the Ministry of Finance, the final interest rates charged to factories might be lowered
 to 6% - 7%.

 III. IMPROVE SELECTION MECHANISMS OF THE GREEN RE-FINANCING FUND

 Facilities such as the Green Re-Financing Scheme have enjoyed little success so far. While interest
 in the funds is widespread, one challenge to fund distribution has been lack of understanding of
 the application process from factories. The selection criteria for factories need to be made clear
 and available across the sector, in order to foster the amount of applications submitted and the
 number of successful recipients of funds.

 IV. MOBILIZE ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

 There is a clear gap of funds available specifically for remediation financing. The results shown
 in this study should be used to raise awareness of this financing gap among government, banks
 and development partners. As safety remediation is a critical challenge to the sustainable growth
 of the RMG sector in the country, this study should be used to advocate the Government of
 Bangladesh towards further action in the area.

 The financing gap is substantial; there is scope for more development partners to join the
 remediation effort. One option is for development organizations to design and launch new credit
 remediation facilities; new facilities would increase the amount of capital available for banks to
 distribute in the sector. Depending on the strategic interest of each development partner, facilities
 could be developed with specific factory targets. The downside of developing new credit facilities is
 the long design and launch phase necessary to get them operational. Another possibility, to avoid
 this issue is for development partners to join in an already pre-existing credit facility, therefore
 increasing their total capital.

 V. ADVOCATE TO ALLOW RE-FINANCING

 Accessing remediation financing has been challenging for Bangladesh’s RMG factories. However, as
 shown in this report, some remediation has taken place. One way of fostering the continuation of
 these efforts would be for banks to allow re-financing options for remediation investments already
 implemented. This would free resources within factories that have already started remediation
 work, and would help spur additional factories in starting remediation work using their own
 finances if they have the prospect of obtaining a re-financing loan later.




48
49
50
IN PARTNERSHIP WITH
