        FACES
OF RESILIENCE
 RECOVERING
 FROM EBOLA,
 PREVENTING
 THE NEXT
 PANDEMIC

  By Melanie Mayhew
  Photographs by Dominic Chavez
Families in quarantine listen to a UNFPA contact tracer in Freetown, Sierra Leone. UNFPA and the World Health Organization, with the support of the World Bank, have been working to stop the spread of Ebola in neighborhoods.
FACES
                                                                                                                  RECOVERING
                                                                                                                  FROM EBOLA,
                                                                                                                  PREVENTING
                                                                                                                  THE NEXT
OF RESILIENCE                                                                                                     PANDEMIC
By Melanie Mayhew                                  Photographs by Dominic Chavez




                                                                                                                                                                                © World Bank Group // All photographs © Dominic Chavez / World Bank
03 Foreword                                        09 An ultimate sacrifice, an investment in a family’s future   21 Good health starts in the community
05 A disease more devastating than war             10 Heroic health workers become patients                       23 Learning from one epidemic to prevent another
06 Surviving Ebola, only to fight another battle   13 Going back to school after months away                      24 Casting a net for a happier future
07 Trying to rebuild, block by block               16 Returning to the fields                                     27 A little money jumpstarts a new life for a family of six
08 When work turns deadly                          19 Stitching a future                                          29 Authors’ notes and acknowledgments
09 Answering the call                              20 Preventing the next outbreak, one swab at a time
    UNICEF coordinators and volunteers use illustrations to help educate people about the Ebola outbreak in Freetown, Sierra Leone.




2
           World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim (right) asks questions during a briefing on the Ebola outbreak in Freetown, Sierra Leone, on
           December 3, 2014. President Kim traveled to the three countries most affected by the Ebola outbreak to see how the Bank Group could
           help the countries respond to and recover from Ebola.




FOREWORD   By Jim Yong Kim
           The Ebola crisis in West Africa is a                                   It’s also a story of people holding                             The people profiled in this book—their
           story of people: the 11,000 who died, the                              onto hope.                                                      struggles, their triumphs, their dreams—
           28,000 who were infected, the millions                                                                                                 are why we do the work we do. We have
           uninfected but devastated by the collapse                              Nearly three years after Ebola began its                        been proud, and humbled, to work
           of their countries and countrymen, the                                 spread across Guinea, Liberia and Sierra                        alongside the governments and people of
           billions who feared the global spread                                  Leone, the countries are recovering from                        Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone as they
           of the disease, and those who risked                                   the most devastating health event in                            respond to and recover from the Ebola
           everything to help.                                                    recent history. The countries’ people are                       crisis. West Africa’s experience—through
                                                                                  resilient despite their uphill climb, now                       the eyes of its people—is a lesson for all of
           It’s a story of health workers treating                                steepened by a catastrophic crisis in three                     us: We must, and we know we can, never
           patients, many losing their lives while                                of the world’s poorest countries.                               let this happen again, anywhere.
           doing their jobs; of mothers dying in
           childbirth, unable to get the healthcare                               Pandemics like Ebola pose some of the
           they need; of children out of school,                                  biggest threats in the world to people’s
           missing a year of learning; of farmers                                 lives and economies—but they are
           fleeing their fields, fishermen unmoored                               preventable. The Ebola crisis taught all of
           from their boats, construction workers                                 us that we must be much more vigilant                           Jim Yong Kim
           without buildings to build; and of                                     to outbreaks and respond immediately to                         President, World Bank Group
           businesses shuttered, dreams deferred.                                 save lives and protect economic growth.                         July 2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
    Ebola survivors Mariatu, 46, and Adama, 13, in Rokupa, Sierra Leone, lost 10 family members to Ebola.




4
  A DISEASE   Past a towering mosque and a trash heap
              piled high with cars, down a dusty hill
              zigzagged with sewage, and just before


      MORE
              the ocean meets the shore is the home
              of Mariatu, 46, and Adama, 13. Shreds of
              orange netting—remnants of the Ebola


DEVASTATING
              quarantine that encircled the community
              many months before—flutter in the
              breeze. Some have repurposed the netting
              to reinforce their rickety homes.


  THAN WAR    Mariatu and her daughter, Adama, are
              Ebola survivors. Mariatu lost 10 family
              members to Ebola, including seven
              children and her husband. Adama was one
              of two of her children to survive. Mariatu
              and Adama’s story is a common one on
              this hillside in Rokupa, Sierra Leone.
              Dozens of Ebola survivors live within a
              50-foot radius, each representing at least a
              handful of lives lost in their homes.

              Mariatu described herself as “broken”
              —sick with post-Ebola syndrome,
              depressed because of the loss of most of
              her family, without a job, and unable to
              pay for food, shelter or schooling for her
              daughter. Mariatu says that she cries every
              day, and often thinks about taking her
              own life. Her life—marked by violence and
              war, poverty, and Ebola, has been difficult.
              During the civil war, the rebels chopped
              off one of her husband’s arms. The family
              fled to Freetown. A dozen years later, the
              neighborhood became an Ebola hotspot.

              “Ebola was more devastating for us than
              what happened during the war,” she says.

                                                             TOP: The World Food Programme and the World Bank deliver food to families who are living under quarantine due to the Ebola outbreak
                                                             in Monrovia, Liberia. BOTTOM: A Liberian woman visits the grave site of a relative on Decoration Day at Disco Hill Cemetery in Monrovia,
                                                                                                                           Liberia. About 3,600 suspected Ebola victims are buried in the cemetery.



                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                             Lina, 40, is an Ebola survivor in Monrovia, Liberia.




    SURVIVING EBOLA,   In a few weeks’ time, she watched it
                       take 14 lives, before she knew its name.
                       By the time she learned its name, her
                                                                     But Lina, now 40, of Monrovia, Liberia,
                                                                     would beat the disease after spending
                                                                     15 days in an Ebola treatment unit. The
                                                                                                                   where she’s studying sociology—she relies
                                                                                                                   on charity to feed her family and faces
                                                                                                                   stigma as an Ebola survivor.

       ONLY TO FIGHT   sisters, brother, sister-in-law, nieces,
                       nephews, aunt and other relatives had
                       bled to death. Three generations gone
                                                                     only person to greet her at the health
                                                                     facility was her friend, a medical student.
                                                                     He later married her despite his family’s
                                                                                                                   When she went to a hospital recently
                                                                                                                   and disclosed that she was a survivor,

     ANOTHER BATTLE    with one strain.

                       And then it came for her. Mouth parched,
                                                                     disapproval of marrying an Ebola survivor.

                                                                     Despite great improvements in her life in
                                                                                                                   the health workers refused to treat her.

                                                                                                                   “When you go to the hospital and they
                       eyes reddened with blood, vomiting and        the more than a year since she recovered      know you’re a survivor, no one is willing
                       diarrhea, blistering confusion and “fire in   from Ebola—getting married, staying in        to touch you,” she says. Lina asked for
                       [her] heart,” she says.                       her home despite a landlord threatening       water to brush her teeth and was given a
                                                                     to evict her and returning to college,        bedpan filled with water.

6
                                                   Abdulai, 34 (right), an Ebola survivor in Crab Town, Sierra Leone, sits outside of his home, waiting for work. His wife, Mariatu, supports the family with her shop.




        TRYING    Abdulai, 34, sits in a flimsy plastic chair
                  on the front porch of his home in Crab
                  Town, Sierra Leone. He pushes his
                                                                         inconsistent. This week, he showed up for
                                                                         work five days, but was hired only one. He
                                                                         made $3 this week for a day’s work.
                                                                                                                                                   evicted from their home, which is made
                                                                                                                                                   of concrete blocks, metal windows and
                                                                                                                                                   doors, and a sturdy roof. If they’re evicted,

    TO REBUILD,   sunglasses to the top of his head so he
                  can wipe tears from his eyes. Eight people
                  in the house, including his parents,
                                                                         The family’s only other income is from
                                                                         his wife’s shop, which she runs from their
                                                                                                                                                   they’ll move to a corrugated-metal shack
                                                                                                                                                   with mud floors and no doors or windows.
                                                                                                                                                   They say they’ll have to wash twice a night

BLOCK BY BLOCK    contracted Ebola. He was the only one to
                  survive the disease.
                                                                         home. She sells soap, cigarettes and garri.
                                                                         Sixteen cups of garri, a staple food that is
                                                                         made from cassava tubers, sells for about
                                                                                                                                                   because of the heat. When the rains come,
                                                                                                                                                   they’ll shiver when water streams through
                                                                                                                                                   the roof and sides of the shack.
                  He was fired from his job when his boss                $4. The shop’s profits barely feed Abdulai,
                  learned that he was an Ebola survivor. He              his wife and their children.                                              “We were not a wealthy family but we
                  had a regular job in construction until                                                                                          were coping,” says Abdulai. “Ebola was
                  late 2014, when he contracted Ebola. Now               They haven’t paid rent in 18 months. They                                 a setback for us.”
                  he lays concrete blocks, but the work is               recently received a notice that they may be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7
               Sidie, 49, is a lab technician and Ebola survivor in Freetown, Sierra Leone.




      WHEN WORK        Sidie, a lab technician in Freetown, Sierra
                       Leone, covered himself, from head to
                       toe, in protective gear that left no skin
                                                                                              A week later, Sidie, 49, started aching.
                                                                                              Then he lost his appetite, and battled
                                                                                              a headache, hiccups and extreme thirst.
                                                                                                                                            “When I think of that,” he says, as tears
                                                                                                                                            streaked his cheeks, “I cry.”



    TURNS DEADLY       uncovered. With syringes in hand, he
                       asked the mother once, twice, five times
                       to hold her 4-year-old son so he could take
                                                                                              A lab test—the one he had administered
                                                                                              so many times—confirmed that he
                                                                                              had Ebola.
                                                                                                                                            After he returned home from the
                                                                                                                                            treatment center, his landlord tried
                                                                                                                                            to evict him. He also lost many of his
                       his blood. But as she lay near her 8-year-                                                                           friends. And although he continues to deal
                       old daughter, he realized that Ebola had                               Throughout the crisis, health care workers    with post-Ebola medical problems, he, like
                       already taken her. Her daughter would                                  like Sidie have been on the frontlines,       many other health workers in West Africa,
                       soon die, too.                                                         risking their lives and livelihoods to end    insisted on returning to work.
                                                                                              Ebola and restore essential health services
                       He held the boy and began taking his                                   in the hardest-hit countries.                 “This is a war that has come to our
                       blood. Three milliliters filled the syringe,                                                                         country,” he says. “You don’t expect a
                       with just a few more to go. Then the boy                               Sidie says he feels lucky to be one of        carpenter to take blood from a sick child.”
                       pulled away with the needle still in his                               the health workers who survived Ebola,
                       arm—and blood sprayed upward, leaving a                                although he has faced stigma as an
                       droplet on Sidie’s forehead, where his face                            Ebola survivor. Many in his community
                       mask had slipped down his sweaty brow.                                 witnessed the ambulance picking him up
                                                                                              at his house when he was sick with Ebola.
                       “I’ve already been infected,” he says he                               His wife cried in the street and asked
                       thought at that moment. He had safely                                  him who would take care of the family
                       taken blood samples from about 100                                     if he died.
                       suspected Ebola patients, but, this time,
                       all it took was one drop.

8
ANSWERING    Before the Ebola crisis, the hardest-hit
             countries already had a severe health
             worker shortage. Liberia, Sierra Leone

  THE CALL   and Guinea ranked 2nd, 5th and 28th
             from the bottom among 193 countries
             in terms of doctors per 1,000 of the
             population, according to the World
             Health Organization.

             Local health workers in the affected
             countries were joined by foreign medical
             workers, who helped treat and care for
             patients, boost local health capacity,
             manage Ebola treatment units, and
             resume essential health services for
             non-Ebola conditions.

             Jonas, a doctor from Mekelle, Ethiopia,
             was one of these foreign medical workers.
             He saw the impact Ebola was having on
             West Africa and responded to the call to
             volunteer through the African Union.
                                                                    Sylla, 58, in Conakry, Guinea, lost his nephew after he contracted Ebola while driving an ambulance.
             The general practitioner started working
             at Liberia’s Redemption Hospital in


                                                                AN ULTIMATE
             February 2015.                                                                            The families of health workers who
                                                                                                       died of Ebola have received compensation
             “It’s our responsibility to help our brothers                                             to help them cope with the loss of


                                                                  SACRIFICE,
             in Africa,” he says.                                                                      their breadwinners.

                                                                                                       When Sylla, 58, of Conakry, Guinea,


                                                             AN INVESTMENT
                                                                                                       lost his 27-year-old nephew to Ebola,
             “It’s our responsibility                                                                  his nephew’s parents and sisters
                                                                                                       were devastated.
                to help our brothers
              in Africa,” says Jonas.                          IN A FAMILY’S                           “His passing away was a disaster,” says
                                                                                                       Sylla. “He was a great support for the


                                                                     FUTURE
                                                                                                       family. Everyone relied on him.”

                                                                                                       His nephew was an ambulance driver for
                                                                                                       Donka National Hospital in Conakry,
                                                                                                       Guinea. He provided most of the family’s
                                                                                                       financial support, including paying
                                                                                                       for breakfast every day for his sister, a
                                                                                                       pharmacy student. With the $10,000
                                                                                                       death benefit the family received, the
                                                                                                       family bought a plow for their land and
                                                                                                       began building a house, investments they
                                                                                                       hope will sustain them in the long run.

                                                                                                                                                                           9
              HEROIC   She raced out of the white tent, her family
                       cheering and clapping wildly when they
                       saw her coming. They embraced her,

     HEALTH WORKERS    broke into song and praised God for
                       sparing her life when so many others had
                       lost theirs. As she climbed into the car to

     BECOME PATIENTS   begin her journey home, they asked her
                       what she would do next, now that she
                       had survived Ebola.

                       “I will live to treat my patients,” she says.

                       Just weeks later, Klubo, 44, with eyesight
                       weakened by Ebola and persistent
                       numbness and joint pain in her legs,
                       returned to Grant Mental Health
                       Hospital in Monrovia, Liberia, where she
                       works as a physician assistant and mental
                       health clinician.

                       Her patients, many of them living with
                       schizophrenia and substance abuse
                       disorders, “started rejoicing and dancing”
                       when they saw her walk through the
                       hospital’s gate, she says. Her patients and
                       their families had repeatedly called her
                       while she was in the treatment center and
                       had visited her at home while she was
                       recovering. Through it all, she had treated
                       her patients over the phone.

                       In a country of 4 million people, Klubo
                       is just one of about 160 health workers
                       who have received any mental health
                       training. She works at the only mental
                       health hospital in the country, which
                       has 71 beds and one psychiatrist, the
                       only one in Liberia.

                       Ebola has deeply affected people’s mental
                       health. When national statistics are
                       available, the Ebola-affected countries’
                       mental health experts expect that they
                       will show that many, many thousands
                       of people need mental health treatment
                       after surviving Ebola, losing relatives and     TOP: A patient at the only mental health hospital in Sierra Leone covers his face outside of the ward where he sleeps.
                       friends to Ebola, helping the victims of            BOTTOM: Klubo, 44, is an Ebola survivor and physician assistant and mental health clinician in Monrovia, Liberia.
                       Ebola, or simply living in the countries
                       during this traumatic time.

10
Patients walk hand-in-hand at the Sierra Leone Psychiatric Hospital.




                                                                       11
     Students in class at the Cape Community Primary School in Freetown, Sierra Leone.




12
GOING BACK TO   After closing for months, the countries’
                schools reopened to prepare the next
                generation for jobs in Guinea, Liberia and

SCHOOL AFTER    Sierra Leone.

                “The epidemic traumatized students,”

MONTHS AWAY     says Ousmane, 25, who teaches 11th and
                12th grade philosophy classes at Groupe
                Scolaire Woodia Berete Primaire Lycée
                near Conakry, Guinea. “By staying home
                so long, they forgot what they learned.”

                Before schools were reopened, they were
                cleaned and sanitized, hand washing
                stations were repaired and built, and
                teachers were trained to
                use thermometers.

                “I’m happy to be at school because Ebola
                has gone,” says Dorris, 6, a kindergartener
                at Billytown Public School in Liberia.

                At Hope Kindergarten School in
                Buchanan, Liberia, teachers are catching
                up students on the lessons they missed
                when schools were closed. And by feeding
                the children at school, they are ensuring
                that students stay in school, are fed and
                have food to take home.

                “It’s very important to feed the kids
                at school because most of them, their
                parents are not working,” says Wilbur, 31,
                the principal.




                                                                             TOP: A teacher takes students’ temperatures at Billytown Public School in Liberia.
                                                              BOTTOM: Children wash their hands outside their classrooms at Billytown Public School in Liberia.




                                                                                                                                                                  13
     TOP FROM LEFT TO RIGHT: 1/ Ebola survivor, Josephine, 30, of Monrovia, Liberia, lost seven family members to Ebola. 2/ Steve, 61, of Monrovia, Liberia, lost three children to Ebola. 3/ Vivian, is an Ebola survivor and social worker at C.H. Rennie Hospital in Margibi County, Liberia. 4/ Ebola
     survivor Saah, 39, of Monrovia, Liberia, lost two family members to Ebola. 5/ Ebola survivor, Henry, 31, of Monrovia, Liberia, lost four family members to Ebola. 6/ Selina lost her older sister to Ebola. She is a student at the Cape Community Primary School in Freetown, Sierra Leone.
     7/ Ebola survivor and doctor, Gassama, works at the Matam Medical Center in Conakry, Guinea. 8/ Ebola survivor Oliver, 37, of Monrovia, Liberia, lost his mother, brother, sister and his wife to Ebola. 9/ Dr. Asinya Magnus, a Nigerian doctor who has been working in Liberia since 2005,
     lost 15 colleagues to Ebola at C.H. Rennie Hospital in Margibi County, Liberia.

14
TOP FROM LEFT TO RIGHT: 1/ Dr. Mohammed Sankoh is the medical director of Redemption Hospital in Monrovia, Liberia. The hospital admitted the first case of Ebola in the city. Several health workers at Redemption Hospital died of Ebola. 2/ Barry, an Ebola survivor and doctor in Conakry,
Guinea, hides his face because of the stigma Ebola survivors face. 3/ Dr. Foday Dafae is the director for disease prevention and control for Sierra Leone. 4/ Dr. Samuel A. Sheku Kargbo is the director of health systems, policy, planning and information at the Ministry of Health and Sanitation
in Freetown, Sierra Leone. 5/ Lawrence is an Ebola survivor and laboratory technician at C.H. Rennie Hospital in Margibi County, Liberia. 6/ John, a 41-year-old emergency nurse from Kenya, works at C.H. Rennie Hospital in Margibi County, Liberia. 7/ Helena, a nurse, wears protective
clothing while working at C.H. Rennie Hospital in Margibi County, Liberia. 8/ Mamuyan Cooper is the administrator of Grant Mental Health Hospital in Monrovia, Liberia. 9/ Oretha, a 37-year-old midwife at C.H. Rennie Hospital in Margibi County, Liberia, lost 15 colleagues to Ebola.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
     RETURNING TO    One sign of recovery is farmers returning
                     to their fields. The people of Gnoungouya,
                     Guinea, build their lives on farming

        THE FIELDS   mangoes, pineapples, and other fruits and
                     vegetables. When Ebola ripped through
                     the community, farming stalled.

                     “During the last farming season, we lost
                     everything because no one bought it,” says
                     Soriba, 52, a farmer and village imam.

                     Thousands of tons of maize and rice seed
                     and fertilizer have helped hundreds of
                     thousands of farmers in Guinea, Liberia
                     and Sierra Leone replant their crops after
                     missing entire planting seasons.	

                     “This is a great activity for us to rebuild
                     our lives—for individual and community,”
                     says Soriba.


                                                                    TOP LEFT: Isatu (left), a local farmer, waits with her neighbors for bags filled with seeds in Makeni, Sierra Leone.
                                                                      TOP RIGHT: Farmers sing songs as bags filled with seeds are delivered to their homes in Makeni, Sierra Leone.
                                                                   BOTTOM: Farmers plow their fields to prepare to plant corn in Gnoungouya, Guinea. Farmers were highly affected
                                                                                                                        by the Ebola outbreak and are returning to their fields to work.


16
Ramatu (right in green), a farmer, surveys her fields with her colleagues in Makeni, Sierra Leone.




                                                                                                     17
     An employee of the Vitafoam factory in Freetown, Sierra Leone, sews mattress covers.




18
STITCHING   Some businesses are seeing their activity
            pick up. A mattress factory in Freetown,
            Sierra Leone, had just been completed

 A FUTURE   when the Ebola crisis hit its peak. Ebola
            severely disrupted factory operations
            but today, the factory is abuzz with
            activity, and is offering jobs to more
            Sierra Leoneans.

            Olive, 24, is a tailor at the factory. With
            her earnings, she takes care of herself,
            her mother and her niece. Her goal is to
            become a manager at the factory.

            “Some of us have jobs now, something
            that we can lean on, for me and my
            family,” says Olive.




                                                          TOP LEFT: Olive, 24, is an employee at Vitafoam in Freetown, Sierra Leone.
                                                           TOP RIGHT: A Vitafoam employee pushes mattress foam into the factory.
                                                                             BOTTOM: Vendors sell water in Freetown, Sierra Leone.



                                                                                                                                       19
             A mother mourns the death of her three-day-old daughter, who died in Freetown, Sierra Leone.                        Gibrilla, 29, takes a sample swab to help determine the cause of death of a man in Freetown, Sierra Leone.




       PREVENTING                         Before the Ebola crisis, the countries
                                          had limited ability to detect and respond
                                          to infectious disease outbreaks as they
                                                                                                            family for details of the death, while the
                                                                                                            swabber pulls on personal protective
                                                                                                            equipment, including a face mask, gloves
                                                                                                                                                                         Although the swabber and disease
                                                                                                                                                                         investigator do not suspect Ebola or
                                                                                                                                                                         another infectious disease as the cause of

          THE NEXT                        spread in communities. Because of Ebola,
                                          countries are changing how they approach
                                          disease surveillance and control.
                                                                                                            and scrubs from head to toe. He enters the
                                                                                                            home with a test tube and swab in hand.
                                                                                                                                                                         death, the country’s new policy is to swab
                                                                                                                                                                         every person who dies, even if they die, for
                                                                                                                                                                         example, in a car accident. If the swabber

     OUTBREAK, ONE                        It is mid-morning in Sierra Leone, and
                                          someone has called 117, the country’s
                                                                                                            The baby’s father pulls the curtain aside
                                                                                                            and illuminates the room with his cell
                                                                                                            phone. The swabber bends to open and
                                                                                                                                                                         and disease investigator had suspected
                                                                                                                                                                         that the baby died of an infectious disease,
                                                                                                                                                                         they would have called an ambulance.

     SWAB AT A TIME                       emergency hotline, to report a death in
                                          Kissy Public Works Development. The
                                          call is routed to the Western Area district
                                                                                                            swab the three-day-old baby’s mouth. He
                                                                                                            places the swab inside of the test tube.
                                                                                                            Later, he will send the specimen to a lab.
                                                                                                                                                                         The team follows the same procedure
                                                                                                                                                                         when they receive reports of diseases
                                                                                                                                                                         among the living.
                                          surveillance team, which dispatches
                                          Tomeh, 53, a disease investigator, and                            Outside, the baby’s mother is crying on                      “If anything happens now we’ll be in a
                                          Gibrilla, 29, a swabber—someone who                               the porch. This is her first child. Family                   position to combat it,” says Tomeh, who
                                          collects laboratory specimens—to the                              members and neighbors have started to                        has investigated more than 100 deaths
                                          home. The disease investigator asks the                           gather to mourn the baby’s passing.                          since 2014.




20
 GOOD HEALTH    At Mount Barclay Clinic in Monserrado
                County, Liberia, most of the community
                health clinic’s workers have gathered in

STARTS IN THE   an open-air shelter for training. One of
                the participants is Sarafina, a 23-year-old
                community health volunteer.

  COMMUNITY     Sarafina goes from home to home,
                educating community members on a
                variety of health issues, encouraging them
                to go to the health center for treatment,
                and ensuring that the most vulnerable are
                treated with dignity and get the care they
                need. She said that many people in Mount
                Barclay are living with mental illness, and
                after Ebola traumatized her community,
                even more are suffering.

                People who are living with mental illness
                “shouldn’t be thrown away,” says Sarafina.
                “These people are useful in our society.
                We need them like they need us. What
                matters is to see them back on their feet.”

                Recently a school in Mount Barclay
                tried to expel a student who had epilepsy.
                Sarafina convinced them to let the
                girl stay.




                                                              TOP: Nurses listen during a training program in Monrovia, Liberia, to learn more about mental health.
                                                                   BOTTOM: A patient stands in the courtyard at Grant Mental Health Hospital in Monrovia, Liberia.




                                                                                                                                                                      21
     Nurse midwife and Ebola survivor, Jackie, 41, works with colleagues and patients in the maternity ward at Redemption Hospital in Monrovia, Liberia.




22
  LEARNING FROM    Health care workers are doing what they
                   can to prevent the spread of disease,
                   applying some of the infection prevention

 ONE EPIDEMIC TO   control measures they practiced at the
                   height of the Ebola crisis, like wearing
                   personal protective equipment and gloves,

PREVENT ANOTHER    washing their hands and using hand
                   sanitizer, and spacing hospital beds three
                   feet apart to prevent the spread of disease.

                   Jackie, a 41-year-old nurse midwife
                   at Monserrado County’s Redemption
                   Hospital, one of the busiest health
                   facilities in the country, rolls an
                   ultrasound cart through the hospital’s
                   busy delivery ward, where five women
                   are moaning as they wait to deliver their
                   babies. After each ultrasound, she pulls
                   sanitizer out of her pink fanny pack and
                   squirts her hands.

                   Jackie has been working at Redemption
                   Hospital for 25 years, first as a registrant,
                   then as a nurse’s aide and now as a nurse
                   midwife. She’s been delivering babies since
                   eighth grade, when her midwife mother
                   began training her.

                   “I love being a midwife,” she says. “I see
                   the joy in the woman coming through
                   labor and taking her baby home.”

                   Her job almost killed her. During the
                   height of the Ebola crisis, Redemption
                   Hospital was in the epidemic’s crosshairs.
                   In September 2014 she was alone in the
                   delivery ward, while other health workers
                   stayed away, fearful of contracting Ebola.

                   A patient started bleeding. She didn’t stop
                   until she was dead. The woman and two
                   other patients died the next day of Ebola,
                   and soon, Jackie learned that she had
                   contracted Ebola from her patients. She
                   was admitted to an Ebola treatment                            TOP: Registered nurse Garmai checks the temperature of a child at Redemption Hospital in Monrovia, Liberia.
                   unit. She returned to work just a few           BOTTOM: Sister (left) consults with Jenevia (far right) at the Macauley Street Government Hospital in Freetown, Sierra Leone.
                   weeks later.


                                                                                                                                                                                                   23
            CASTING   Every day for 27 years, in the early
                      morning blackness that only fishermen
                      know, John, 43, and his crew dislodged

        A NET FOR A   their boat from Sierra Leone’s shore and
                      paddled north toward Guinea, returning
                      at sunset with nets flopping with fish.

     HAPPIER FUTURE   Today John stands in a few inches of water
                      in the port of Aberdeen, Sierra Leone,
                      gazing at the colorful boats skirting the
                      horizon, wishing he could return to the
                      sea. It’s been a year since he captained a
                      boat, a year since he fished.

                      “I would love to go fish but I can’t because
                      I don’t have a boat,” says John.

                      John doesn’t have a boat because the boats
                      won’t hire an Ebola survivor—they’re
                      afraid of contracting Ebola. Like the other
                      former fishermen milling about the port,
                      he is unemployed, unskilled to perform
                      any job other than fishing. All are eager
                      to work despite the blurry vision, body
                      pain and headaches that they live with
                      every day, reminders that they survived
                      Ebola, but that Ebola never will go away
                      for them.

                      The captains among them each made an
                      average of $12 on a good fishing day. Now
                      none of them can feed their families.

                      If Ebola had been stopped earlier, people
                      like Umaru, 39, who contracted Ebola
                      in February 2015—14 months after the
                      outbreak began—would still be fishing the
                      seas of Sierra Leone.

                      “Things are pretty tough,” he says, “but
                      I’m hopeful things will turn around. I’m a
                      young man with a long life.”




24
A fisherman works in Freetown, Sierra Leone.




                                               25
     Bindeh, 22, who lost her husband to Ebola, sits in her home with her five children in Tree Planting, Sierra Leone.




26
                                                                               Bindeh, 22, of Tree Planting, Sierra Leone, used unconditional cash payments to build a soap-making business.




A LITTLE MONEY    When Bindeh, a mother of five, became
                  a widow at age 22, she lost the man she
                  loved, the father to her children—and
                                                              Bindeh’s community of Tree Planting,
                                                              Sierra Leone, was hit hard by the Ebola
                                                              crisis. In the middle of the crisis, she and
                                                                                                                            that does not leak and that has electricity.
                                                                                                                            She also bought a freezer, which now sits
                                                                                                                            in her living room. She chills soda that she

 JUMPSTARTS A     the family’s sole breadwinner. With only
                  a fourth-grade education, Bindeh relied
                  on the kindness of friends to pay for the
                                                              her neighbors received cash payments that
                                                              helped them pay for food and schooling
                                                              for their children, and to start new trades
                                                                                                                            sells in her community.

                                                                                                                            Now, she can pay the school fees of her

  NEW LIFE FOR    family’s basic needs.

                  “To lose a husband is a great loss. He
                                                              that would support their families for
                                                              years to come.
                                                                                                                            kids, ages 5 to 14. The kids have dreams
                                                                                                                            to be a bank manager, a lawyer and a
                                                                                                                            journalist. Two want to be president of

A FAMILY OF SIX   was head of the family, and the death
                  of my husband also comes with a loss of
                  income,” she says. “And it will never be
                                                              Bindeh used the money to jumpstart a
                                                              small business: She bought palm oil and
                                                              soda to make soap, which she sold. With
                                                                                                                            the country.

                                                                                                                            “I’m leaving the past behind me and
                  the same again.”                            the profits of her soap-making business,                      moving on,” says Bindeh.
                                                              she moved her family to a sturdier house
                                                                                                                                                                                               27
     A fisherman prepares a net for a day of fishing in Conakry, Guinea.




28
                                   Melanie Mayhew and Dominic Chavez traveled in

AUTHORS’ NOTES / ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
                                   Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone for two months in 2015
                                   and 2016 to document the impact of the Ebola crisis and
                                   the countries’ response and recovery efforts.

                                                       Melanie Mayhew is a communications officer in the           The World Bank Group mobilized $1.62 billion in financing for Ebola response and recovery efforts to
                                                       Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice at the     support Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, the countries hardest hit by Ebola. This includes $1.17 billion
                                                       World Bank Group. She previously worked in the Bank         from IDA, the World Bank Group's fund for the poorest countries, to provide treatment and care, contain
                                                       Group’s corporate communications team; at GMMB,
                                                       a communications firm; and as a journalist. Melanie
                                                                                                                   and prevent the spread of infections, help communities cope with the economic impact of the crisis,
                                                       received her undergraduate degree from the University       improve public health systems, and build a regional disease surveillance system. It also includes at
                                                       of Richmond and her master’s degree from Johns              least $450 million from IFC, a member of the Bank Group, to enable trade, investment and employment
                                                       Hopkins University. Melanie, a native of North Canton,      in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
                                                       Ohio, United States, lives in Washington, D.C.
                                                                                                                   The major lesson of the Ebola crisis in West Africa is that the world must be better prepared for and
                                                       Dominic Chavez is a freelance photographer who has          respond much more quickly to future disease outbreaks. With the World Health Organization and
                                                       spent much of his career working in some of the world’s
                                                                                                                   other partners, including the private sector, the World Bank Group has created a global Pandemic
                                                       most challenging places. He previously worked at The
                                                       Boston Globe and The Denver Post. His work has been         Emergency Financing Facility, to enable a rapid response to shut down a severe disease outbreak
                                                       nationally recognized with many awards, he has helped       before it becomes a pandemic. Together with greater global and country investments in preparedness,
                                                       produce several books and his photographs have been         this facility will serve as a cornerstone in building a smarter, stronger global system to reduce
                                                       exhibited internationally. Dominic, a native of Denver,     future pandemic risks.
                                                       Colorado, United States, lives in Boston, Massachusetts.


                                                                                                                   This book would not be possible without the support of Michael Sahr, Safiatou Diallo, Moses Kargbo,
                                                                                                                   Ahmed Sahid Nasralla, Sheriff Mahmud Ismail, Inguna Dobraja, Cheick Fantamady Kante, Francis
                                                                                                                   Ato Brown, Parminder Brar, Sheikh Alhaji Yayah Sesay, Carolyn Reynolds, John Donnelly, Trina Haque,
                                                       FRONT COVER: Mariatu, 46, holds her daughter, Adama, 13,
                                                       in Rokupa, Sierra Leone. They survived Ebola, but lost      Shunsuke Mabuchi, Patricio Marquez, Sheila Dutta, Rianna Mohammed, Tim Evans, Olusoji Adeyi,
                                                       10 family members to the disease.                           Nicole Klingen, Dasan Bobo, Kafu Kofi Tsikata, Phil Hay, Steven Shalita, Haleh Bridi, Kristina Nwazota,
                                                       BACK COVER: Fisherman and Ebola survivor, Alusan, 45,       Julia Ross, Aisha Faquir, Kitchie Hermoso, Sheryl Silverman, Huma Imtiaz, Angie Gentile, Anu Palan,
                                                       of Freetown, Sierra Leone, has found it difficult to find   Juan Quiroga and dozens of other World Bank Group staff in Washington, D.C., and throughout the
                                                       steady work since recovering from Ebola.
                                                                                                                   world, as well as colleagues at the World Health Organization, UNICEF, UNFPA, UNOPS, the World Food
                                                       All photographs © Dominic Chavez / World Bank
                                                                                                                   Programme and many other partners—and most of all, without the people of Guinea, Liberia and
                                                       Design by Chavez Design Studio                              Sierra Leone, who courageously shared their stories during the most traumatic time of their lives.
                                                       Printed in the United States, in 2016.                      We are grateful to them for the opportunity—and responsibility—to tell their stories.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               31
www.worldbank.org/pandemics   @WBG_Health
