Investing in a Research
Revolution for LGBTI
Inclusion
                   November, 2016
Investing in a Research Revolution for
LGBTI Inclusion
Table of Contents

Table of Contents .................................................................................................................. 1
Executive Summary ............................................................................................................... 2
1. Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 4
Figure 1: The LGBTI Research Infrastructure ................................................................................................ 7
2. Research priorities ............................................................................................................ 8
Social inclusion priority dimensions.............................................................................................................. 9
Other high-priority needs as identified by LGBTI civil society and institutions .......................................... 12
Emerging methodological opportunities to expand knowledge ................................................................ 16
3. Strategic investments to jumpstart the revolution ........................................................... 19
Figure 2: Measuring the Inclusion of LGBTI People .................................................................................... 23
4. Conclusion: What success will look like........................................................................... 25
APPENDIX: Methodology .................................................................................................... 27
Acknowledgments ............................................................................................................... 28




                                                                                                                                                  1
Executive Summary
Introduction: In 2015, 193 United Nations member countries adopted the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) and committed to “leaving no one behind” in the effort to end
poverty and inequality. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) people
throughout the world have led global efforts to raise awareness of their experience of ongoing
discrimination, exclusion, and violence. Despite some gains that have made information more
available, huge gaps in research and data on LGBTI experiences persist in every country,
blocking progress toward inclusion and the realization of human rights for all. Clearly,
significant donor investment in strategic research on LGBTI inclusion is needed, in both the
immediate and the long term, to provide a reliable evidence base that can inform policies,
legislation, programs, and investments to advance the human rights and inclusion of LGBTI
people in national and global efforts.

Identifying Research Priorities: This paper is not a specific proposal. Rather, its intention is to
highlight for discussion the critical research and knowledge gaps with regard to human rights
and inclusion for LGBTI people that require investments to ensure that they are part of the
human rights and development agendas. In light of these significant gaps, the paper outlines a
number of high-priority research needs that have been identified as a result of wide-ranging
consultations with civil society organizations (CSOs), governments, research institutions, human
rights and development agencies, and researchers.

Data and research defining and measuring the social inclusion and exclusion of LGBTI people
are at the top of the list of priorities. Global consultations led by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) about a proposed LGBTI Inclusion Index revealed widespread
agreement on five high-priority dimensions of inclusion in development (from a rights-based
approach): health, economic well-being, personal security and violence, education, and political
and civic participation. In each of these dimensions, new data and research will be required to
create an index that will track the degree of LGBTI inclusion, both cross-nationally and within
individual countries, which can then be used to inform laws, policies, programs, and budgets to
advance this goal.

There are other related research priorities. For example, estimates of the size of the LGBTI
population and accurate measures of public opinion would be invaluable in the effort to frame
and evaluate the impact of investments in inclusion. Other priorities include examining the links
between LGBTI inclusion and national economic development, tracking the impact of laws and
practices that make LGBTI people more vulnerable, assessing the influence of prevailing gender
norms, measuring the prevalence and impact of conversion therapies, and studying the impacts
of mass movements of people on this community. Research on new data collection methods, as
well as new survey questions about sexual orientation, gender identity, and sex characteristics
(SOGIESC), would underpin the collection of all of this critical data.




                                                                                                  2
Several themes cut across these priorities. As in all research, it will be important to take into
account the multiple identities that people hold (such as race, ethnicity, religion, age, and so
on). It will also be important to be able to disaggregate data to get measures for separate
groups within the LGBTI umbrella term, particularly for transgender and intersex people, where
there is a distinct dearth of research. Finally, research protocols and approaches will need to
ensure that data collection efforts cause no harm and fully respect the rights of LGBTI people,
including their privacy and dignity.

Strategic Investments: In light of the research gaps, a set of proposed strategic investments
would focus on those high-priority topics. These investments would also build an LGBTI
research infrastructure, defined as resources and networks of government, human rights,
development, civil society, and other representatives and institutions that produce and share
knowledge about LGBTI people and issues.

Recommendation 1. Invest in capacity building and partnerships between governments, LGBTI
civil society groups, academics, multilateral institutions, and other stakeholders to create an
infrastructure for LGBTI research and data collection. This recommendation includes resources
for efforts to:
 Support strategic networks in countries and regions to develop instruments and
     methodologies for survey and administrative data collection and to lead educational efforts
     with governments
 Increase government commitment to LGBTI inclusion by funding government research and
     data capacity on LGBTI issues
 Fund and promote communication and collaboration between researchers and the LGBTI
     community
 Fund the expansion of a robust academic infrastructure to produce new researchers

Recommendation 2. Fund the establishment and operationalization of the UNDP LGBTI
Inclusion Index (which will contribute to the national capacity building mentioned in
Recommendation 1) to undertake the targeted research required for each of the identified
priority dimensions of the LGBTI Inclusion Index: health, economic well-being, personal security
and violence, education, and political and civic participation. This recommendation includes
short-term (12 month), medium-term (12–48 month), and long-term (48–60 month)
investments to: build a research infrastructure and partnerships between governments, CSOs,
academics, multilaterals and other stakeholders; mine existing data for relevant data on LGBTI
inclusion; collect new data on the key priority dimensions of LGBTI inclusion; design, maintain,
build, and analyze a database for the LGBTI Inclusion Index; and produce reports to support
advocacy and evidence-based law, policy, program, and budgetary decisions to advance the
inclusion and human rights of LGBTI people.

Recommendation 3. Fund existing, new, or future research priorities identified by LGBTI civil
society, whether related to local, national, regional, or global issues. Civil society has already
identified and embarked on some essential projects that will need funding. Other important
initiatives to fund would expand the knowledge base on under-researched groups, particularly
                                                                                                     3
intersex people, transgender people, low-income LGBTI people, and LGBTI people in ethnic
minority groups.

What success looks like: If sufficient strategic investments are made in LGBTI research and data
collection, knowledge about LGBTI people will increase dramatically, which will empower LGBTI
people and their governments to move toward the SDG promise of inclusion and human rights
for all. There will be a broad, active, and sustainable research infrastructure at the national and
global level that is supported by government funding of and participation in new data and
research. This research will inform and generate new programs, policies, and investments for
inclusion and respect for the rights of LGBTI people. What is more, LGBTI people will be actively
collaborating in the research process, and they will have the research and data that they need
to advocate for social, legal, and political change.


1. Introduction
In 2015, 193 United Nations member countries adopted the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), which are rooted in human rights principles with the aim of fighting poverty and
inequality and promoting inclusive development, “leaving no one behind.” Lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) people have worked within their countries and
globally to raise awareness about their experiences of persistent discrimination and exclusion.1
However, LGBTI people have had very little data or research about their lives to draw on to
inform policies, legislation, programs, and investments to advance LGBTI inclusion and respect
for their rights. Today, the need for such knowledge greatly outstrips the current supply, and
countries in the Global South are particularly in need of knowledge to support human rights
and human development efforts for LGBTI people. This paper proposes an investment in
knowledge that will transform global action on LGBTI issues by jumpstarting a research
revolution.

As the SDGs heighten the focus on measurable outcomes, data on LGBTI people must catch up.2
It is time to expand beyond the historical attention to HIV, which has underpinned advocacy
efforts and allowed many health-based financing mechanisms to focus research on populations
particularly at risk for HIV, notably gay men, men who have sex with men (MSM), and (only
recently) transgender women. An exclusive focus on HIV leaves out many other LGBTI people


1
  The terms used by individuals and groups to describe their sexual orientation, gender identity and expression,
and sex characteristics (SOGIESC) vary across and within countries. In using LGBTI to identify the groups facing
exclusion, it is acknowledged that these groups do not fully represent the range of identities found in the world.
Nonetheless, this umbrella acronym is used because it captures vulnerability to similar kinds of exclusion that
might be experienced by LGBTI people and by those with other identities related to SOGIESC. To avoid confusion,
this acronym is used even in situations where some parts of that group might not have been represented, such as
discussions of past research.
2
  For an analysis of how SOGIE issues fit into the SDGs, see Elizabeth Mills “‘Leave No One Behind’: Gender,
Sexuality and the Sustainable Development Goals,” IDS Evidence Report 1 54 (Brighton, UK: Institute of
Development Studies, 2015).

                                                                                                                     4
and the many other human rights and development challenges they face. Increasingly, bilateral
and multilateral aid agencies, international foundations, and human rights organizations are
prioritizing the well-being of LGBTI persons. More data and research would provide a better
assessment of the lived experience of LGBTI people around the world, supporting advocacy and
providing evidence on a range of fronts. Human rights organizations would have new ways to
monitor the inclusion of LGBTI people and the fulfillment of government obligations and
commitments in relation to international human rights standards. Governments, civil society
organizations (CSOs), development agencies, and other partners need more data to understand
the link between LGBTI exclusion and sustainable development and to create evidence-based
laws, policies, programming, and budgeting. Moreover, LGBTI activists are seeking more data
and research for advocacy to educate the world about their lives and the urgent need for
change.3

Research has already been a powerful tool in LGBTI human rights and social change in some
parts of the world. Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and researchers on LGBTI issues
have worked with and successfully encouraged governments to collect data on same-sex
couples and LGBTI people in many countries in North America, Europe, and Latin America. This
information has helped to counter stereotypes and morality-based arguments by showing the
very real harm of exclusion for LGBTI people and for society as a whole, as well as the benefits
of inclusion and respect for the rights all. Recent research has allowed civil society actors to
craft new arguments and policy makers to make more informed decisions about
decriminalization, nondiscrimination laws, health care, educational access, and family
recognition, along with many other issues. This new information has also led to other important
developments, including:

       Research showing that LGBTI parents raise healthy children has supported successful
        litigation on child custody issues (Inter-American Court of Human Rights) and marriage
        equality (Colombia, United States).
       A study demonstrating the economic cost of the exclusion of LGBTI people in India
        helped activists make new arguments to persuade policy makers of the value of
        inclusion.
       Studies of the prevalence of HIV in Kenya have demonstrated the importance of
        focusing health care and prevention efforts on gay and bisexual men and transgender
        women.
       Data on prejudice toward LGBTI people in the Caribbean documented the need for
        greater protection of human rights.

These examples provide a glimpse of the change that might be possible on a global scale with a
greater investment in data and research to inform laws, policies, programs, and budgeting. Yet
in spite of its demonstrated utility, only a tiny share—5 percent—of the limited global funding

3 This particular point was emphasized in a consultation between the authors, LGBTI organizations, and
institutional partners at the Global LGBTI Human Rights Conference held in Uruguay in July 2016. See the Annex for
more information.

                                                                                                                5
for LGBTI issues currently goes to support research,4 a level that is simply not adequate to meet
the growing knowledge needs and make use of the new opportunities, including in relation to
the SDGs.

Many new research investments could take advantage of “low-hanging fruit” and produce
immediate benefits. National and global data are currently available that are both unused and
underused. Providing support to researchers and policy makers to analyze the LGBTI
implications of that data in new research projects might, in some countries at least, meet some
of the knowledge needs described below in Section 2.

Other important goals will take longer to achieve, particularly the development of a global
research infrastructure. In the context of LGBTI issues, the research infrastructure would be
made up of national and global stakeholders and would include networks of researchers, LGBTI-
related NGOs, government departments and ministries, parliaments, human rights and
development institutions (national, bilateral, and multilateral), other funders, and universities
that produce and share knowledge about LGBTI people and issues (see figure 1).5 The
significant scaling up of research will require investments in many parts of the proposed
infrastructure. For example, getting governments committed to and capable of collecting data
on LGBTI people will require advocacy, sustained capacity building, and research strategies to
create, test, and adapt methods for the most appropriate and reliable ways of asking questions
on surveys about sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, and sex characteristics
(SOGIESC) in a range of contexts. Training researchers to analyze the data and create a new
knowledge base and working with LGBTI civil society groups and actors and national policy
makers to identify local and national research priorities will both take significant time and
resources. Nevertheless, together and over time, these efforts will create a sustainable global
capacity to provide the data and knowledge needed to accelerate, monitor, and evaluate the
progress of LGBTI people in the human rights and development context.




4
  Funders for LGBTQ Issues, “A Global Gaze: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex Grantmaking in the
Global South and East 2010” (New York: Funders for LGBTQ Issues, 2011),
https://www.lgbtfunders.org/files/A_Global_Gaze_2010.pdf; and Global Philanthropy Project and Funders for
LGBTQ Issues, “2013/2014 Global Resources Report. Government and Philanthropic Support for Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, Transgender, and Intersex Communities” (New York: Global Philanthropy Project and Funders for LGBTQ
Issues, 2016).
5 This definition draws on P. Edwards and others, “Knowledge Infrastructures: Intellectual Frameworks and
Research Challenges” (Ann Arbor, MI: Deep Blue, 2013), https://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/handle/2027.42/97552.

                                                                                                              6
Figure 1: The LGBTI Research Infrastructure




The next section outlines the research priorities that have emerged as a result of extensive
consultations with the LGBTI community. Section 3 presents recommendations for funding
specific projects and high-priority research needs, such as the proposed LGBTI Inclusion Index
of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and for building the underlying
infrastructure that would create the needed research capacity. Section 4 concludes with a
summary and long-term vision of what a successful global research community on LGBTI issues
would look like. A discussion of methods informing this paper, including greater detail about
the consultations, is in the Annex.

The strategic investments outlined in this paper would ensure attention to LGBTI people in the
SDGs and create an evidence base for policies and programs that would more rapidly advance
the goals of LGBTI inclusion and human rights globally. To this end, all of the priorities and
recommendations discussed in the next two sections share these common principles:

      the importance of LGBTI community leadership and participation
      the responsibility of governments to develop knowledge and data about LGBTI people
       and their inclusion and rights, including to inform laws, policies, programs, and
       budgetary priorities to advance these objectives
      the use of ethical, safe, and respectful methodologies that are most appropriate for and
       effective in different contexts
      the importance of research partnerships between governments, civil society, academia,
       and multilaterals institutions

                                                                                                 7
       the crucial contributions of a vibrant academic community
       the understanding that research should be relevant and useful to improving the lives of
        LGBTI people

Building a research infrastructure will be a global public good, increasing research capacity and
knowledge for all governments, interested agencies, civil society, and other stakeholders at the
global, regional, and national levels. And as a shared public good, the plan outlined here
provides opportunities for partnership and points to the need for collaboration across
organizations in order to meet the knowledge needs for LGBTI human rights and development
issues.



2. Research Priorities
It is clear that large data and knowledge gaps about LGBTI people persist. These gaps are
reflected in an examination of current literature reviews and reports primarily written by CSOs,
research institutions, human rights organizations, and government and development agencies
and informed by formal and informal consultations. This section prioritizes the topics relevant
to LGBTI inclusion that have been identified as most important by CSOs and others and
presents clear research priorities for donors, program countries, development partners, and
the private sector to consider in the effort to promote a research revolution and create a
sustainable LGBTI research infrastructure.

Four cross-cutting themes emerge consistently in literature and research and should be
considered in connection with each research priority:

       Participant safety and ethical concerns. There is a potential risk that research may
        inadvertently subject LGBTI participants to violence or discrimination. To mitigate risks
        and promote safety, researchers should follow professional ethical guidelines and
        additionally should respect the wishes, rights, and dignity of the community; ensure
        confidentiality at all times; promote participant safety and security; prevent re-
        traumatization; and ensure that teams in the field are fully trained in best practices of
        data collection, including informed consent, and sensitized to the specific vulnerabilities
        of LGBTI people.6 Also, research findings should be presented with an understanding of
        how they might be interpreted in negative ways.7


6
  This refers to ethical standards culled from standards in interventions developed by the World Bank, Inter-
American Development Bank, International Center for Research on Women, and Global Women’s Institute and
articulated in “Violence Against Women & Girls Resource Guide” (Washington, DC: World Bank, Inter-American
Development Bank, Global Women’s Institute, and International Center for Research on Women, 2014),
http://www.vawgresourceguide.org/ethics.
7 This point was emphasized in the discussions at the Global LGBTI Human Rights Conference in Uruguay (see

Annex).

                                                                                                                8
       Intersectionality. Different identity and social categories—including sexual orientation,
        gender identity, intersex status, gender, age, employment, religion, ethnicity, race,
        socioeconomic status, and so forth—often intersect in a way to shape one’s experiences
        and societal expectations. For many LGBTI people, this intersection creates specific
        vulnerabilities to discrimination and violence.8

       Disaggregating data. Noting the diversity of “letters” within the LGBTI acronym,
        disaggregation into specific groups may fill in missing research and data gaps and
        highlight the experiences of specific groups of LGBTI people that have traditionally been
        ignored. Specifically, lesbian and bisexual women, transgender men and women,
        persons with non-binary identities, and intersex individuals are underrepresented in the
        bulk of existing research studies and data collection.9

       Alternative experiences and identities. The concepts in the LGBTI acronym may not
        always pertain to the diversity of experiences and identities that sexual and gender
        nonconforming individuals live with or adopt, for example, third gender hijras or kothis
        in South Asia.10 Alternative or local identities outside of the LGBTI acronym have
        substantial implications for data collection and measurements. In generating meaningful
        analysis and knowledge to guide policy, categories of identity can be developed through
        a participatory approach, with options to self-identify during data collection.11


Social inclusion priority dimensions

Promoting the social inclusion of marginalized groups occurs through a series of actions and
programs toward a targeted end. In this sense, social inclusion is both a process as well as an
outcome.12 As such, inclusion offers salient entry points for analytical work on measuring the
extent of LGBTI exclusion as well as establishing the indicators of a fully inclusive society.

8
  CREA, “Count Me In! Research Report Violence against Disabled, Lesbian, and Sex-Working Women in
Bangladesh, India, and Nepal” (New Delhi: CREA, 2012),
http://www.creaworld.org/sites/default/files/The%20Count%20Me%20In!%20Research%20Report.pdf; and P.
Crehan and J. McCleary-Sills, “Brief on Violence against Sexual and Gender Minority Women” (Washington, DC:
World Bank Group, Inter-American Development Bank, Global Women’s Institute, and International Center for
Research on Women, 2015),
http://www.vawgresourceguide.org/sites/default/files/briefs/vawg_resource_guide_sexual_and_gender_minority
_women_final.pdf.
9
  K. Hawkins and others, “Sexuality and Poverty Synthesis Report,” IDS Evidence Report 53 (Brighton, UK: Institute
of Development Studies, 2014),
http://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/bitstream/handle/123456789/3525/ER53.pdf?sequence=1.
10
   This theme was also emphasized at the Uruguay conference.
11
   OHCHR, “A Human Rights-Based Approach to Data. Leaving No One Behind in the 2030 Development Agenda”
(Geneva: Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, 2016),
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/HRIndicators/GuidanceNoteonApproachtoData.pdf.
12
   World Bank, Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity (Advance Edition) (Washington, DC: World
Bank, 2013), http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTSOCIALDEVELOPMENT/Resources/244362-
1265299949041/6766328-1329943729735/8460924-1381272444276/InclusionMatters_AdvanceEdition.pdf.

                                                                                                                 9
Through a series of expert and community consultations that included representatives of civil
society, academia, the private sector, and multilaterals, UNDP developed a process definition of
LGBTI inclusion that is pertinent to the diversity of experiences that these communities face.
Inclusion is defined as “…access to opportunities and achievements of outcomes for LGBTI
people….,”13 a process definition that should guide the collection of data in relation to the
opportunities and outcomes in key sectors. The consultation process culminated in an
agreement that an LGBTI Inclusion Index would provide a valuable measure of inclusion that
could be compared globally for use in the context of the SDGs and other data needs.14

During the consultation process, the following five sectors were identified as priority
dimensions for the proposed index, categories that could also play a useful role in a broader
research agenda on LGBTI inclusion. These dimensions will require that measures be developed
that are comparable across countries in order to go into the index. 15 (See the
recommendations and figure 2 in section 3).

Health. Globally, data on the health equity and outcomes of LGBTI persons are sparse.
However, some health institutions are building an evidence base and have already found an
alarming global pattern: LGBTI persons experience poorer health outcomes than the general
population and have specific vulnerabilities that are fueled by exclusion, social stigma, and
discriminatory laws, policies, and practices.16 The stigma and pathologization of people with
non-normative SOGIESC have even fueled targeted violence against LGBTI people, including
forced sterilizations, forced abortions, and/or forced anal examinations.17 However, this
evidence base needs to be bolstered with a specific focus on health issues beyond HIV,
reproductive health, access to services, bias among health care providers, and other LGBTI
health outcomes. In particular, research on the mental health of LGBTI people is largely absent
in many countries, although data in some countries show that LGBTI people experience
depression and anxiety at a higher rate in comparison to the general population, which can




13
   UNDP, “Concept Note, Global LGBTI Index” (New York: UNDP, 2016).
14
   A global index is just one of many culminations of research when regarding the dimensions listed above.
However, due to the unprecedented support of LGBTI organizations for these dimensions as part of the UNDP
LGBTI Global Index, this section showcases them as significant priorities.
15
   Although health, economic well-being, personal security and violence, education, and political/civic participation
have been identified as the key dimensions for the LGBTI Inclusion Index, some of the following are areas in which
LGBTI people also experience exclusion: youth empowerment, access to information, access to justice, access to
housing and other goods and services, and food security, among others.
16
   WHO, “Improving the Health and Well-Being of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Persons” (Geneva: World
Health Organization, 2013), http://www.ghwatch.org/sites/www.ghwatch.org/files/B133-6_LGBT.pdf.
17
   WHO, Sexual Health, Human Rights and the Law (Geneva: World Health Organization, 2015),
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/175556/1/9789241564984_eng.pdf.

                                                                                                                  10
often lead to suicide.18 Data on the extent of mental health disparities should therefore also be
scaled up.19

Economic well-being. Due to a lack of data and research on the relationships between SOGIESC
and poverty,20 there now exists only a limited empirical link between discrimination, violence,
and a lower socioeconomic status among LGBTI individuals.21 What little research exists shows
that LGBTI people are highly vulnerable to poverty,22 most likely because they are cut off from
the opportunities or resources needed to build one’s human and social capital, capabilities,
and/or productive assets. Although a preliminary link has emerged to show a cycle of poverty
for some LGBTI people, more data and analysis are needed.23

Personal security and violence. In many countries, LGBTI persons cannot safely report an act of
violence or access justice following an attack, and thus the extent of SOGIESC-motivated
violence is largely unknown. Although existing statistics show alarming rates of violence against
LGBTI people24—and in particular against transgender women25—these figures are believed to
be significantly underrepresenting the problem, including because of the reluctance of LGBTI
people to report violence to the authorities.

Education. Access to education for LGBTI persons is critical in its own right and also has direct
impacts on other dimensions, including but not limited to economic empowerment. Not only
do LGBTI people need to have access to education, education systems also need to meet their
needs. This includes having policies on equality and diversity in education as well as measures

18
   J. Grant, L. Mottet, and J. Tanis, “Injustice at Every Turn, A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination
Survey” (Washington, DC: National Gay and Lesbian Task Force and the National Center for Transgender Equality,
2011), http://www.thetaskforce.org/static_html/downloads/reports/reports/ntds_full.pdf; T. Ojanen, R.
Ratanashevorn, and S. Boonkerd, “Gaps in Responses to LGBT Issues in Thailand: Mental Health Research, Services,
and Policies,” Psychology of Sexualities Review 7, no. 1 (2016); and S. L. Budge, J. L. Adelson, and K. A. Howard,
“Anxiety and Depression in Transgender Individuals: the Roles of Transition Status, Loss, Social Support, and
Coping,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 81, no. 3 (2013).
19
   UNDP and USAID, “Being LGBT in Asia: Nepal Country Report/Thailand Country Report. A Participatory Review
and Analysis of the Legal and Social Environment for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender (LGBT) Persons and
Civil Society” (Bangkok: UNDP and USAID, 2014), http://www.asia-
pacific.undp.org/content/rbap/en/home/operations/projects/overview/being-lgbt-in-asia.html.
20
   Hawkins and others, “Sexuality and Poverty Synthesis Report.”
21
   S. Jolly, “Poverty and Sexuality: What Are the Connections?” (Stockholm: Swedish International Development
Cooperation Agency, 2010),
http://www.globalequality.org/storage/documents/pdf/sida%20study%20of%20poverty%20and%20sexuality.pdf.
22
   M. V. Lee Badgett, “The Economic Cost of Stigma and the Exclusion of LGBT People: a Case Study of India”
(Washington, DC: World Bank, 2014), http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/10/23952131/economic-
cost-stigma-exclusion-lgbt-people-case-study-india.
23
   S. Singh and others, “Experienced Discrimination and its Relationship with Life Chances and Socio -Economic
Status of Sexual Minorities in India,” Amaltas Research (Washington, DC: World Bank, forthcom ing).
24
   IACHR, “An Overview of Violence Against LGBTI Persons in the Americas. A Registry Documenting Acts of
Violence Between January 1, 2013 and March 31, 2014” (Washington, DC: Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights, Organization of American States, 2014),
http://www.oas.org/en/iachr/media_center/PReleases/2014/153A.asp.
25
   See the website, Trans Respect vs. Transphobia at http://transrespect.org/en.

                                                                                                                11
to combat stigma, discrimination, and bullying. Globally, SOGIESC-motivated violence and
bullying in schools can be very common and can be committed by peers as well as school staff,
including teachers. This bullying often leads LGBTI students to drop out or experience
significant mental health problems, which are harmful outcomes for both the individual as well
as the larger community and society. However, concrete research on the prevalence and extent
of SOGIESC-motivated bullying, as well as its corresponding impact on individuals and society, is
sparse in many contexts, particularly in college and university settings.26 When teachers,
counselors, and other staff promote a culture of inclusion (perhaps by positive representation
of LGBTI students in school curricula27), students are able to develop the essential skills
necessary for a fulfilled life and thus add to productive societies.28 Research can also show the
effect of such inclusion programs on the prevalence of violence against LGBTI students and
offer insights on how to combat it at a school-wide and government level.

Political and civic participation. Although participation by LGBTI people in political bodies, state-
building exercises, and intra-state conflict resolution has been observed, a systematic
examination of the opportunities for LGBTI people to engage in civic and political processes is
largely lacking. Indicators of participation would include being involved in decision making on
legal frameworks, policies, and practices that relate directly to discrimination and also on
legislation that shapes the degree to which LGBTI people are fully included in civic and political
life, such as laws regarding legal recognition of identity and criminalization, the registration of
NGOs, and funding restraints. In addition, analyses of elected officials, political parties, and
LGBTI organizations and publications would further illuminate the degree of inclusion. This
research could also directly identify the needs for capacity building within the LGBTI civil society
community and effective strategies for political mobilization and change.


Other high-priority needs as identified by LGBTI civil society and institutions

Outside of social inclusion and the five sectors outlined above, many other important research
priorities were articulated by CSOs, researchers, human rights institutions, government
agencies, and development institutions.

Population estimates of LGBTI persons. Public discussions and research about LGBTI issues often
start with estimates of the size of the LGBTI population. One estimate of the proportion of the
U.S. population who identifies as LGBT (not including intersex individuals) is 3.8 percent, with




26
   UNESCO, Out in the Open, Education Sector Responses to Violence Based on Sexual Orientation and Gender
Identity/Expression (Paris: UNESCO, 2015), http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002447/244756e.pdf.
27
   Ibid.
28
   C. Vagneron and F. Houdart, “Homophobic Bullying in Educational Institutions Undermines World Bank Equity
Efforts,” World Bank, Education for Global Development (blog), December 9, 2013,
http://blogs.worldbank.org/education/homophobic-bullying-educational-institutions-undermines-world-bank-
equity-efforts; and UNESCO, Out in the Open.

                                                                                                               12
higher estimates when asking about same-sex behaviors and attractions.29 A more recent
estimate in the United States shows that approximately 0.6 percent of all adults (1.4 million
people) identify as transgender.30 Although methodological challenges exist in deriving these
estimates,31 population estimates are useful for analyzing programs and demonstrating a need
for more inclusive policies.

Measures of stigma in the general population and among public officials. Public opinion and
attitudes about LGBTI people and issues matter and are sometimes mentioned separately as a
research priority. These attitudes can act as barometers of potential violence or
discrimination.32 In this sense, research that measures attitudes toward LGBTI people may
capture an important dimension of their ability (or inability) to access markets, services, or
spaces. For example, measurements of antipathy among service providers can offer meaningful
insights on why LGBTI people may experience barriers in accessing essential services.33 Public
opinion data may also better inform LGBTI campaigns and identify weak points within a group’s
strategy.34 Attempts to measure attitudes in the general population should add more in-depth
questions on gender identity and intersex status—two largely ignored components.

Relationship between rights, inclusion, and economic growth. Research can also uncover how
micro-level forms of exclusion may aggregate to impact the human and economic development
of the larger society.35 Specifically, research can show a relationship between human rights,
inclusion, and economic growth. For example, in an analysis of 39 countries, an additional right
for LGBT (not including intersex) persons in a country is associated with US$300 more in GDP
per capita and a higher value in the Human Development Index.36 This research could be
expanded upon to include a broader set of countries and economic outcomes to serve two
purposes: first, in reaching out to more low- and high-income countries, an analysis might

29
   G. Gates, “How Many People are Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender?” (Los Angeles, CA: The Williams
Institute, UCLA, 2011), http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/Gates-How-Many-People-LGBT-
Apr-2011.pdf.
30
   A. Flores and others, “How Many Adults Identify as Transgender in the United States?” (Los Angeles , CA: The
Williams Institute, UCLA, 2016), http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/How-Many-Adults-
Identify-as-Transgender-in-the-United-States.pdf.
31
   These methodological challenges may be quite significant. Deriving accurate estimates may be challenging if
people are afraid to identify, perhaps due to stigma or insufficient trust between researchers and participants. In
turn, low-end estimates may stymie appropriate policies for LGBTI people and groups. These points were brought
out during the authors’ discussions with LGBTI organizations and others at the 2016 Uruguay conference.
32
   World Bank, Inclusion Matters.
33
   FRA, Professionally Speaking: Challenges to Achieving Equality for LGBT People (Vienna: European Union Agency
for Fundamental Rights, 2015), http://fra.europa.eu/sites/default/files/fra_uploads/fra-2016-lgbt-public-
officials_en.pdf.
34
   This point was emphasized during the consultations at the Uruguay conference.
35
   At the Uruguay conference, participants expressed an interest in scaling up and replicating this line of research
(“the cost of homo/transphobia”). See the Annex for more information on these discussions.
36
   M. V. Badgett and others, “The Relationship between LGBT Inclusion and Economic Development: An Analysis of
Emerging Economies” (Washington, DC and Los Angeles: USAID and The Williams Institute, 2014),
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/15396/lgbt-inclusion-and-development-november-
2014.pdf.

                                                                                                                 13
provide a better understanding of the relationship between rights and economic development;
second, this analysis might uncover more specifically how rights have an impact on the
economy, for example, through foreign direct investment or tourism.37

Impact of laws, policies, and programs. Although laws alone will not end stigma, they often
mitigate the terms by which LGBTI people may or may not engage in society. Outside of the HIV
arena, few studies exist to show the link between laws and an LGBTI person’s experience of
discrimination and violence—or even inclusion. Although anecdotal and qualitative data
suggest direct impacts (particularly from the harshest and most punitive laws), quantitative and
representative studies on specific impacts are rare. Research can also study the impact of
positive laws designed to respect human rights and promote the participation and inclusion of
LGBTI people in many sectors. In particular, research may uncover whether some laws, policies
and programs actually promote inclusion, the development of human capital, and/or higher
economic productivity, for example.

A related research gap concerns the impact of other policies and programs on LGBTI people.
Programs specific to LGBTI people and implemented by human rights or development agencies
should be coupled with monitoring and evaluation (M&E) from an early stage. More general
programs and policies in social, economic, justice, and other sectors should seek to monitor and
evaluate the impacts on LGBTI people, including the lack of access or any other negative
impact. This kind of research would provide an evidence base to inform future programming,
filling the current immense M&E data gaps. Assessments can uncover the barriers LGBTI
persons may face in accessing development programming, perhaps because heteronormative
language or traditional notions of gender have been written into the programs. Poverty and
Social Impact Analyses (PSIAs) or Policy Audits can assess anti-poverty interventions and public
efforts to reduce exclusion, analyzing whether or not LGBTI people are benefiting from such
programs.38 These analyses should also provide useful findings about the extent to which LGBTI
inclusion/access helps bolster outcomes and development goals.39

Link to prevailing gender norms. Growing quantitative evidence shows that the more
patriarchal and male-dominated a society, the more intolerant it will be toward LGBTI people.40
When hegemonic masculinity41 thrives, LGBTI people face specific vulnerabilities driven by strict

37
   Ibid.
38
   Hawkins and others, “Sexuality and Poverty Synthesis Report.”
39
   Consultations at the Uruguay conference indicated that, in addition to human rights –based arguments,
organizations are showing an increasing interest in research that highlights the link between policies and programs
to actual improved outcomes, in order to appeal to decision makers who may be less convinced by the more
traditional human rights approach.
40
   M. Greene, O. Robles, and P. Pawlak, “Masculinities, Social Change, and Development,” Background Paper for
World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2011); G.
Barker and others, “Evolving Men: Initial Results from the International Men and Gender Equality Survey
(IMAGES)” (Washington, DC and Rio de Janeiro: International Center for Research on Women (ICRW) and Instituto
Promundo, 2011); and World Values Surveys (database), World Values Survey Association,
http://www.worldvaluessurvey.org/wvs.jsp.
41
   This refers to the dominant social position of heterosexual men.

                                                                                                                14
gender norms as well as stigma against nonconforming sexual or gender identities. However,
the bulk of analytical work conducted by development and aid institutions continues to posit a
traditional binary notion of gender, in addition to the assumption of heterosexuality,42 thus
excluding the experiences of many LGBTI people. Stepping outside of a gender binary and
broadening the examination of power imbalances on the basis of gender as well as gender
identity, sexual orientation, and intersex status can expand the reach of research on the root
causes and sustained drivers of prevailing gender norms, violence, and discrimination.

The impact and prevalence of conversion therapies. Conversion therapies (or so-called
“reparative” therapies) are a particularly virulent practice, rooted in stigma and having
deleterious impacts on an LGBTI person’s health and well-being. They have no basis in modern
science and are condemned by the World Health Organization (WHO).43 This topic could include
any sexually motivated act of violence with the added intention to—falsely—“cure” or “correct”
women within the LGBTI community.44 It could also include nonconsensual cosmetic surgeries
performed on intersex children for the purpose of “correcting” their healthy bodies based on
norms about gender or sexuality. Although conversion therapies continue to exist in a number
of countries, there is little research in middle- and lower-income countries to indicate their
prevalence or overall impact on mental and physical health.

Impact of migration or forced movement. Sometimes LGBTI people have little choice but to
leave their homes, moving from rural to more accepting urban areas or from an intolerant to a
more tolerant country,45 or even as a result of a humanitarian crisis that displaces large
segments of a population. Research can better uncover the reasons why LGBTI people leave a
particular country, that is, the “push” factors that may be fueled by violence and stigma. In
understanding the impact on the country of origin, research can also better estimate the
number of LGBTI people who are forced to leave and identify how that loss of human capital
and productivity depletes larger societal goals (in other words, the possible effects of a “brain
drain”). Alternatively, research may also uncover “pull” factors from more tolerant countries
and how the movement of LGBTI people may bring in human capital and boost the productivity
of a host country.

LGBTI refugees are also significantly under-researched, although preliminary evidence shows
that without the systems of resilience they cultivated in their home countries, they become
more vulnerable to violence.46 Thus, organizations and governments (in developed and

42
   Crehan and McCleary-Sills, “Brief on Violence against Sexual and Gender Minority Women .”
43
   WHO, “Improving the Health and Well-Being of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Persons.”
44
   IGLHRC, “Violence on the Basis of Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, and Gender Expression Against Non-
Heteronormative Women in Asia” (New York: Outright Action International, 2010),
http://www.iglhrc.org/sites/default/files/386-1_0.pdf.
45
   F. Houdart and J. Fagan, “Pink Migration—Rising Tide of LGBT Migrants?” World Bank, People Move (blog), July
28, 2014, http://blogs.worldbank.org/peoplemove/pink-migration-rising-tide-lgbt-migrants.
46
   R. Greenwood and A. Randall, “Treading Softly: Responding to LGBTI Syrian Refugees in Jordan,” IMES Capstone
Paper Series (Washington, DC: The George Washington University, Elliott School for International Affairs, 2015);
and UNHCR, “Age, Gender and Diversity Policy: Working with People and Communities for Equality and Protection”
(Geneva: United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees, 2011).

                                                                                                             15
developing nations alike) involved in the resettlement process are left without crucial
knowledge of the situation for some of the most vulnerable individuals and how to mitigate the
serious risks to their physical integrity and well-being.47

Emerging methodological opportunities to expand knowledge

In addition to knowledge gaps, there are also underused methods of conducting research that
could expand the breadth and depth of data on LGBTI inclusion and exclusion. Filling this
“methods gap” is critical to ensuring that the most appropriate and efficient ways to study
LGBTI issues are utilized. There are several approaches that could also be used to address the
research priorities outlined above. New research methods should also be considered within
larger normative guidelines to respect the wishes, rights, and dignity of the LGBTI community.48

National-level surveys and representative individual/household surveys. Most authoritative data
for national policy making and programming come from government-sponsored surveys of
representative samples of a country’s population, such as censuses and demographic surveys,
crime victimization surveys, and poverty and welfare surveys. These surveys are considered
representative because they are large, random (or “probability-based”) samples of the
population.

Many of the research gaps outlined here will require such data to draw conclusions about the
LGBTI population as a whole. This includes, for example, whether poverty and crime
victimization rates are higher for LGBTI people than for the general population. But the data
required to ask and answer those questions do not exist in most countries. As discussed in the
next section, donors and development agencies can support the capacity of developing and
middle-income countries to ask SOGIESC questions on large-scale surveys, add questions
particular to the LGBTI experience, and disaggregate published outcomes by SOGIESC, thereby
helping to close knowledge gaps. The collection of these kinds of data sets will require research
on the definition of SOGIESC and the design of effective survey questions that will stand up to
scientific scrutiny. For example, two U.S.-based initiatives took on this task for sexual
orientation and gender identity questions in the past decade, as did survey researchers in the
United Kingdom’s Office of National Statistics.

Macroeconomic modeling. Studies assessing the relationship between country-level
macroeconomic measures, such as GDP or foreign direct investment, and LGBTI inclusion could
provide powerful insights for policy discussions and bring new allies to the table. For example,
the World Bank’s study of the exclusion of LGBT people in India illustrated that the cost of

47
   Among LGBTI refugees, some may be more vulnerable to violence or differential treatment. For a look at the
many levels of vulnerability that refugees face (not necessarily motivated by SOGIESC), see the World Bank,
“Forcibly Displaced: Toward a Development Approach Supporting Refugees, the Internally Displaced, and their
Hosts,” Advance Edition (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2016),
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/25016/9781464809385.pdf?sequence=2.
48
   This point was emphasized in consultations with LGBTI organizations and institutional partners at the Uruguay
conference.

                                                                                                                   16
discrimination against these persons in employment and health services may be between
US$1.9 and US$30.8 billion.49

Mixed-methods research. Although quantitative research can uncover the scope of a problem,
be used in rights-based advocacy at the UN level, and inform development programs,
qualitative research can often fill in missing dimensions, specifically articulating the needs of
subgroups and explaining quantitative data more clearly. A mixed-methods approach to data
collection may better inform programs and policy on the national (and perhaps state or
municipality) level, for example, by including questions and observations about implementation
and enforcement.50 Further, mixed-methods research may also provide a better basis for
creating the benchmarks needed to track progress51 across time.

Using other innovative methods. Some new or rarely used methods address some of the
methodological challenges of surveying representative probability samples (such as cost) and
also provide meaningful information. For example, one study found that children who have
non-normative sexual orientations were more vulnerable to physical as well as sexual abuse in
the home compared to a control group of their heterosexual siblings.52 Other studies can
unpack discrimination in formal sector employment. For example, in an experimental (or audit)
study on resumes, researchers submitted several pair of almost identical resumes to 1,700
open positions, with the sole difference that one contained a marker that the applicant was
LGBTI. The research demonstrated that the resume showing the LGBTI marker had a 40 percent
lower chance of receiving an interview.53

Big data and data science. Big data and data analysis seek to find meaningful patterns in
massive data sets that are based on online behavior rather than surveys. Big data may offer
insights into population estimates, geographic dispersion, and experiences of stigma.
Moreover, supporting the analysis of big data may provide new routes to circumvent barriers in
traditional survey research methods.54 For example, faster computers have given researchers
the ability to quickly mine very large data sets and find meaningful correlations that might



49
   A. Patel, “Homophobia May Cost India’s Economy Billions of Dollars,” The Wall Street Journal, India, June 10,
2014, http://blogs.wsj.com/indiarealtime/2014/06/10/how-homophobia-hurts-indias-economy.
50
   UNDP and USAID, “Being LGBT in Asia.”
51
   J. Klugman and others, Voice and Agency: Empowering Women and Girls for Shared Prosperity (Washington, DC:
World Bank Group, 2014), https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/19036.
52
   K. Balsam, E. Rothblum, and T. Beauchaine, “Victimization over the Life Span: A Comparison of Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, and Heterosexual Siblings,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 73, no. 3 (2005): 477–87,
http://tpb.psy.ohio-state.edu/papers/Balsam%20JCCP%202005.pdf.
53
   A. Tilcsik, “Pride and Prejudice: Employment Discrimination against Openly Gay Men in the United States,”
American Journal of Sociology 117, no. 2 (2011): 586–626,
http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/661653?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents.
54
   User-generated online data may carry some biases as well. Global trends show that the Internet, in many
contexts, tends to be less accessible to poor individuals and more accessible to those living in cities as well as to
men and younger people. See World Bank, World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends (Washington, DC:
World Bank, 2016), http://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2016.

                                                                                                                   17
otherwise be invisible. As such, the potential of big data for LGBTI issues may be extraordinary,
although few partnerships seem to currently exist between data scientists and LGBTI advocates.

Big data is also a space in which the private sector is heavily engaged and thus has an important
role to play in related partnerships. Social media platforms and mobile apps, for example,
already have millions of users with significant user-generated input. Partnerships that promote
sharing and analyzing those data can yield a rich analysis that might otherwise be
underestimated, such as better estimates of HIV-positive individuals or educational outcomes,
to cite just two examples. This analysis can be used in targeted campaigns to fulfill the SDGs,
such as Goal 3 (healthy lives) or Goal 4 (inclusive education).


Box 1: Summary of High-Priority LGBTI Research Needs

Measures of inclusion
   Health, including: heath disparities involving inequalities in health access and
      health outcomes; pathologization of homosexuality and transgender people; lack of
      respect for bodily integrity of intersex people
   Economic well-being, including: income disparities and poverty levels of LGBTI
      people; the existence of employment and nondiscrimination laws and their
      implementation
   Personal security and violence, including: rates of violence against LGBTI people
      including homicides; police competency and training
   Education, including: access of LGBTI people to education and whether education
      systems meet their needs
   Political and civic participation, including: right to determine and get official
      recognition of identity; decriminalization of LGBTI people; number of “out” LGBTI
      parliamentarians and decision makers; ability of LGBTI people and organizations to
      exercise freedom of association, assembly, and expression

Additional high-priority needs
    Estimates of LGBTI population size
    Measures of public opinion and stigma
    Relationship between rights, inclusion, and growth
    Impact of laws, policies, and programs on LGBTI people
    Links to prevailing gender norms
    Impact and prevalence of conversion therapies
    Migration and forced movement
    Research to assess new methods and survey questions




                                                                                              18
3. Strategic Investments to Jumpstart the Revolution
The high-priority research needs outlined in section 2 would support the work of national
governments to advance inclusion and respect for the rights of LGBTI people in the SDGs, and
such projects would also have value for other national and global stakeholders. To generate
that high-priority data and knowledge, three complementary investment strategies are needed:
the first builds the research infrastructure to meet the knowledge needs, the second is the
LGBTI Inclusion Index, and the third targets research on additional specific priorities identified
by LGBTI civil society.

Recommendation 1: Invest in capacities and partnerships between governments, LGBTI civil
society groups, academics, multilateral institutions, the private sector, and other stakeholders
to create an infrastructure for LGBTI data collection and research.

To meet the significant challenge of addressing the momentous data and research needs for
the SDGs and LGBTI Inclusion Index, a global research infrastructure will need to be created.
This research infrastructure will be made up of the resources and activities necessary to
produce knowledge about LGBTI people and would include representatives from government,
civil society, human rights and development institutions, other funders of research, and
academia (see figure 1 above). The infrastructure would necessarily be decentralized, given the
wide range of local contexts in which LGBTI people live and with which researchers must
contend. As was learned from the research infrastructure built up during the HIV/AIDS
epidemic, an LGBTI research infrastructure will need to be adaptable and flexible so that over
time, new research technologies, new research areas, and new funding opportunities can be
incorporated, early research questions can be elaborated on, current and future needs can be
addressed, and relevant and useful findings can be produced and disseminated.55

Building a research infrastructure on LGBTI people and issues means investing in five general
components:

(a) Invest in strategic networks in countries and regions to develop instruments and
methodologies for survey and administrative data collection and to lead educational efforts
with governments.

High-quality data on LGBTI people will be essential for meeting the needs of the SDGs and the
LGBTI Inclusion Index, as well as for other research. Particular countries or regions might be ripe
for relatively quick wins in adding SOGIESC questions to national surveys. Well-funded national
or regional networks of researchers could work on the development of sampling methods and
survey questions that can be used to study LGBTI people in those countries or regions. Acting as
an expert panel, those researchers can then educate and persuade government statistical
agencies to add those questions to current surveys or to undertake LGBTI-specific surveys. For

55
  For an analysis of the HIV infrastructure, see D. Ribes and J. Polk, “Organizing for Ontological Change: The Kernel
of an AIDS Research Infrastructure,” Social Studies of Science 45, no. 2 (2015): 214–41.

                                                                                                                  19
example, networks of researchers and activists in the United States deployed an effective
theory of change built on the observation that government statistical agencies are influenced
both by the scientific community and the political climate; as a result, new research plus
educational efforts were successful in getting U.S. surveys to add sexual orientation and gender
identity questions.56 A second example of expanding data comes from gender equality
advocates’ efforts to add a module on domestic violence against women to the Demographic
and Health Survey (DHS), funded by the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), to
estimate the prevalence of domestic violence within and across countries.57 That module was
first added in 1998 and is now included in 91 surveys.

(b) Invest directly in government capacity on LGBTI inclusion and human rights by supporting
government research and data collection on LGBTI issues.

Donors could enhance a country’s ability to promote the inclusion and human rights of LGBTI
people by investing in government research and data collection capacity. For example, a donor
could: invest in building the capacities of national statistical offices, specific ministries/sectors,
and/or national institutions to undertake data collection and analysis of relevant LGBTI issues;
or commission existing government agencies or government-funded research institutes to
produce knowledge on LGBTI people. Research connected to a government agency might also
raise the status of its efforts in the eyes of the news media, general public, and academic
audiences. Also, investments in government statistical agencies, or grants to academic or other
institutions to undertake pilot surveys or methodological research on SOGIESC questions, might
move those questions into large-scale government surveys much more quickly.

(c) Invest in communication and collaboration between researchers and the LGBTI community to
ensure knowledge that is relevant and useful.

Experience demonstrates that activists and researchers want to be connected so that research
is relevant, but effective communication and collaboration take time, energy, and resources.
LGBTI civil society groups and actors should be engaged in the research process, including in the
selection of research priorities, data collection, data analysis, and the communication of
research findings. This need to pull activists and researchers together generates another
important investment opportunity that can be met in a number of ways, and support could go
to several types of collaboration: formal consultations that provide activists with a voice to
communicate research priorities to researchers; 58 relationship building and the creation of

56
   Two networks in the United States have produced influential best practice guides: Sexual Minority Action
Research Team (SMART), “Best Practices for Asking Questions about Sexual Orientation on Surveys” (Los Angeles,
CA: The Williams Institute, UCLA, 2009), http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/SMART-FINAL-
Nov-2009.pdf; and Gender Identity in U.S. Surveillance Group (GenIUSS), “Best Practices for Asking Questions to
Identify Transgender and Other Gender Minority Respondents on Population-Based Surveys” (Los Angeles, CA: The
Williams Institute, UCLA, 2014), http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/geniuss-report-sep-
2014.pdf.
57
   Klugman and others, Voice and Agency.
58
   This point was emphasized in the consultations at the Uruguay conference.

                                                                                                            20
spaces for collaboration that bring researchers and activists together in formal or informal
ways; participatory research strategies that involve LGBTI activists at many stages of the
research process; and capacity building of LGBTI organizations to learn data collection and
analysis skills. These strategies for communication and collaboration could either be funded
independently or folded into specific research projects.

(d) Invest in the expansion of a robust academic infrastructure to produce new researchers.

More researchers are needed who are able and willing to work on LGBTI topics in government,
academic, and NGO settings. The current number of researchers studying these issues across
universities, governments, and NGOs is too small to carry out an SDG-related research agenda
in only 10 countries, much less on a global scale covering 193 countries. Increasing funding and
access to data would make more research possible. However, scaling up will also require
funding to train many more new and existing researchers in best research practices. Through
universities and government agencies, funders could support a number of different activities to
benefit researchers: online or in-person courses on research methods and existing research;
fellowships for masters, doctoral, and post-doctoral students; mentoring programs to match
new researchers with more experienced ones; translations of existing studies; publication of
open-access journals; and meetings for the sharing of research.

Investments in technology and course content that allow academics to teach research methods
to new researchers and to LGBTI groups outside of academia may yield long-term and
sustainable growth in research capacity. This may be especially pertinent to NGOs that have
expressed an interest in research and data collection but currently lack the capacity and
experience to undertake it. At present, the capacity to collect and use data varies significantly
across countries.59

(e) Engage the private sector and support partnerships between companies, researchers, and
LGBTI NGOs.

The private sector has the capacity to support and enrich the research needed for LGBTI
inclusion and rights protection. Aside from partnerships based on big data analysis (see section
2 above), some companies can partner with researchers and LGBTI organizations to better
understand the treatment of their employees and how to provide appropriate services to their
customers. For example, some companies are beginning to utilize the Human Rights Campaign’s
Corporate Equality Index to determine if LGBT (not including intersex) staff receive equal
benefits or face barriers in being hired. This data allow the tracking of practices promoting
equality that may also boost overall labor productivity and larger societal goals. Additionally,
some private health providers have begun to offer support for gender-confirming surgeries and
hormone treatments. Research with LGBTI groups can determine if private health care plans
appropriately support their unique needs and concerns—noting the predominance of private


59
     This point was also emphasized in the discussions at the Uruguay conference.

                                                                                               21
health care plans in some contexts.60 Additionally, and perhaps due to the rise in corporate
social responsibility, some companies are donating to NGOs and social causes. This funding can
be leveraged to support the research needs of LGBTI people in developing and middle-income
countries.

Recommendation 2: Invest in the establishment and operationalization of the UNDP-led LGBTI
Inclusion Index (contributing to the national capacity building outlined in Recommendation 1
of government, civil society, and academia) to undertake the targeted research required for
each of the identified priority dimensions of the LGBTI Inclusion Index: health, economic well-
being, personal security and violence, education, and political and civic participation.

The dimensions of the LGBTI Inclusion Index are a particularly important focus, since the index
will be a global benchmark for progress in inclusion that, according to LGBTI activists, will have
enormous value. The index will require the collection of data from all countries where such
information is available, as well as investments in new LGBTI-specific data collection, including
data that can be disaggregated across the different LGBTI subgroups, with a view to increasing
the number of participating countries. This will also have major positive spillover effects, since
the valuable data and knowledge produced by the index can also be used in many other
projects.

Although the UNDP-led LGBTI Inclusion Index is a large research and capacity-building
undertaking, the five dimensions lend themselves well to collaborative efforts between
different funders who might prefer to focus on one or two dimensions in the short, medium,
and/or long term (see figure 2). Accordingly, one potential template for a process might include
these stages:

          Short-term investments (first 12 months): Funding to design, establish, and maintain a
           platform or repository to house the data on LGBTI inclusion to be collected over time,
           and support for a team of researchers to (i) assess existing data on the five priority
           dimensions, (ii) identify proxy indicators and agree on the approaches to gathering
           existing data that would be drawn on for the data collection envisaged by the LGBTI
           Inclusion Index, and (iii) develop LGBTI-specific indicators against which new data would
           be collected as well as appropriate methodologies for collecting this data in various
           country contexts.
          Medium-term investments (12–48 months): Resourcing partnerships at the global level
           (civil society, academia, government, multilaterals) for mining and analyzing the data
           using proxy indicators in all countries where relevant data exist and issuing analytical
           reports; establishing and resourcing national partnerships (government, civil society,
           academia) to undertake the research for data collection of LGBTI-specific indicators in
           20–25 countries, ensuring the inclusion of low-, medium-, and high-income countries
           across all regions. Capacity building for national data collection, funding to maintain the


60
     This is another point that was raised at the Uruguay conference.

                                                                                                    22
       data repository, and advocacy activities to engage additional governments to participate
       in the data collection.
      Long-term investments (48–60 months and beyond): Providing resources for expanding
       new research efforts and adding additional countries where data collection is
       undertaken, ensuring a balance of participating countries from all regions and country
       typologies, maintaining the data repository, continuing to build national capacities for
       LGBTI data collection, regularly issuing analytical reports, supporting advocacy for data
       collection on LGBTI inclusion, and providing technical assistance to countries to utilize
       the data and analysis to inform national policies and programs.


Figure 2: Measuring the Inclusion of LGBTI People




                                                                                             23
Recommendation 3. Investing in existing, new, or future research priorities identified by LGBTI
civil society groups, whether related to local, national, regional, or global issues.

In addition to the LGBTI Inclusion Index–related measures, section 2 presents many other
important research priorities that have been mentioned by at least some activists in particular
contexts, as listed in box 1: migration, conversion therapies, measures of stigma and public
opinion, links to gender norms, and the impact of laws, policies, and programs. Additional
funding opportunities for such research can be tailored to the needs expressed by local,
national, or regional CSOs. Also, increasing the availability of general research funding would
facilitate innovation and research into under-explored aspects of the LGBTI experience by social
and health scientists who seek to more fully understand the lived experiences of LGBTI people.

Invest in projects that LGBTI civil society groups have already identified as priorities: Many LGBTI
NGOs have expressed interest in being more involved in the choice of research projects but lack
the necessary funding to finance them. An investment in the priorities they identify may yield
knowledge that they can tailor to their own efforts to influence policy.61 Additionally, some
research projects are already under development by LGBTI NGOs, whether on their own or in
concert with other researchers.

Invest in researchers and activists to create a research agenda and pilot projects on intersex
people: One particularly large gap that calls for a research initiative, including pilot research
projects, concerns intersex people’s lives and concerns. The UNDP-led LGBTI Inclusion Index
validation meeting clarified that the current research and data strategies related to sexual
orientation and gender identity questions will not be adequate for an understanding of the
challenges faced by people with variations in sex characteristics. Already, intersex groups have
called for unbiased and peer-reviewed research on the impact of both non-binary sex
characteristics and nonconsensual “normalizing” surgery on health outcomes—including
mental health.62 Additionally, nonmedical research on the social, economic, and health issues
for intersex people is at a relatively early stage, with some recent projects showing promise.63 A
concerted effort to identify intersex-specific research priorities and to begin pilot studies would
provide useful knowledge as well as guidelines for the LGBTI Inclusion Index and other research
projects.

Look for projects to support that target other under-researched groups: Research gaps are
broad and deep for all subgroups of the LGBTI population. However, as noted in section 2,
some groups are especially under-researched, for example, transgender men and women as
well as low-income LGBTI people.

61 This point was emphasized in consultations at the Uruguay conference.
62
  This goal may be challenging to achieve. In many contexts, the medical establishment tends to promote
compulsory surgery at birth or in early childhood. In addition, there are inadequate policies to ensure that people
born with variant sex characteristics are able to provide informed consent throughout their lives. This is another
topic that was emphasized in consultation with LGBTI organizations and institutional partners at the Uruguay
conference.
63
   T. Jones and others, Intersex: Stories and Statistics from Australia (Cambridge, UK: OpenBook Publishers, 2016).

                                                                                                                 24
 Box 2: Recommendations for Strategic Investments

 Recommendation 1. Fund the development of capacity and partnerships between
 governments, LGBTI civil society groups, academics, multilateral institutions, and other
 stakeholders to create an infrastructure for LGBTI research and data collection.

 Recommendation 2. Fund the establishment and operationalization of the UNDP LGBTI
 Inclusion Index (contributing to the national capacity building outlined in Recommendation 1
 for government, civil society, and academia) to undertake the targeted research required for
 each of the identified priority dimensions of the LGBTI Inclusion Index: health, economic
 well-being, personal security and violence, education, and political and civic participation.

 Recommendation 3. Fund existing, new, or future research priorities identified by LGBTI civil
 society groups, whether related to local, national, regional, or global issues.




4. Conclusion: What Success Will Look Like
If sufficient strategic investments are made in LGBTI research and data collection, the
knowledge about LGBTI people will increase dramatically and empower countries and LGBTI
people to move toward the achievement of many of the SDGs and the promise to promote
inclusion and respect for human rights for all—with no one left behind. There will be a broad
and active infrastructure at the national and global level that is sustained by funding for priority
research, including government participation in producing new data and studies. That research
will inform and generate new programs, policies, and investments for LGBTI inclusion and
human rights protections.

The knowledge generated will be relevant, timely, and useful for decision making by LGBTI
people, civil society groups, policy makers, development agencies, private philanthropy
organizations, and businesses. The interactions between governments, multilateral and
bilateral institutions, researchers, and CSOs will create a sustainable flow of research:

Researchers in academia, government agencies, multilateral and bilateral development
institutions, and LGBTI NGOs will be conducting quantitative and qualitative research on LGBTI
people in every sizable country. They will have courses and materials to teach students and
other researchers how to do more of that research. Researchers will have financial support,
data, publication outlets, and access to existing research. Networks of researchers will provide
expertise to the public, push each other to expand knowledge, and develop new methodologies
to better answer difficult questions.

                                                                                                 25
Policy makers, national statistical agencies, funders, human rights and development agencies,
businesses, NGOs, media outlets, health professionals and agencies, and other end users of
research will know about new problems and have new research-based strategies and evidence
to address them. Research users will generate and suggest new questions and ideas for
research, and some will be active participants in the new research projects.

Donors will provide financial and data resources to develop and continue this process. They will
be actively shaping the progression of knowledge to contribute to the inclusion of LBGTI people
and respect for their human rights.

LGBTI people will have access to research findings that speak truth about their lives in
accessible forms that they can use to advocate for social, legal, and political change. They will
have research and data to support their work toward full inclusion and respect for their rights in
the context of the global sustainable development commitment to eradicate poverty and
inequality.




                                                                                               26
ANNEX: Methodology
The analysis and recommendations in this paper come from a variety of sources. The primary
authors have met with researchers and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI)
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in a variety of countries and contexts to discuss LGBTI-
related research, including through numerous meetings on these issues with stakeholders from
around the globe. LGBTI and research stakeholders include those from the United States,
Europe, South America, China, Kenya, and the Republic of Korea, and institutional stakeholders
include a variety of institutions, such as the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
the Office of the United Nations High Commission for Human Rights (OHCHR), the U.S. Agency
for International Development (USAID), the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank
(IDB), and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Feedback was
also received from OutRight Action International and the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual,
Transgender and Intersex Association (ILGA), two ECOSOC-accredited global LGBTI
organizations that work in multiple regions around the world. Altogether, these discussions
included the challenges faced by researchers, the needs of civil society, and the resources
required to build capacity. In addition, UNDP conducted an extensive consultation process with
a variety of stakeholders to develop the LGBTI Inclusion Index.

Input was also sought about the question of communicating the research priorities of LGBTI
activists and civil society groups to scholars by requesting information on several listservs that
included researchers, civil society organization leaders, activists, and funders. Less formally,
there were in-person discussions about this topic with activists and academics from a variety of
fields and geographic locations, including some from the Global South. Additionally, a draft of
this report was circulated to stakeholders in LGBTI organizations, key institutions, the funding
community, and researchers for feedback.

Finally, the authors and institutional partners presented and discussed this paper at the 2016
conference, Global LGBTI Human Rights Conference: Non-Violence, Non-Discrimination, and
Social Inclusion, in Montevideo, Uruguay in July 2016.64 Specifically, the authors and partners
invited conference participants to a side event to present this paper’s main arguments and
gather feedback on research priorities, strategic investments, and any additional concerns.
During these extensive discussions, over 40 conference participants joined in and represented a
diversity of organizations and institutions from different regions, think tanks, governments, and
bilateral aid agencies. This final version incorporates this significant feedback from conference
participants.

As per UNDP and World Bank quality assurance processes, this paper was separately peer
reviewed by both institutions to ensure quality and accuracy. This final version incorporates
edits and comments from the peer reviewers.



64
     See the website, Global LGBTI Human Rights Conference at http://www.lgbtimontevideo2016.org/en/.

                                                                                                        27
Acknowledgments
This paper was written by Dr. M. V. Lee Badgett (Professor of Economics, University of
Massachusetts Amherst; Williams Institute, UCLA) and Phil Crehan (LGBTI and Social Inclusion
Consultant, World Bank Group). It was written in partnership with the World Bank Group
(WBG) and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).The partnership was created
under the supervision of Clifton Cortez (Gender, Key Populations and LGBTI Team Leader,
UNDP), Suki Beavers (Advisor, Health Governance and Inclusive Political Processes, UNDP),
Boyan Konstantinov (Policy Specialist, Key Populations and LGBTI, UNDP), Nicholas Menzies
(Senior Counsel, WBG), Maria Beatriz Orlando (Lead Social Development Specialist, WBG),
Maninder Gill (Director, WBG), Lee Badgett, and Phil Crehan.

The authors would like to thank the following for providing input and comments at various
stages: Mandeep Dhaliwal (Director, UNDP’s HIV, Health & Development Practice), Michael van
Gelderen (Human Rights Officer, OHCHR), Fabrice Houdart (Human Rights Officer, OHCHR),
Alesdair Ittelson (Staff Attorney, InterACT Advocates for Intersex Youth), Anne Tamar-Mattis
(Legal Director, InterACT Advocates for Intersex Youth), Yiu Tung Suen (Assistant Professor,
Department of Sociology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong), Anne Lim (Executive Director,
GALANG), Jennifer McCleary-Sills (Director, Gender Violence and Rights, International Center
for Research on Women), Chloe Schwenke (International LGBTI Development Advisor), Aengus
Carroll and Renato Sabbadini (International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex
Association), Chad Dobson (Executive Director, Bank Information Center), Christian Velasquez-
Donaldson (Safeguards Campaign Manager, Bank Information Center), Andrew Park
(International Program Director, the Williams Institute), Lauren Kitz (Program Officer for Citizen
Participation and Inclusion, National Democratic Institute), Mark Bromley (Council Chair,
Council for Global Equality), Julie Dorf (Senior Advisor, Council for Global Equality), Saurav
Thapa (Associate Director of Research, Human Rights Campaign), Jeremy Kadden (Senior
International Policy Advocate, Human Rights Campaign), Federica Saliola (Program Manager,
Development Economics, WBG), Tanya Primiani (Senior Investment Policy Officer, WBG), Elaine
R. E. Panter (Legal Consultant, Development Economics, Global Indicators Unit, WBG),
Fernando Montenegro Torres (Senior Health Economist, WBG), and Jeffrey Waite (Adviser,
WBG). Thanks also go to Kerry Ashforth, Charles Chauvel, Vy Lam, and Shantanu Merkherjee for
their peer review as per the UNDP quality assurance process. Finally, the authors thank Patricia
Carley (Consultant, WBG) for copy editing as well as Kadeem Khan (Junior Professional
Associate, WBG) for design work on figure 1.




                                                                                               28
