                                 ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                 WIND ENERGY
                                 August 7, 2015




    ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES FOR
                     WIND ENERGY
INTRODUCTION
1. The Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines are technical reference documents with
general and industry-specific examples of Good International Industry Practice (GIIP). 1 When one or
more members of the World Bank Group are involved in a project, these EHS Guidelines are applied as
required by their respective policies and standards. These industry sector EHS Guidelines are designed
to be used together with the General EHS Guidelines document, which provides guidance to users on
common EHS issues potentially applicable to all industry sectors. For complex projects, use of multiple
industry sector guidelines may be necessary. A complete list of industry sector guidelines can be found at
www.ifc.org/ehsguidelines.

2. The EHS Guidelines contain the performance levels and measures that are generally considered to
be achievable in new facilities by existing technology at reasonable costs. Application of the EHS
Guidelines to existing facilities may involve the establishment of site-specific targets, with an appropriate
timetable for achieving them.

3. The applicability of the EHS Guidelines should be tailored to the hazards and risks established for
each project on the basis of the results of an environmental assessment in which site-specific variables,
such as host country context, assimilative capacity of the environment, and other project factors, are
taken into account. The applicability of specific technical recommendations should be based on the
professional opinion of qualified and experienced persons.

4. When host country regulations differ from the levels and measures presented in the EHS Guidelines,
projects are expected to achieve whichever are more stringent. If less stringent levels or measures than
those provided in these EHS Guidelines are appropriate, in view of specific project circumstances, a full
and detailed justification for any proposed alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental
assessment. This justification should demonstrate that the choice for any alternate performance levels is
protective of human health and the environment.

APPLICABILITY
5. The EHS Guidelines for wind energy include information relevant to environmental, health, and
safety aspects of onshore and offshore wind energy facilities. It should be applied to wind energy facilities
from the earliest feasibility assessments, as well as from the time of the environmental impact
assessment, and continue to be applied throughout the construction and operational phases. Annex A
contains a full description of industry activities for this sector. EHS issues associated with the construction

1 Defined as the exercise of professional skill, diligence, prudence, and foresight that would be reasonably expected
from skilled and experienced professionals engaged in the same type of undertaking under the same or similar
circumstances globally. The circumstances that skilled and experienced professionals may find when evaluating the
range of pollution prevention and control techniques available to a project may include, but are not limited to, varying
levels of environmental degradation and environmental assimilative capacity, as well as varying levels of financial and
technical feasibility.

                                                           1
                                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                              WIND ENERGY
                                              August 7, 2015




and operation of transmission lines are addressed in the EHS Guidelines for Electric Transmission
and Distribution.

This document is organized in the following manner:

       1. Industry-Specific Impacts and Management ............................................................................. 2
          1.1 Environment............................................................................................................................. 2
          1.2 Occupational Health and Safety ............................................................................................ 13
          1.3 Community Health and Safety ............................................................................................... 17
       2. Performance Indicators Monitoring ......................................................................................... 22
          2.1 Environment........................................................................................................................... 22
          2.2 Occupational Health and Safety ............................................................................................ 24
       3. References ................................................................................................................................. 25
       Annex A. General Description of Industry Activities ................................................................... 32



1. INDUSTRY-SPECIFIC IMPACTS AND MANAGEMENT
6. The following section provides a summary of EHS issues associated with wind energy facilities,
along with recommendations for their management. As described in the introduction to the General EHS
Guidelines, the general approach to the management of EHS issues should consider potential impacts
as early as possible in the project cycle, including the incorporation of EHS considerations into the site
selection, in order to maximize the range of options available to avoid and minimize potential adverse
impacts. Importantly, many EHS impacts associated with wind energy facilities may be avoided by careful
site selection.

1.1        Environment

7. Construction activities for wind energy facilities typically include land clearing for site preparation and
access routes; excavation, blasting, and filling; transportation of supply materials and fuels; construction
of foundations involving excavations and placement of concrete; operating cranes for unloading and
installation of equipment; construction and installation of associated infrastructure; 2 installation of
overhead conductors or cable routes (above ground and underground); and commissioning of new
equipment. Decommissioning activities may include removal of project infrastructure and site
rehabilitation.

8. Environmental impacts associated with the construction, operation, and decommissioning of wind
energy facilities activities may include, among others, impacts on the physical environment (such as noise
or visual impact) and biodiversity (affecting birds and bats, for instance). Due to the typically remote
location of wind energy facilities, the transport of equipment and materials during construction and
decommissioning may present logistical challenges (e.g., transportation of long, rigid structures such as
blades, and heavy tower sections). Recommendations for the management of such EHS issues are
provided in the construction and decommissioning section of the General EHS Guidelines. The
construction of access roads for the siting of wind facilities in remote locations may result in additional
risks, including adverse impacts on biodiversity and induced access to relatively inaccessible areas. The

2   As presented in Annex A.

                                                                                   2
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              WIND ENERGY
                              August 7, 2015




Toll Roads EHS Guideline provides additional guidance on prevention and control of impacts associated
with the construction and operation of road infrastructure.

9. Environmental issues specific to the construction, operation, and decommissioning of wind energy
projects and facilities include the following:

        • Landscape, Seascape, and Visual impacts
        • Noise
        • Biodiversity
        • Shadow Flicker
        • Water Quality

10. Due to the nature of wind energy facilities and, this sector may be particularly associated with
cumulative environmental and social impacts. If no relevant country-specific guidance is available in
relation to cumulative impacts assessment, international sources of good practice guidance on this topic
should serve as references. 3 Cumulative impacts assessments are especially warranted when multiple
wind energy facilities are sited in close proximity to sensitive receptors such as areas of high biodiversity
value.

1.1.1    Landscape, Seascape, and Visual Impacts

11. Depending on the location, a wind energy facility may have an impact on viewscapes, especially if
visible from or located near residential areas or tourism sites. Visual impacts associated with wind energy
projects typically concern the installed and operational turbines themselves (e.g., color, height, and
number of turbines).

12. Impacts may also arise in relation to operational wind facilities’ interaction with the character of the
surrounding landscape and/or seascape. Impacts on Legally Protected and Internationally Recognized
Areas of importance to biodiversity 4 and cultural heritage features 5 are also a consideration. Preparing
zone of visual influence maps and preparing wire-frame images and photomontages from key viewpoints
is recommended to inform both the assessment and the consultation processes.

13. Avoidance and minimization measures to address landscape, seascape, and visual impacts are
largely associated with the siting and layout of wind turbines and associated infrastructure, such as
meteorological towers, onshore access tracks, and substations.

14. Consideration should be given to turbine layout, size, and scale in relation to the surrounding
landscape and seascape character and surrounding visual receptors (e.g., residential properties, users of
recreational areas/routes).

3 Guidance documents include: International Finance Corporation (IFC), Good Practice Handbook on Cumulative
Impact Assessment and Management: Guidance for the Private Sector in Emerging Markets (2013); Canadian Wind
Energy Association (CanWEA), An Introduction to Wind Energy Development in Canada (2011); Scottish Natural
Heritage (SNH), Assessing the Cumulative Impact of Onshore Wind Energy Developments (2012).
4 See paragraph 20 in IFC Performance Standard 6 (IFC, 2012) for the definition of “Legally Protected and

Internationally Recognized Areas.”
5 Sites with archaeological, paleontological, historical, cultural, artistic, and religious values.



                                                     3
                                  ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                  WIND ENERGY
                                  August 7, 2015




15. Consideration should also be given to the proximity of turbines to settlements, residential areas, and
other visual receptors to minimize visual impacts and impacts on residential amenity, where possible. All
relevant viewing angles should be considered when considering turbine locations, including viewpoints
from nearby settlements.

16. Other factors can be considered in relation to minimizing visual impacts:

         • Incorporate community input into wind energy facility layout and siting.
         • Maintain a uniform size and design of turbines (e.g., type of turbine and tower, as well as
           height).
         • Adhere to country-specific standards for marking turbines, including aviation/navigational and
           environmental requirements (see Community Health and Safety section below), where available.
         • Minimize presence of ancillary structures on the site by minimizing site infrastructure, including
           the number of roads, as well as by burying collector system power lines, avoiding stockpiling of
           excavated material or construction debris, and removing inoperative turbines.
         • Erosion measures should be implemented and cleared land should be promptly re-vegetated
           with local seed stock of native species.

1.1.2      Noise

Construction Noise

17. Onshore construction noise should be limited to protect people living nearby. Noise-producing
activities include blasting, piling, construction of roads and turbine foundations, and the erection of the
turbines themselves. Guidance on acceptable levels can be found in the General EHS Guidelines.

18. Underwater noise and vibration from offshore construction—e.g., from piling activity—may adversely
impact marine life, including fish, marine mammals, and sea turtles. Environmental parameters that
determine sound propagation in the sea are site-specific, and marine species could be impacted
differently depending on their sensitivity to underwater sound frequencies. Assessments should be
conducted to identify where and/or when underwater noise has the potential to impact marine life
significantly and to identify appropriate mitigation measures.

Operational Noise

19. Wind turbines produce noise through a number of different mechanisms, which can be roughly
grouped into mechanical and aerodynamic sources. 6 The major mechanical components include the
gearbox, generator, and yaw motors, each of which produce their own characteristic sounds. Other
mechanical systems, such as fans and hydraulic motors, can also contribute to the overall acoustic
emissions. Mechanical noise is radiated by the surface of the turbine and by openings in the nacelle
housing. The interaction of air and the turbine blades produces aerodynamic noise through a variety of
processes as air passes over and past the blades. 7


6   Generally, wind turbines radiate more noise as the wind speed increases.
7   B. Howe et al., Wind Turbines and Sound: Review and Best Practice Guidelines (2007).

                                                          4
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              WIND ENERGY
                              August 7, 2015




20. Noise impact should be assessed in accordance with the following principles:

      • Receptors should be chosen according to their environmental sensitivity (human, livestock, or
        wildlife).
      • Preliminary modeling should be carried out to determine whether more detailed investigation is
        warranted. The preliminary modeling can be as simple as assuming hemispherical propagation
        (i.e., the radiation of sound, in all directions, from a source point). Preliminary modeling should
        focus on sensitive receptors within 2,000 meters (m) of any of the turbines in a wind energy
        facility.
      • If the preliminary model suggests that turbine noise at all sensitive receptors is likely to be below
        an LA90 8 of 35 decibels (dB) (A) at a wind speed of 10 meters/second (m/s) at 10 m height
        during day and night times, then this preliminary modeling is likely to be sufficient to assess
        noise impact; 9 otherwise it is recommended that more detailed modeling be carried out, which
        may include background ambient noise measurements.
      • All modeling should take account of the cumulative noise from all wind energy facilities in the
        vicinity having the potential to increase noise levels.
      • If noise criteria based on ambient noise are to be used, it is necessary to measure the
        background noise in the absence of any wind turbines. This should be done at one or more
        noise-sensitive receptors. Often the critical receptors will be those closest to the wind energy
        facility, but if the nearest receptor is also close to other significant noise sources, an alternative
        receptor may need to be chosen.
      • The background noise should be measured at 10 m height over a series of 10-minute intervals,
        using appropriate wind screens. At least five of these 10-minute measurements should be taken
        for each integer wind speed from cut-in speed to 12 m/s. 10,11

Noise Mitigation Measures

21. Measures to prevent and control noise are mainly related to engineering design standards and
turbine siting. With modern turbines, mechanical noise is usually significantly lower than aerodynamic
noise, and continuous improvement in airfoil design is reducing the latter. 12

22. Additional recommended noise management measures might include:

      • Operating turbines in reduced noise mode.
      • Building walls/appropriate noise barriers around potentially affected buildings (only an option in
        hilly terrain, due to the height of turbines).



8 Noise level exceeded for 90 percent of the measurement period, A-weighted.
9 ETSU, Report ETSU-R-97, “The Assessment and Rating of Noise from Wind Farms” (1997).
10 Institute of Acoustics (IOA), “A Good Practice Guide to the Application of ETSU-R-97 for the Assessment and

Rating of Wind Turbine Noise” (2013).
11 D. McLaughlin, “Wind Shear and Its Effect on Wind Turbine Noise Assessment,” Acoustics Bulletin, July/August

2012, 39-42 (2012).
12 Idem.



                                                      5
                                  ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                  WIND ENERGY
                                  August 7, 2015




        • Curtailing turbine operations above the wind speed at which turbine noise becomes
          unacceptable in the project-specific circumstances.

23. See section below for noise-related mitigation options with respect to offshore ecological receptors.

1.1.3     Biodiversity

24. Wind energy facilities have the potential for direct and indirect adverse impacts on both onshore and
offshore biodiversity during construction, operation and maintenance, and decommissioning. 13,14
Examples of impacts include bird and bat collision-related fatalities; bat fatalities due to the potential
impact of pulmonary barotrauma; 15 displacement of wildlife; habitat conversion/degradation; 16,17,18 and
noise to marine mammals with respect to offshore facilities. In offshore environments, benthic disturbance
and new structures may also impact existing habitats and attract new habitat-forming species, such as
shellfish, corals, and underwater vegetation. 19 The location of operational turbines may disrupt the daily
movements of bats and birds (e.g., from feeding to roosting or breeding grounds), and may potentially
represent a barrier to the migratory patterns of certain wildlife. 20,21 Adverse impacts can also result from
associated infrastructure, particularly overhead transmission lines, meteorological masts, substations,
underwater cables, roads, lighting, and boat-based maintenance traffic.

25. Site selection is critical to avoiding and minimizing potential adverse impacts on biodiversity. Site
selection should include the following:

        • Consideration of the proximity of the proposed wind energy facility to sites of high biodiversity
          value in the region (including those located across national boundaries). Early screening can
          improve macro-level project site selection and the scoping of priorities for further assessment,

13 D. Strickland et al., “Comprehensive Guide to Studying Wind Energy/Wildlife Interactions,” (Washington, D.C.:
National Wind Coordinating Collaborative, 2011).
14 G. C. Ledec et al., Greening the Wind: Environmental and Social Considerations for Wind Power Development,

(Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 2011).
15 Note that evidence suggests that adverse impacts on bats related to barotrauma may have been overestimated.

The following literature and others should be duly considered: E. F. Baerwald et al., “Barotrauma Is a Significant
Cause of Bat Fatalities at Wind Turbines,” Current Biology 18:R695-R696 (2008); D. Houck et al., “A Computational
and Analytical Study of Bats Flying near Wind Turbines: Implications Regarding Barotrauma,” Oral presentation given
at the National Wind Coordinating Committee, Wind-Wildlife Research Meeting IX, November 27–30, 2012, Denver,
CO, USA (2012); K. E. Rollins et al., “A Forensic Investigation into the Etiology of Bat Mortality at a Wind Farm:
Barotrauma or Traumatic Injury?” Veterinary Pathology 49:362-371 (2012).
16 Hötker et al., “Impacts on Biodiversity of Exploitation of Renewable Energy Sources: The Example of Birds and

Bats – Facts, Gaps in Knowledge, Demands for Further Research, and Ornithological Guidelines for the
Development of Renewable Energy Exploitation” (Bergenhusen: Michael-Otto-Institut im NABU, 2006).
17 J. M. Pearce-Higgins, “Distribution of Breeding Birds around Upland Wind Farms,” Journal of Applied Ecology

(2009).
18 Due to the limited footprint of wind energy facilities, habitat conversation/degradation is more likely a consideration

in high-value habitats, especially in forested habitats that are more likely to incur impacts related to habitat
fragmentation.
19 J. Köller et al. (Eds.), Offshore Wind Energy: Research on Environmental Impacts, (Berlin, 2006).

20 A. L. Drewitt and H. W. Langston, “Assessing the Impacts of Wind Farms on Birds,” Ibis 148, (2006): 29–42.

21 Masden et al., “Barriers to Movements: Impacts of Wind Farms on Migrating Birds,” ICES Journal of Marine

Science 66 (2009): 746–753.

                                                            6
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                WIND ENERGY
                                August 7, 2015




          thus reducing unnecessary biodiversity impacts and costs in the future. Sites of local, regional,
          and international importance may include: national and international protected areas (including
          marine protected areas), Important Bird Areas (IBA), Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs), Alliance for
          Zero Extinction (AZE) sites, Ramsar sites (Wetlands of International Importance), known
          congregatory sites, and unique or threatened ecosystems. These sites may be known to be
          important migration routes, wetlands, or staging, foraging, or breeding areas; they may house
          bat hibernation areas and roosts; or they may contain important topographical features, including
          ridges, river valleys, shorelines, and riparian areas. Useful site selection tools can include:
          (i) strategic environmental assessments that compare the biodiversity and other environmental
          sensitivity of different wind resource areas; (ii) sensitivity (overlay) maps; 22 (iii) digital resources
          that display areas of high biodiversity value; 23,24,25 and (iv) zoning maps.
      • With respect to offshore facilities, siting would include a review of areas of importance to the life
        history of marine life, notably fish, marine mammals, and sea turtles (e.g., feeding, breeding,
        calving, and spawning areas) or other habitats, such as juvenile/nursery habitats, mussel/oyster
        beds, reefs, or sea grass and kelp beds. Siting would also include a review of productive fishing
        areas.
      • Consultation with relevant national and/or international conservation organizations also helps to
        inform site selection for both onshore and offshore facilities.

Pre-construction assessments

26. Following a scoping and desktop study, appropriate site-specific baseline biodiversity information
may be needed to inform the Environmental & Social Impact Assessment (ESIA). Baseline biodiversity
surveys, where required, should occur as early as possible (e.g., when wind meteorological masts are
erected) and should consider seasonality. A tiered approach to biodiversity surveys could be useful in
terms of designing a survey effort commensurate with the stage of project development, also considering
the existing biodiversity value of the area. 26,27

27. Guidelines have been developed that detail the scope and extent of biodiversity surveys for
onshore 28,29,30,31 and offshore 32,33,34,35,36,37 wind energy facilities. Where robust in-country guidelines are

22 For example, the migratory soaring bird project available at http://migratorysoaringbirds.undp.birdlife.org/en.
23 Tools, such as the Integrated Biodiversity Assessment Tool (IBAT), can facilitate access to key international data
sets. See www.ibat-alliance.org.
24 See http://www.protectedplanet.net/

25 European Commission (EC) Guidance Document, “Wind Energy Developments and Natura 2000,” (2011).

26 A. R. Jenkins et al., Best Practice Guidelines for Avian Monitoring and Impact Mitigation at Proposed Wind Energy

Development Sites in Southern Africa (2011).
27 U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, “Land-based Wind Energy Guidelines” (2012).

28 Scottish Natural Heritage (SNH), Visual Assessment of Windfarms: Best Practice (2014).

29 U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 2012.
30 L. Rodrigues. et al., “Guidelines for Consideration of Bats in Wind Farm Projects,” EUROBATS Publication Series
No. 6 (Bonn: UNEP/EUROBATS, 2014).
31 L. Hundt, Bat Surveys: Good Practice Guidelines, (Bat Conservation Trust, 2012).

32 K. Camphuysen, Towards Standardized Seabirds at Sea Census Techniques in Connection with Environmental

Impact Assessments for Offshore Wind Farms in the U.K. (Collaborative for Offshore Wind Research into the
Environment (COWRIE), 2004).

                                                         7
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                WIND ENERGY
                                August 7, 2015




not yet developed, international guidelines should be used and should always consider the need for
surveys to be site-, species-, and season-specific. Generic risk assessments and mitigation plans are
unlikely to be useful or easily transferable between species and locations. Surveys should consider the
following:

      • Site-specific issues: consideration of habitats, geographical location, topography, and vicinity of
        the wind energy facility to sites of high biodiversity value.
      • Species-specific issues: surveys should be targeted to species of flora and fauna of high
        biodiversity value, those with a special international or national conservation status, endemic
        species, and species that are at elevated risk of impact from wind energy facilities. For example,
        species with a relatively high collision risk include certain soaring, aerial-displaying, and/or
        migratory birds and flocking birds, as well as birds of prey; and migratory, tree-roosting, and
        insectivorous bats. Species with a relatively high risk of visual disturbance include open-country
        species that instinctively avoid tall structures. 38 Some species may be attracted to wind energy
        facilities as perches or feeding areas, which could further increase potential for collision. Species
        at risk of collision with associated transmission lines include relatively heavy-bodied birds with
        limited maneuverability (e.g., vultures, bustards, waterfowl, cranes, storks, pelicans, herons,
        flamingoes), as well as flocking bird species. Species at risk of electrocution from associated
        transmission lines include various raptors, vultures, owls, and certain storks and other birds with
        large wingspans, and with behavioral tendencies to perch frequently on power lines and
        associated structures. Species with a relatively high risk of disturbance from underwater noise
        (at offshore wind facilities) include marine mammals (especially cetaceans) and certain pelagic
        schooling fish species (e.g., herrings). These impacts and potential mitigation options should be
        assessed on a species-by-species basis.
      • Season-specific issues: surveys should take into consideration certain periods during the year
        when the project site may have a greater or different ecological function or value (e.g., migration,
        breeding season, or winter seasons). Surveys should usually be conducted for at least one year
        when at-risk wildlife is identified. Longer surveys may sometimes be necessary in areas with
        exceptional aggregations of at-risk migratory birds and where existing biodiversity data are
        limited. This would be determined on a project-by-project basis.

28. Surveys should be designed and implemented to adequately guide the micro-siting of turbines (and
turbine selection) to minimize collision risks to birds and bats. This is normally expected to entail
gathering relatively precise information on the spatial patterns of site utilization by at-risk wildlife species,

33 R. J. Walls et al., “Revised Best Practice Guidance for the Use of Remote Techniques for Ornithological Monitoring
at Offshore Windfarms,” (COWRIE, 2009).
34 I. M. D. Maclean et al., “A Review of Assessment Methodologies for Offshore Windfarms,” (British Trust for

Ornithology Report, Commissioned by COWRIE, 2009).
35 C. B. Thaxter and N. H. K. Burton, “High Definition Imagery for Surveying Seabirds and Marine Mammals: A

Review of Recent Trials and Development of Protocols,” (British Trust for Ornithology Report, Commissioned by
COWRIE, 2009).
36 I. M. D. Maclean et al., “Use of Aerial Surveys to Detect Bird Displacement by Offshore Windfarms,” BTO Research

Report No. 446 to COWRIE (Thetford: BTO).
37 D. Jackson and P. Whitfield, “Guidance on Survey and Monitoring in Relation to Marine Renewables Deployments

in Scotland,” Birds Volume 4. (2011).
38 Strickland et al. 2011.



                                                         8
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                WIND ENERGY
                                August 7, 2015




as well as consideration of the locations of certain topographic, ecological, or other landscape features
that may attract or otherwise concentrate the activity of flying wildlife within the project area and its
surrounding landscape. 39 Specific data-gathering methods and study designs should be selected based
on site- and species-specific considerations, guided by technical experts, and may include vantage point
surveys, 40,41 point count surveys, ultrasound acoustic methods, remote-sensing data-gathering
techniques, and/or other techniques to understand movement patterns, as appropriate. The extent of data
collection should be commensurate with the biodiversity risk at the wind energy facility.

29. The use and effectiveness of radar and/or other remote-sensing technologies in pre-construction
studies should be evaluated on a project-by-project basis and may be appropriate to supplement
observer-based surveys, depending on the circumstances. 42 Remote-sensing technologies are
particularly useful at offshore wind facilities, as observer-based studies are more difficult and expensive in
the offshore environment.

30. Surveys for bats could include an assessment of feeding and/or roosting habitats both within the
project area and in its vicinity, activity surveys (transects) using hand-held ultrasound bat detectors,
trapping and release surveys, and deployment of static ultrasound detectors (particularly at turbine
locations). It is preferable for static detectors to be deployed at height and could be attached to
meteorological masts.

31. Depending on the location of the wind energy facility and on species-specific considerations,
Collision Risk Modeling (CRM) may be also appropriate, especially when wind energy facilities are
located close to areas of high biodiversity value. 43,44 The utility of CRM is to be evaluated on a project-by-
project basis with qualified experts. CRM is particularly useful at offshore wind farm facilities where
empirical tools are limited. 45

32. Where multiple wind farm facilities are located in the same geographical area and near areas of high
biodiversity value, wind project developers are encouraged to implement a coordinated approach to
surveys and monitoring. This approach is cost-effective, as surveys could be jointly planned and
implemented with costs shared between developers. A common survey methodology and approach also
lends itself to cumulative impact assessment, as data collection methods and the level of effort could be
standardized. Cumulative impact assessments should be undertaken in cases where multiple wind farms
are located near areas of high biodiversity value.




39  G. D. Johnson et al., Wildlife Monitoring Studies, Seawest Windpower Plant, Carbon County, Wyoming, 1995-
1999. Final report prepared for SeaWest Energy Corporation, San Diego, California, and the Bureau of Land
Management, Rawlins, Wyoming, (Cheyenne: Western EcoSystems Technology, Inc. (WEST), 2000).
40 SNH 2014.

41 Strickland et al. 2011.

42 Walls et al. 2009.

43 SNH, “Guidance: Wind Farms and Birds – Calculating Theoretical Collision Risk Assuming No Avoiding Action,”

(2000).
44. B. Band, “Using a Collision Risk Model to Assess Bird Collision Risks for Offshore Wind Farms,” (British Trust for

Ornithology, 2012).
45 SNH (2000).



                                                          9
                                   ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                   WIND ENERGY
                                   August 7, 2015




Mitigation Measures (Onshore)

33. Careful site selection and layout should reduce adverse impacts on biodiversity. Any significant
residual adverse impacts will need appropriate mitigation, 46 which could include the following:

         • Modify the number and size of turbines and their layout in accordance with site-, species-, and
           season-specific risks and impacts. Fewer taller towers may reduce the collision risk for most
           birds and reduce vegetation clearing for construction. The location of associated infrastructure—
           such as transmission lines, substations, and access roads—should also be accordingly informed
           by biodiversity risk and impact assessments.
         • If the wind energy facility is located close to areas of high biodiversity value, active turbine
           management such as curtailment and shut-down on-demand procedures should be considered
           as part of the mitigation strategy, and factored into financial modeling and sensitivities at an
           early stage. This method of mitigation should be adaptive and guided by a well-developed post-
           construction monitoring program. Curtailment and shut-down on-demand measures should be
           first conducted as an experiment, with control turbines that are not curtailed and with both sets
           carefully monitored, to determine whether or not the curtailment is producing the desired fatality
           reduction. Technology-led turbine shut-down should be considered in certain cases, although
           any such system should be subject to a period of observer-led ground truthing and evaluation
           through a process of adaptive management.
         • Avoid artificially creating features in the environment that could attract birds and bats to the wind
           energy facility, 47 such as water bodies, perching or nesting areas, novel feeding areas, and
           staging or roosting habitats. Capping or fixing any cavities in walls or buildings helps to remove
           potential bat roosting sites.
         • Avoid attracting birds to predictable food sources, such as on-site or off-site waste disposal
           areas, or landfills; this is especially relevant when vultures or other carrion-eating birds are
           present. These types of mitigation measures may also need to be carried out in the
           surroundings of the wind energy facility in order to be effective.
         • Consider adjustments of cut-in wind speeds to reduce potential bat collisions. The feasibility of
           this measure should be informed by species- and site-specific data. A slight increase in cut-in
           wind speed may have the potential to achieve significant reductions in bat fatalities, 48,49 with
           minimal reduction in generation or financial returns.
         • Eliminate “free-wheeling” (free spinning of rotors under low wind conditions when turbines are
           not generating power).
         • Avoid artificial light sources where possible. White, steady lights in particular attract prey (e.g.,
           insects), which in turn attracts predators. If lights are used, red or white blinking or pulsing



46   National Wind Coordinating Collaborative, Mitigation Toolbox, (2007).
47 It is understood that, in the case of bats, the turbines themselves are an attractant.
48 E. B. Arnett, “Altering Turbine Speed Reduces Bat Mortality at Wind-Energy Facilities,” Frontiers in Ecology and the
Environment 9(4): 209–214, (2011).
49 R. E. Good et al., “Bat Monitoring Studies at the Fowler Ridge Wind Farm, Benton County, Indiana,” Final Report:

April 1–October 31, 2011, Prepared for Fowler Ridge Wind Farm (Bloomington: Western EcoSystems Technology,
Inc., 2012).

                                                           10
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                WIND ENERGY
                                August 7, 2015




          lights 50,51 are best. Steady or slow blinking lights are to be avoided. Timers, motion sensors, or
          downward-hooded lights help to reduce light pollution.
      • Bury on-site transmission lines.
      • Install bird flight diverters on transmission lines and guy wires from meteorological masts to
        reduce bird collisions when located in or near areas of high biodiversity value and/or where birds
        of high biodiversity value are at risk of collision. 52,53
      • Use “raptor safe” designs for power line poles to reduce electrocution risk. 54
      • Assess the current state of the art of bird and bat deterrence technology, and consider
        implementing any proven effective technologies where appropriate.

Mitigation Measures (Offshore)

34. Biodiversity-related mitigation measures for offshore facilities, including noise-related mitigation, may
include the following:

      • If species of high biodiversity value are associated with the site, plan construction activities to
        avoid sensitive times of the year (e.g., migration and breeding seasons) and to coincide with
        less productive times of year for fish.
      • Employ a “soft start” procedure for pile-driving activities to help prevent exposure of marine life
        to damaging underwater noise and vibration levels and provide them with an opportunity to
        leave the area. The use of bubble curtains during pile driving is also recommended. 55
      • Employ auger piling or other means of fixing wind turbine generators to reduce conventional
        pile-driving disturbance.
      • Use a monopole turbine foundation in shallower water, which results in less seabed disturbance
        than other foundation types. 56 In deeper water, alternative foundations such as jacket type may
        be more appropriate.
      • Use acoustic deterrent devices that emit sounds to deter marine life from the area during
        construction activities.
      • If species of high biodiversity value, such as marine mammals or sea turtles, are anticipated in
        the area, appoint observers prior to the commencement of construction. Construction should
        take place at least 500 meters away.


50 J. L. Gehring, et al., “Communication Towers, Lights, and Birds: Successful Methods of Reducing the Frequency of
Avian Collisions,” Ecological Applications 19: 505–514 (2009).
51 P. Kerlinger et al., “Night Migrant Fatalities and Obstruction Lighting at Wind Turbines in North America,” The

Wilson Journal of Ornithology 122: 744–754 (2010).
52 Avian Power Line Interaction Committee (APLIC), Reducing Avian Collisions with Power Lines: The State of the Art

in 2012, (Washington, D.C.: Edison Electric Institute and APLIC, 2012).
53 APLIC 2012.
54 Idem.
55 J. Nedwell et al., “Assessment of Sub-Sea Acoustic Noise and Vibration from Offshore Wind Turbines and Its

Impact on Marine Wildlife; Initial Measurements of Underwater Noise during Construction of Offshore Wind Farm, and
Comparison with Background Noise,” COWRIE Report 544 R 0424, (Southampton, UK: Subacoustech Ltd., 2003).
56 Cape Wind Associates, LLC (CWA), “Cape Wind Energy Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement” (2004).



                                                        11
                                  ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                  WIND ENERGY
                                  August 7, 2015




        • Use hydraulic jet plowing technology or other less environmentally damaging technologies for
          the installation of cables.
        • Where electrically or magnetically sensitive species are present within the study area, mitigation
          measures include appropriate choice of cable types, separation, and burial depths for the
          cables.

1.1.4    Shadow Flicker

35. Shadow flicker occurs when the sun passes behind the wind turbine and casts a shadow. As the
rotor blades rotate, shadows pass over the same point causing an effect termed shadow flicker. Shadow
flicker may become a problem when potentially sensitive receptors (e.g., residential properties,
workplaces, learning and/or health care spaces/facilities) are located nearby, or have a specific
orientation to the wind energy facility.

36. Shadow flicker is not typically considered to be a significant issue for offshore wind energy facilities,
given the distances involved between wind turbines and potential receptors located onshore.

37. Potential shadow flicker issues are likely to be more important in higher latitudes, where the sun is
lower in the sky and therefore casts longer shadows that will extend the radius within which potentially
significant shadow flicker impact will be experienced.

38. Where there are nearby receptors, commercially available software can be used to model shadow
flicker in order to identify the distance to which potential shadow flicker effects may extend. The same
software can typically also be used to predict the duration and timing of shadow flicker occurrence under
real weather conditions at specific receptors located within the zone of potential shadow flicker impact.

39. If it is not possible to locate the wind energy facility/turbines such that neighboring receptors
experience no shadow flicker effects, it is recommended that the predicted duration of shadow flicker
effects experienced at a sensitive receptor not exceed 30 hours per year and 30 minutes per day on the
worst affected day, based on a worst-case scenario. 57,58,59,60


57 In order to assess compliance with the recommended limits, shadow flicker should be modeled and predicted

based on an astronomical worst-case scenario, which is defined as follows:
     • There is continual sunshine and permanently cloudless skies from sunrise to sunset.
     • There is sufficient wind for continually rotating turbine blades.
     • Rotor is perpendicular to the incident direction of the sunlight.
     • Sun angles less than 3 degrees above the horizon level are disregarded (due to likelihood for vegetation and
        building screening).
     • Distances between the rotor plane and the tower axis are negligible.
     • Light refraction in the atmosphere is not considered.
58 Federal States Committee for Pollution Control, Hinweise zur Ermittlung und Beurteilung der optischen

Immissionen von Windenergieanlagen [Information on Identifying and Assessing the Optical Emissions from Wind
Turbines], (2002).
59 French Decree of 26 August 2011 relating to electricity production facilities using mechanical wind energy (facility

subject to authorization) (Arrêté du 26 août 2011 relatif aux installations de production d’électricité utilisant l’énergie
mécanique du vent au sein d’une installation soumise à autorisation au titre de la rubrique 2980 de la législation des
installations classées pour la protection de l’environnement.)
60 Canadian Wind Energy Association (CanWEA), “An Introduction to Wind Energy Development in Canada,” (2011).



                                                            12
                               ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                               WIND ENERGY
                               August 7, 2015




40. Prevention and control measures to avoid significant shadow flicker impacts include the following:

        • Site wind turbines appropriately to avoid shadow flicker being experienced or to meet limits
          placed on the duration of shadow flicker occurrence, as set out in the paragraph above.
        • Wind turbines can be programmed to shut down at times when shadow flicker limits are
          exceeded.

41. Previously, blade or tower glint, which could occur when the sun reflects off a rotor blade or the
tower at a particular orientation, was considered to have a potential impact on communities. However,
provided that wind turbines are painted with a matt, non-reflective finish, as is typical with modern wind
turbines, blade or tower glint is no longer considered to be a significant issue.

1.1.5    Water Quality

Onshore

42. The installation of turbine foundations, underground cables, access roads, and other ancillary
infrastructure may result in increased erosion, soil compaction, increased run-off, and sedimentation of
surface waters. Measures to prevent and control these issues are discussed in the General EHS
Guidelines and in the Toll Roads EHS Guideline.

Offshore

43. The installation of the turbine foundations and subsurface cables may disturb the marine seabed and
may temporarily increase suspended sediments in the water column, thereby decreasing water quality
and potentially adversely affecting marine species and commercial or recreational fisheries. Furthermore,
the installation of the offshore structures may result in localized seabed erosion due to changes in water
movements. Additional guidance is provided in the Ports, Harbors, and Terminals EHS Guideline.

44. Other prevention and control measures to address the impacts on water quality include the following:

        • Conduct a site selection process that considers the potential for interference of the project’s
          structural components with commercial or recreational fisheries and marine species habitats.
        • Plan the construction, installation, and removal of structural components, taking into account
          sensitive lifecycle periods.
        • Control the use of jetting, bubble curtains, and sediment traps; undertake such activities in slack
          water (or on a tide that moves material away from the sensitive location).

1.2      Occupational Health and Safety

45. Occupational health and safety hazards during the construction, operation, and decommissioning of
onshore and offshore wind energy facilities are generally similar to those of most large industrial facilities
and infrastructure projects. They may include physical hazards, such as working at heights, working in
confined spaces, working with rotating machinery, and falling objects. Prevention and control of these and
other physical, chemical, biological, and radiological hazards are discussed in the General EHS
Guidelines.


                                                      13
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                WIND ENERGY
                                August 7, 2015




46. Occupational health and safety hazards specific to wind energy facilities and activities primarily
include the following: 61

        • Working at Height
        • Working over Water
        • Working in Remote Locations
        • Lifting Operations

1.2.1     Working at Height and Protection from Falling Objects

47. Working at height occurs frequently throughout all phases of operation at any wind energy facility,
and is especially relevant for maintenance purposes. The main focus when managing working at height
should be the prevention of a fall. However, additional hazards that may also need to be considered
include: falling objects and adverse weather conditions (wind speed, extreme temperatures, humidity, and
wetness). Managing working at height activities requires suitable planning and the allocation of sufficient
resources. Preferred mitigation methods may include, in this order:

        • Eliminate or reduce the requirement to work at height. During the planning and design phases of
          an installation, specific tasks should be assessed with the aim of removing the need to work at
          height, if practicable. Examples of this would include assembling structures and carrying out
          ancillary works at ground level, then lifting the complete structure into position to the extent that
          is feasible and cost effective.
        • If working at height cannot be eliminated, use work equipment or other methods to prevent a fall
          from occurring. Collective protection systems, such as edge protection or guardrails, should be
          implemented before resorting to individual fall arrest equipment. In addition, safety nets or
          airbags can be used to minimize the consequences of a fall should it occur.

48. In addition to the above hierarchy, the following points should be considered as methods of
preventing working-at-height and falling-object incidents:

        • Ensure all structures are designed and built to the appropriate standards, 62 and have the
          appropriate means of working-at-height systems fitted.
        • Suitable exclusion zones should be established and maintained underneath any working-at-
          height activities, where possible, to protect workers from falling objects.
        • Ensure all employees working at height are trained and competent in the use of all working-at-
          height and rescue systems in place.
        • Provide workers with a suitable work-positioning device; also ensure the connectors on
          positioning systems are compatible with the tower components to which they are attached.
        • Ensure that hoisting equipment is properly rated and maintained and that hoist operators are
          properly trained.

61 A comprehensive set of guidelines for safe working procedures during construction and operation and maintenance

of offshore wind turbines is available from British Wind Energy Association (BWEA), “BWEA Briefing Sheet: Offshore
Wind,” (2005c).
62 E.g., International Electrochemical Commission (IEC), “IEC 61400”.



                                                       14
                                   ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                   WIND ENERGY
                                   August 7, 2015




         • When working at height, all tools and equipment should be fitted with a lanyard, where possible,
           and capture netting should be used if practicable.
         • Signs and other obstructions should be removed from poles or structures prior to undertaking
           work.
         • An approved tool bag should be used for raising or lowering tools or materials to workers on
           elevated structures.
         • Avoid conducting tower installation or maintenance work during poor weather conditions and
           especially where there is a risk of lightning strikes.
         • An emergency rescue plan should be in place detailing the methods to be used to rescue
           operatives should they become stranded or incapacitated while at height.

1.2.2      Working over Water

49. Prevention and control measures associated with working over open water include the basic
principles described for working at height, as above, in addition to the following:

         • Complete a risk assessment in order to develop a safe system of work for all working-over-water
           tasks and allocate appropriate resources to mitigate the hazards.
         • Ensure all operatives are trained and competent in all tasks they are expected to undertake and
           in using all equipment, including Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) they are expected to
           operate.
         • In addition to standard PPE, as noted above, use approved buoyancy equipment 63 (e.g., life
           jackets, vests, floating lines, ring buoys) when workers are over, or adjacent to, water where
           there is a drowning hazard.
         • Where exposure to low water temperatures is likely to lead to the onset of hypothermia, control
           measures such as survival suits must be implemented.
         • When buoyancy equipment is being used with working-at-height fall-arrest equipment, these
           systems should be compatible.
         • Train workers to avoid salt spray and contact with waves.
         • Allow the provision of appropriate rescue vessels with qualified operators and emergency
           personnel, if required.

1.2.3      Working in Remote Locations

50. Planning is vital in ensuring the safety, health, and welfare of employees when operating in remote
locations, especially in offshore sites. Areas to consider when planning for remote working include:

         • Suitability of communication equipment available for the work crew.
         • The training and competence of personnel working remotely and the readiness of all necessary
           safety equipment in the location.



63   E.g., ISO 12402 Personal flotation devices.

                                                     15
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                WIND ENERGY
                                August 7, 2015




        • Supervision by competent personnel empowered to make decisions based on events and
          conditions at the work location.
        • Means for managers to track the exact location of the working crew.
        • Local emergency plan in place.
        • Provision of suitably qualified first-aid-trained personnel in the work crew.

51. Additional information on Lone and Isolated workers can be found in the General EHS Guidelines.

1.2.4     Lifting Operations

52. Lifting operations are an integral component of the construction of any wind energy facility. During
the construction phase, components are typically assembled and transported to the site where assembly
will take place. This involves using large, complex pieces of lifting equipment to lift loads of varying
dimensions and weights numerous times.

53. The lifting requirements during the construction of an onshore wind facility are similar to those of any
other construction project, however when lifting operations are required in an offshore environment the
lifts can become a very complex operation, involving multiple vessels and cranes. This can create a
number of additional hazards, including: sea states that can affect the stability of the lifting platforms, a
marine environment that can accelerate the degradation of lifting points on components, and
communication problems between multinational crews on separate vessels carrying out the lift.

54. The management of lifting operations requires the use of competent personnel, thorough planning,
effective communication, and a high level of supervision when carrying out a lift. Consideration should be
given to the following areas:

        • Ensure all relevant information is known about the load, e.g., the size, weight, method of
          slinging, and attachment points.
        • Ensure all lifting equipment (including load attachment points) is suitable, capable of supporting
          the load, in good condition, and in receipt of any statutory inspections required.
        • Ensure all supervisors, equipment operators, and slingers are trained and competent in the
          lifting equipment and intended lifting techniques.
        • Where possible, exclusion zones are to be established and maintained in order to prevent any
          unauthorized access to lifting areas.
        • When lifting large loads, ensure weather conditions are favorable for the task. Heavy lifting
          equipment typically has safe operating parameters included in its operating manual and these
          parameters should not be exceeded at any time. Additional information on severe weather can
          be found in the General EHS Guidelines.

55. A planning meeting between all parties involved in the lift should be carried out and should include:
the details of the lift, the roles of each party involved in the lift, and the methods used to communicate
instructions among the parties.




                                                       16
                               ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                               WIND ENERGY
                               August 7, 2015




1.3      Community Health and Safety

56. Community health and safety hazards during the construction, operation, and decommissioning of
onshore and offshore wind energy facilities are similar to those of most large industrial facilities and
infrastructure projects. These hazards may apply to the structural safety of project infrastructure, life and
fire safety, public accessibility, and emergency situations. Their management is discussed in the General
EHS Guidelines.

57. Community health and safety hazards specific to wind energy facilities primarily include the
following:

        • Blade and Ice Throw
        • Aviation
        • Marine Navigation and Safety
        • Electromagnetic Interference and Radiation
        • Public Access
        • Abnormal Load Transportation

1.3.1    Blade/Ice Throw

58. A failure of the rotor blade can result in the “throwing” of a rotor blade, or part thereof, which may
affect public safety. The overall risk of blade throw is extremely low. 64 If ice accretion occurs on blades,
which can happen in certain weather conditions in cold climates, then pieces of ice can be thrown from
the rotor during operation, or dropped from it if the turbine is idling.

59. Turbines must be sited at an acceptable distance ("setback") between wind turbines and adjacent
sensitive receptors to maintain public safety in the event of ice throw or blade failure.

60. Blade throw risk management strategies include: 65

        • Establish setback distances between turbines and populated locations. The minimum setback
          distance is 1.5 x turbine height (tower + rotor radius), although modeling suggests that the
          theoretical blade throw distance can vary with the size, shape, weight, and speed of the blades,
          and the height of the turbine. 66 It is therefore recommended that the minimum setback distances
          required to meet noise and shadow flicker limits be maintained with respect to sensitive
          residential receptors to provide further protection.
        • Minimize the probability of a blade failure by selecting wind turbines that have been subject to
          independent design verification/certification (e.g., IEC 61400-1), and surveillance of
          manufacturing quality.
        • Ensure that lightning protection systems are properly installed and maintained.

64 Health and Safety Executive (HSE), “Study and Development of a Methodology for the Estimation of the Risk and

Harm to Persons from Wind Turbines,” Research Report RR968, (2013).
65 CanWEA 2011.

66 Rogers et al. 2011.



                                                      17
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                WIND ENERGY
                                August 7, 2015




        • Carry out periodic blade inspections and repair any defects that could affect blade integrity.
        • Equip wind turbines with vibration sensors that can react to any imbalance in the rotor blades
          and shut down the turbine if necessary.

61. Ice throw risk-management strategies include:

        • Establish setback distance. 67
        • Curtail wind turbine operations in weather conditions that can lead to ice accretion.
        • Equip turbines with ice detectors that shut down the turbine to an idling state when ice is
          present.
        • Post warning signs at least one rotor diameter from the wind turbine in all directions, if turbines
          are required to operate in icing conditions, and are in a remote location where people are
          unlikely to be put at risk.
        • Equip turbines with ice detectors to control blade-heating systems, which are designed to
          release ice from the blade surface, thereby maintaining the efficiency of the turbine; the blade
          surface finish may also affect the efficiency of heating systems.
        • Post warning signs at entrance points to the wind energy facility.
        • Ensure that working procedures include precautions such as shutting down wind turbines before
          maintenance personnel access the site in icing conditions.

62. In addition to the health and safety implications of operation in cold climates, it is important that
turbines be of suitable specification to achieve reliable and long-lasting operation.

1.3.2     Aviation

Aircraft Safety

63. Wind turbine blade tips, at their highest point, can reach up to 200 meters and in the future may
exceed this height as the technology evolves. If located near airports, military low-flying areas, or known
flight paths, a wind energy facility (including anemometer mast) may impact aircraft safety directly through
potential collision or alteration of flight paths.

64. Prevention and control measures to address these impacts include the following:

        • Consult with the relevant aviation authorities before installation, in accordance with air traffic
          safety regulations.
        • When feasible, avoid siting wind energy facilities close to airports and within known low-flying
          areas or flight paths. Cumulative impacts associated with the number of existing wind energy
          facilities within, or in close proximity to, low-flying areas or flight paths should be a consideration
          in siting turbines.




67 International Energy Agency, “Wind Expert Group Study on Recommended Practices: 13,” Wind Energy Projects in

Cold Climates, 1st Edition, (2011).

                                                        18
                               ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                               WIND ENERGY
                               August 7, 2015




        • Use anti-collision lighting and marking systems on towers and/or blades and consult with the
          relevant aviation authorities to determine appropriate lighting and marking requirements in line
          with national standards. In the absence of national standards, refer to good practice guidance. 68

Aviation Radar

65. Wind energy facilities located near radar may impact the operation of aviation radar by causing
signal distortion, which may cause loss of signal, masking real targets and/or erroneous signals on the
radar screen, creating flight safety issues. 69 These effects are caused by the physical structures of the
tower/turbine and the rotating blades. 70 Proximity to existing energy facilities should also be considered in
relation to cumulative impacts on radar.

66. Prevention and control measures to address these impacts include the following:

        • Consider wind energy facility design options, including geometric layout, location of turbines, and
          changes to air traffic routes.
        • Consider radar design alterations, including relocation of the affected radar, radar blanking of the
          affected area, or use of alternative radar systems to cover the affected area. 71
        • Consultation should be undertaken with the relevant aviation authorities to determine prevention
          and control measures.

1.3.3     Marine Navigation and Safety

Marine Safety

67. As with aviation safety, if located near ports, harbors, or known shipping lanes, an offshore wind
turbine may impact shipping safety through collision or alteration of vessel traffic. Additional vessel traffic
during construction can increase these risks. This may result in damage to turbines and/or vessels, as
well as pollution risk associated with collisions.

68. Offshore turbines, cable routes, and other associated infrastructure require careful consideration in
terms of siting to take into account factors such as anchorage areas, seabed conditions, archaeology
sites, existing cable or pipeline routes, and fishing grounds, and to minimize impacts where possible.

69. Offshore wind turbine generators can interfere with radar operation used for shipping navigation,
preventing vessels from being detected, with the potential to impact normal and shipping operations.

70. Prevention and control measures to address these impacts include the following:



68  International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 2012; CAA 2013; American Wind Energy Association (AWEA)
2008; CanWEA 2011.
69 Radio Advisory Board of Canada (RABC) & CanWEA (undated), “Technical Information and Coordination Process

between Wind Turbines and Radio Communication and Radar Systems.”
70 Idem.

71 Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), “Policy and Guidelines on Wind Turbines” (CAP 764, 2013).



                                                      19
                                 ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                 WIND ENERGY
                                 August 7, 2015




        • Consult with marine regulatory traffic authorities before installation, in accordance with marine
          traffic safety regulations.
        • When feasible, avoid siting wind energy facilities close to ports and within known shipping lanes.
        • Use anti-collision lighting and marking systems on turbines and all other hazards. Use of guard
          vessels should also be considered. Lighting and marking should be determined with relevant
          marine authorities.
        • Safety zones can be established around each turbine and construction vessel during the
          construction phase in order to minimize disruption to other sea users.
        • Use reference buoys to aid navigation.

1.3.4     Electromagnetic Interference

71. Wind turbines could potentially cause electromagnetic interference with telecommunication systems
(e.g., microwave, television, and radio). This interference could be caused by path obstruction,
shadowing, reflection, scattering, or re-radiation. 72 The nature of the potential impacts depends primarily
on the location of the wind turbine relative to the transmitter and receiver, characteristics of the rotor
blades, signal frequency receiver characteristics, and radio wave propagation characteristics in the local
atmosphere. 73

Telecommunication Systems

72. Impacts on telecommunications systems can include those on broadcast-type systems and those on
point-to-point systems. Prevention and control measures to address impacts to telecommunications
systems include the following:

        • Modify placement of wind turbines to avoid direct physical interference of point-to-point
          communication systems; consultation with relevant operators can assist in establishing the
          location of telecommunication links and relevant buffers to be applied in order to minimize
          impacts.
        • Install a directional antenna.
        • Modify the existing aerial.
        • Install an amplifier to boost the signal. 74

Television

73. Prevention and control measures to address impacts to television broadcast include the following:

        • Site the turbine away from the line-of-sight of the broadcaster transmitter.
        • If interference is detected during operation, install higher-quality or directional antenna.


72 RABC & CanWEA (undated).
73 D. Sengupta and T. Senior, “Large Wind Turbine Siting Handbook: Television Interference Assessment, Final
Subcontract Report,” (1983).
74 URS Australia Pty. Ltd, “Woodlawn Wind Farm Environmental Impact Statement,” (2004).



                                                         20
                                   ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                   WIND ENERGY
                                   August 7, 2015




         • Direct the antenna toward an alternative broadcast transmitter
         • Install digital television.
         • Install an amplifier.
         • Relocate the antenna.

1.3.5      Public Access

74. Safety issues may arise with public access to wind turbines (e.g., unauthorized climbing of the
turbine) or to the wind energy facility substation. Any public rights of way located within and close to the
wind energy facility site should be identified prior to construction in an effort to establish any measures
that may be required to ensure the safety of their users. 75

75. Prevention and control measures to manage public access issues include:

         • Use gates on access roads.
         • Where public access is not promoted to the site and/or there are no current rights of way across
           the site, consider fencing the wind energy facility site, or individual turbines, to prohibit public
           access to the turbines.
         • Provide fencing of an appropriate standard around the substation with anti-climb paint and
           warning signs.
         • Prevent access to turbine tower ladders.
         • Post information boards about public safety hazards and emergency contact information.

1.3.6      Abnormal Load Transportation

76. Traffic and transportation issues to consider in siting wind energy facilities are largely covered within
the General EHS Guidelines and the Toll Roads EHS Guideline. The main challenge with respect to
wind energy facilities lies with the transportation of oversized or heavy wind turbine components (blades,
turbine tower sections, nacelle, and transformers) and cranes to the site. The logistics, traffic, and
transportation study should assess impacts on existing offsite roadways, bridges, crossings over culverts,
overpasses/underpasses, turning radii, and utilities, as well as whether surface replacements, upgrades,
or resettlements will be required. To reduce delays to other road users and the potential for other effects
on local communities in the vicinity of the proposed route, schedule deliveries outside of peak hours, use
only approved access routes, provide traffic management to stop other traffic where needed (for example,
at pinch-point locations), and provide police escorts where required.




75   European Union, “European Best Practise Guidelines for Wind Energy Development,” (2002).

                                                         21
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              WIND ENERGY
                              August 7, 2015




2. PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MONITORING
2.1     Environment

2.1.1   Emissions and Effluent Guidelines

77. Wind energy facilities do not normally generate process emissions and effluents during their
operation. Guideline values for process emissions and effluents in this sector are indicative of good
international industry practice, as reflected in relevant standards of countries with recognized regulatory
frameworks. Air emissions, wastewater discharges, and solid wastes related to construction and
decommissioning activities are discussed in the General EHS Guidelines.

2.1.2   Noise Monitoring

78. Noise impacts should not exceed the levels presented in the General EHS Guidelines.

79. Noise generated from wind energy facilities tends to increase with the speed of the wind, as does
overall background noise due to the friction of air over existing landscape features. Increased wind
speeds may also mask the noise emitted by the wind energy facility itself, and wind speed and direction
may affect the direction and extent of noise propagation. The application of noise guideline values and
the assessment of background levels should therefore take these factors into consideration. It is
considered good practice to undertake noise compliance testing when the project becomes operational to
verify the modeled noise levels at nearby properties and confirm the appropriateness of any mitigation
applied. 76

80. Additional consideration may be required to address the nuisance factor associated with impulsive or
tonal (sound of a specific frequency) characteristics of noise emitted from some wind energy facilities’
configurations. 77

2.1.3   Environmental Monitoring

81. Environmental monitoring programs for this sector should be implemented to address all activities
that have been identified to have potentially significant impacts on the environment, during both normal
operations and upset conditions. Environmental monitoring activities should be based on direct or indirect
indicators of emissions, effluents, and resource use applicable to the particular project.

82. Monitoring should be conducted by qualified individuals following monitoring and record-keeping
procedures and using properly calibrated and maintained equipment. Additional guidance on applicable
sampling and analytical methods for emissions and effluents is provided in the General EHS Guidelines.




76 For measurement procedures, see International Electrochemical Commission (IEC), “IEC 61400-11 Wind Turbines
– Part 11: Acoustic Noise Measurement Techniques,” (2012).
77 Some jurisdictions apply a “penalty” of 5 dB(A) that is added to the predicted levels.



                                                     22
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                WIND ENERGY
                                August 7, 2015




2.1.4   Operation Phase Biodiversity Monitoring

83. Operation phase biodiversity monitoring (post-construction monitoring) is essential for (i) confirming
the predicted bird or bat mortality and recording unexpected mortality; (ii) enabling adaptive management
of the wind energy facility; (iii) better predicting the impacts of additional turbines in the same
geographical area; and (iv) advancing scientific knowledge for future wind energy developments. The
extent and design of operation phase biodiversity monitoring programs should be informed by site-
specific, species-specific, and season-specific risks, as identified during baseline surveys, impact
assessments, and/or collision risk assessments.

84. Monitoring programs should be designed to measure the rate and the taxonomic composition of bird
and bat fatalities that are occurring at the facility and the effectiveness of mitigation measures, most
notably curtailment strategies and on-demand shut-down procedures, and other experimental mitigation
measures. Following an adaptive management paradigm, the implementation of mitigation measures may
be augmented, diminished, or eliminated, depending on their demonstrated effectiveness. Monitoring
programs should be focused on species of heightened concern as defined by the pre-construction
assessment. 78

85. Assessment of collision-related impacts to bats and birds at land-based wind energy facilities is
normally expected to include post-construction carcass searches. Depending on the type and extent of
biodiversity risk at the wind energy facility, such searches should be conducted for a minimum of one to
three years subsequent to the initiation of wind farm operation, and may be extended to longer durations
in high-risk environments, if necessary.

86. Post-construction carcass searches and evaluation should incorporate current scientific design
elements 79,80,81 to ensure that the resulting estimates of bird and bat fatality rates at the facility are
accurate and robust, such as the following: 1) correction for searcher efficiency (carcass detection) bias;
2) correction for carcass removal by scavengers; 3) correction for unsearched areas; 4) selection of
appropriate carcass search frequency based on expected fatality and carcass scavenging rates; 82 5)
selection of subsample of turbines to be searched, as appropriate, depending on size of project and
expected fatality rates; 6) selection of search area size and configuration at searched turbines depending
on substrate searchability and analytical considerations.

87. In certain circumstances, post-construction monitoring may also include further surveys of the use
and movement patterns of birds and bats through the project area to supplement data gathered by
carcass searches.




78 See second bullet of paragraph 27.
79 See Ledec (2011), Appendix D.
80 F. Korner-Nievergelt et al., “Estimating Bat and Bird Mortality Occurring at Wind Energy Turbines from Covariates

and Carcass Searches Using Mixture Models,” PLoS One 8(7): e67997.doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0067997, (2013).
81 M. M. P. Huso, and D. Dalthorp, “Accounting for Unsearched Areas in Estimating Wind Turbine-caused Fatality,”

Journal of Wildlife Management 78:347-358 (2014).
82Á. Camiña, “Bat Fatalities at Wind Farms in Northern Spain — Lessons to Be Learned,” Museum and Institute of
Zoology, Acta chiropterologica 4(1): 205–212 (2012).

                                                        23
                                 ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                 WIND ENERGY
                                 August 7, 2015




88. Where multiple wind farm facilities are located in the same geographical area and close to areas of
high biodiversity value, wind project developers are encouraged to implement common post-construction
monitoring procedures so that results can be assessed cumulatively. A common data-sharing and
reporting mechanism would facilitate this process.

89. Wind farm developers are also encouraged to make post-construction monitoring results available to
relevant stakeholders.

90. Offshore wind energy facilities should be monitored both temporally and spatially for parameters,
including benthic organisms, mammals, and fish. Parameters may include infauna (sediment and infaunal
communities); hard substrate habitat; fish; sand eel (indicator species of changes to sediment
characteristics); birds and bats; and marine mammals.

2.2      Occupational Health and Safety

2.2.1    Occupational Health and Safety Guidelines
91. Occupational health and safety performance should be evaluated against internationally published
incident statistics, if they are available. Typical methods to assess an organization’s performance include:

        • Recording all incidents that occur over the course of project implementation.
        • Recording near-miss (also known as near-hit) data during a project in order to identify trends
          and implement improvements.
        • Carrying out workplace and worker auditing to assess the effectiveness of risk management
          systems and workplace safety culture.
        • Conducting worker consultation and feedback via questionnaires or periodic safety meetings.
        • Comparing organizational data with released industry-specific data, if available.

2.2.2    Accident and Fatality Rates
92. Project management should aim to reduce the number of accidents among project workers (whether
directly employed or subcontracted) to zero, especially accidents that could result in lost work time,
different levels of disability, or even fatalities. Accident rates may be benchmarked against the
performance of similar facilities in this sector in developed countries through consultation with published
sources.

2.2.3    Occupational Health and Safety Monitoring
93. The working environment should be continually monitored for occupational hazards relevant to the
specific project. Monitoring should be designed and implemented by accredited professionals 83 as part of
an occupational health and safety-monitoring program. Facilities should also maintain a record of
occupational accidents and diseases, as well as dangerous occurrences and accidents. Additional
guidance on occupational health and safety monitoring programs is provided in the General EHS
Guidelines.

83Accredited professionals may include certified industrial hygienists, registered occupational hygienists, or certified
safety professionals or their equivalent.

                                                          24
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              WIND ENERGY
                              August 7, 2015




3. REFERENCES
American Wind Energy Association (AWEA). 2008. Wind Farm Siting Handbook.

———. 2010, Airspace, Radar, and Wind Energy.

Arnett, E. B. 2011. “Altering Turbine Speed Reduces Bat Mortality at Wind-Energy Facilities.” Frontiers in
   Ecology and the Environment 9(4): 209–214.

Arrêté du 26 août 2011 relatif aux installations de production d’électricité utilisant l’énergie mécanique du
    vent au sein d’une installation soumise à autorisation au titre de la rubrique 2980 de la législation des
    installations classées pour la protection de l’environnement.

Australian Government National Health and Medical Research Council. 2010. Wind Turbines and Health.
   www.nhmrc.gov.au/guidelines-publications/eh57

AusWEA (Australian Wind Energy Association). 2002. Best Practice Guidelines for Implementation of
   Wind Energy Projects in Australia.

———. 2004a. Wind Farm Safety in Australia. Fact Sheet.

———. 2004b.The Electromagnetic Compatibility and Electromagnetic Field Implications for Wind Farms
  in Australia. Fact Sheet.Avian Power Line Interaction Committee (APLIC). 2012. “Reducing Avian
  Collisions with Power Lines: The State of the Art in 2012”. Edison Electric Institute and APLIC.
  Washington, D.C.

Baerwald, E. F., G. H. D’Amours, B. J. Klug, R. M. R. Barclay. 2008. “Barotrauma Is a Significant Cause
   of Bat Fatalities at Wind Turbines.” Current Biology 18:R695–R696.

Band, B. 2012. Using a Collision Risk Model to Assess Bird Collision Risks for Offshore Wind Farms.
   British Trust for Ornithology.

Bombace, G. 1997. “Protection of Biological Habitats by Artificial Reefs.” In Jensen, A.C. (Ed.) European
   Artificial Reef Research Proceedings. First EARRN Conference, Ancona, Italy. March 1996.

Bowdler, D. and G. Leventhall, (Eds.). 2011. Wind Turbine Noise. Brentwood, Essex: Multi-Science
   Publishing.

Brett Lane and Associates. 2005. Interim Standards for Assessing Risks to Birds from Wind Farms in
    Australia. Australian Wind Energy Association.

British Wind Energy Association (BWEA). 1994. Best Practice Guidelines for Wind Energy Development.

———. 2005a. Guidelines for Health and Safety in the Wind Energy Industry.

———. 2005b. BWEA Briefing Sheet: “Wind Turbine Technology.”

———. 2005c. BWEA Briefing Sheet: “Offshore Wind.”

———. 2005d. BWEA Briefing Sheet: “Wind Power and Intermittency: The Facts.”


                                                     25
                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                             WIND ENERGY
                             August 7, 2015




Camina, A. 2012. “Bat Fatalities at Wind Farms in Northern Spain — Lessons to Be Learned.” Museum
   and Institute of Zoology. Acta Chiropterologica 14(1): 205–212.

Camphuysen, K. 2004. Towards Standardized Seabirds at Sea Census Techniques in Connection with
   Environmental Impact Assessments for Offshore Wind Farms in the U.K. Collaborative for Offshore
   Wind Research Into the Environment (COWRIE).

Canadian Wind Energy Association (CanWEA). 2011. “An Introduction to Wind Energy Development in
   Canada.” www.canwea.ca/pdf/canwea-sitingreport-e.pdf

Cape Wind Associates, LLC (CWA). 2004. “Cape Wind Energy Project Draft Environmental Impact
   Statement.”

Civil Aviation Authority (CAA). 2013. “Policy and Guidelines on Wind Turbines” (CAP 764).

———. 2012. “Lighting and Marking of Wind Farms and Meteorological Masts.”

Code de la Santé Publique Livre III : Protection de la santé et environnement, Titre III : Prévention des
   risques sanitaires liés à l'environnement et au travail, Chapitre IV : Lutte contre la présence de plomb
   ou d'amiante et contre les nuisances sonores, Article R1334-30 et suivants: Crée par Décret n° 2006-
   1099 du 31 août 2006 relatif à la lutte contre les bruits de voisinage et modifiant le code de la santé
   publique 2006. Journal Officiel of 01 September 2006.

Contra Costa County (California). 1996. Municipal Code (Wind Energy Conversion Systems), Article 88-3
   Section 612.

Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans (NBSAP)
   Search http://www.cbd.int/nbsap/search/default.shtml.

Drewitt, A. L. and H. W. Langston. 2006. “Assessing the Impacts of Wind Farms on Birds.” Ibis 148 29–
   42.

Duff, K. and M. Steward. 2008. “Turbine Carcass Search Methods and Carcass Removal Trials at the
    Braes of Doune Wind Farm.” Natural Research Technical Information Note 4.

Elsam Engineering A/S. 2005. “Elsam Offshore Wind Turbines—Horns Rev Annual Status Report for the
    Environmental Monitoring Program,” January 1–December 2004.

Environment Canada. 2005. “Wind Turbines and Birds—A Guidance Document for Environmental
   Assessment,” Final Draft. Canadian Wildlife Service.

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2010. “Guidance Note on Noise Assessment of Wind Turbine
   Operations at EPA Licensed Sites” (NG3).

Erickson, W. P. 2009. “Avian and Bat Monitoring Plan for Martinsdale Wind Farm.” Western Ecosystems
    Technology Inc.

ETSU for the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI). United Kingdom. 1997. Report ETSU-R-97, “The
   Assessment and Rating of Noise from Wind Farms.”



                                                    26
                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                             WIND ENERGY
                             August 7, 2015




EUROCONTROL. 2010. “EUROCONTROL Guidelines on How to Assess the Potential Impact of Wind
   Turbines on Surveillance Sensors.”

European Commission (EC) Guidance Document. 2011. “Wind Energy Developments and Natura 2000.”
   European Commission.

European Union (EU). 2002. “European Best Practise Guidelines for Wind Energy Development.”

European Wind Energy Association (EWEA). 2002. “European Best Practice Guidelines for Wind Energy
   Development.”

———. 2009. “Oceans of Opportunity: Harnessing Europe's Largest Domestic Energy Resource.”

Federal States Committee for Pollution Control (Germany). 2002. Hinweise zur Ermittlung und
   Beurteilung der optischen Immissionen von Windenergieanlagen [Information on Identifying and
   Assessing the Optical Emissions from Wind Turbines]. www.gewerbeaufsicht.niedersachsen.de/

Gardner, P., J. Phillips, O. Fitch-Roy, and P. Reynolds. 2013. A Guide to UK Offshore Wind.

Gehring, J. L., P. Kerlinger, and A. M. Manville II. 2009. “Communication Towers, Lights, and Birds:
   Successful Methods of Reducing the Frequency of Avian Collisions.” Ecological Applications 19: 505–
   514.

General Electric Energy. 2006. “Ice Shedding and Ice Throw – Risk and Mitigation.”

Gipe, P. B. 1995. Wind Energy Comes of Age. New York: John Wiley and Sons.

Good, R. E., A. Merrill, S. Simon, K. L. Murray, and K. Bay. 2012. “Bat Monitoring Studies at the Fowler
   Ridge Wind Farm, Benton County, Indiana.” Final Report: April 1 – October 31, 2011. Prepared for
   Fowler Ridge Wind Farm, Fowler, Indiana. Prepared by Western EcoSystems Technology, Inc.
   Bloomington, Indiana.

Health and Safety Executive (HSE). 2013. “Study and Development of a Methodology for the Estimation
   of the Risk and Harm to Persons from Wind Turbines.” Research Report RR968.

Hötker, H., K. M. Thomsen, and H. Jeromin. 2006. “Impacts on Biodiversity of Exploitation of Renewable
   Energy Sources: The Example of Birds and Bats – Facts, Gaps in Knowledge, Demands for Further
   Research, and Ornithological Guidelines for the Development of Renewable Energy Exploitation.”
   Michael-Otto-Institut im NABU, Bergenhusen.

Houck, D. R., M. J. Lawson, R. W. Thresher. 2012. “A Computational and Analytical Study of Bats Flying
   near Wind Turbines: Implications Regarding Barotrauma.” Oral presentation given at the National
   Wind Coordinating Committee, Wind-Wildlife Research Meeting IX, November 27–30, 2012, Denver,
   CO, USA.

Howe, B., B. Gastmeier, and N. McCabe. 2007. “Wind Turbines and Sound: Review and Best Practise
   Guidelines.” HGC Engineering: Mississauga, Ontario.

Hundt, L. 2012. Bat Surveys: Good Practice Guidelines, 2nd edition, Bat Conservation Trust.



                                                   27
                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                             WIND ENERGY
                             August 7, 2015




Huso, M. M. P. and D. Dalthorp. 2014. Accounting for Unsearched Areas in Estimating Wind Turbine-
   caused Fatality. Journal of Wildlife Management 78:347-358.

International Association of Marine Aids to Navigation and Lighthouse Authorities (IALA). 2004. IALA
    Recommendation O-117 on the Marking of Offshore Windfarms, Edition 2.

International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). Annex 14, Volume 1.

International Electrochemical Commission (IEC). 2012. IEC 61400-11 “Wind Turbines – Part 11: Acoustic
    Noise Measurement Techniques.”

International Energy Agency. 2011. “Wind Expert Group Study on Recommended Practices: 13” (Wind
    Energy Projects in Cold Climates, 1st Edition).
    https://ieawind.org/index_page_postings/June%207%20posts/task%2019%20cold_climate_%20rp_a
    pproved05.12.pdf.

International Finance Corporation (IFC). 2012. “Performance Standard 6.”

———. 2012. “Performance Standard 8, Cultural Heritage.”

———. 2013. “Good Practice Handbook on Cumulative Impact Assessment and Management: Guidance
  for the Private Sector in Emerging Markets.”

Institute of Acoustics (IOA). 2013. “A Good Practice Guide to the Application of ETSU-R-97 for the
     Assessment and Rating of Wind Turbine Noise.”

Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (IEMA) and Landscape Institute (LI). 2013.
     “Guidelines for Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment,” 3rd Edition.

Irish Wind Energy Association. 2012. “Wind Energy Development Best Practice Guidelines.”

Jackson, D. and P. Whitfield. 2011. “Guidance on Survey and Monitoring in Relation to Marine
   Renewables Deployments in Scotland.” Birds, Volume 4. http://www.snh.gov.uk/docs/A585081.pdf

Jenkins, A. R., C. S. van Rooyen, J. J. Smallie, J. A. Harrison, M. Diamond, and H. A. Smit. 2013. “Best
   Practice Guidelines for Avian Monitoring and Impact Mitigation at Proposed Wind Energy
   Development Sites in Southern Africa.”

Johnson, G. D., D. P. Young, W. P. Erickson, C. E. Derby, M. D. Strickland, R. E. Good, and J. W. Kern.
   2000. “Wildlife Monitoring Studies.” Seawest Windpower Plant, Carbon County, Wyoming, 1995-
   1999. Final report prepared for SeaWest Energy Corporation, San Diego, California, and the Bureau
   of Land Management, Rawlins, Wyoming, by Western EcoSystems Technology, Inc. (WEST).
   Cheyenne, Wyoming.”

Joint Nature Conservation Committee (JNCC). 2010. “The Protection of Marine European Protected
    Species from Injury and Disturbance.” Oct 2010.

Kerlinger, P., J. L. Gehring, W. P. Erickson, R. Curry, A. Jain, J. Guarnaccia. 2010. “Night Migrant
    Fatalities and Obstruction Lighting at Wind Turbines in North America.” The Wilson Journal of
    Ornithology 122: 744–754.


                                                   28
                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                             WIND ENERGY
                             August 7, 2015




Köller, J., J. Köppel, W. Peters, (Eds.). 2006. Offshore Wind Energy: Research on Environmental
    Impacts. Berlin.

Korner-Nievergelt, F., R. Brinkman, I. Niermenn, and O. Behr. 2013. Estimating Bat and Bird Mortality
   Occurring at Wind Energy Turbines from Covariates and Carcass Searches Using Mixture Models.
   PLoS One 8(7): e67997.doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0067997.

Landscape Institute. 2011. “Advice Note: Photography and Photomontage in Landscape and Visual
   Assessment.”

Laakso, T., I. Baring-Gould, M. Durstewitz, R. Horbaty, A. Lacroix, E. Peltola, G. Ronsten, L. Tallhaug,
   and T. Wallenius. 2003. State-of-the-Art of Wind Energy in Cold Climates. VTT Technical Research
   Centre of Finland, Vuorimiehentie.

Ledec, G. C., K. W. Rapp, and R. G. Aiello. 2011. Greening the Wind: Environmental and Social
   Considerations          for       Wind        Power      Development.    World      Bank.
   http://elibrary.worldbank.org/content/book/9780821389263

Lowther, S. 2000. “The European Perspective: Some Lessons from Case Studies.” Proc. National Avian-
   Wind Power Planning Meeting III, San Diego, CA, May 1998. National Wind Coordinating Committee,
   Washington, D.C.

Maclean, I. M. D, L. J. Wright, D. A. Showler, and M. M. Rehfisch. 2009. “A Review of Assessment
   Methodologies for Offshore Windfarms.” British Trust for Ornithology Report Commissioned by
   Collaborative    for   Offshore    Wind     Research   Into   the    Environment    (COWRIE).
   http://www.thecrownestate.co.uk/media/5884/ei-km-ex-pc-method-052009-a-review-of-assessment-
   methodologies-for-offshore-windfarms.pdf

Maclean, I. M. D., H. Skov, M. M. Rehfisch, and W. Piper. 2006. “Use of Aerial Surveys to Detect Bird
   Displacement by Offshore Windfarms.” BTO Research Report No. 446 to COWRIE. BTO, Thetford.

Maritime and Coastguard Agency. 2008. “Offshore Renewable Energy Installations (OREIs) - Guidance
   on U.K. Navigational Practice, Safety, and Emergency Response Issues.”

———. 2012. “Offshore Renewable Energy Installations: Impacts on Shipping.”

Masden, E. A., D. T. Haydon, A. D. Fox, R. W. Furness, R. Bullman, and M. Desholm. “Barriers to
   Movements: Impacts of Wind Farms on Migrating Birds.” ICES Journal of Marine Science 66 (2009),
   746–753.

Masden E. A., D. T. Haydon, A. D. Fox, R. W. Furness. 2010. “Barriers to Movement: Modelling Energetic
   Costs of Avoiding Marine Wind Farms amongst Breeding Seabirds.” Marine Pollution Bull. 60: 1085–
   1091.

McLaughlin, D. 2012. “Wind Shear and Its Effect on Wind Turbine Noise Assessment.” Acoustics Bulletin,
   July/August 2012, 39–42.

Minnesota Department of Commerce: Energy Facility Permitting. 2011. “International Review of Policies
   and Recommendations for Wind Turbine Setbacks from Residences: Setbacks, Noise, Shadow
   Flicker, and Other Concerns.”


                                                  29
                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                             WIND ENERGY
                             August 7, 2015




National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners (NARUC). 2011. “Best Practices Guidelines for
    Assessing Sound Emissions from Proposed Wind Farms and Measuring the Performance of
    Completed Projects.”

National Wind Coordinating Collaborative (NWCC). 1999. “Methods for Studying Energy/Bird Interactions.
    A Guidance Document.”

———. Siting Committee. 2002. “Permitting of Wind Energy Facilities. A Handbook.”

———. 2007. Mitigation Toolbox.

Natural Resources Canada. 2003. “Environmental Impact Statement Guidelines for Screenings of Inland
   Wind Farms under the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act.”

Nedwell, J., J. Langworthy, and D. Howell. 2003. “Assessment of Sub-Sea Acoustic Noise and Vibration
   from Offshore Wind Turbines and Its Impact on Marine Wildlife; Initial Measurements of Underwater
   Noise during Construction of Offshore Wind Farm, and Comparison with Background Noise.”
   COWRIE Report 544 R 0424 (May 2003). Subacoustech Ltd.: Southampton, UK.

Ontario, Ministry of the Environment. 2004. “Interpretation for Applying MOE Technical Publication to
   Wind Turbine Generators.”

OSPAR Commission. 2008. “Guidance on Environmental Considerations for Offshore Wind Farm
   Development.”

Pearce-Higgins, J. M. 2009. “Distribution of Breeding Birds around Upland Wind Farms.” Journal of
   Applied Ecology.

Radio Advisory Board of Canada (RABC) & Canadian Wind Energy Association (CanWEA). “Technical
   Information and Coordination Process between Wind Turbines and Radio Communication and Radar
   Systems.”

Renewable U.K. 2013. “Guidance on Low-Flying Aircraft and Onshore Tall Structures Including
   Anemometer Masts and Wind Turbines.”

Rodrigues, L., L. Bach, M. J. Dubourg-Savage, J. Goodwin, and C. Harbusch. 2014. “Guidelines for
   Consideration of Bats in Wind Farm Projects.” EUROBATS Publication Series No. 6 (English
   version).           UNEP/EUROBATS                  Secretariat,             Bonn,           Germany.
   http://www.eurobats.org/sites/default/files/documents/publications/publication_series/pubseries_no6_
   english.pdf

Rollins, K. E., D. K. Meyerholz, G. D. Johnson, A. P. Caparella, S. S. Loew. 2012. “A Forensic
    Investigation into the Etiology of Bat Mortality at a Wind Farm: Barotrauma or Traumatic Injury?”
    Veterinary Pathology 49:362–371.

Scottish Enterprise and The Crown Estate. ” A Guide to UK Offshore Wind Operations and Maintenance”
   (2013).     http://www.scottish-enterprise.com/knowledge-hub/articles/guide/offshore-wind-operations-
   and-maintenance-opportunities

Scottish Natural Heritage (SNH). 2000. “Guidance: Wind Farms and Birds – Calculating Theoretical
   Collision Risk Assuming No Avoiding Action.”

                                                  30
                            ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                            WIND ENERGY
                            August 7, 2015




———. 2002. “Visual Assessment of Windfarms: Best Practice.”

———. 2009. “Siting and Designing Windfarms in the Landscape.”

———. 2012. “Assessing the Cumulative Impact of Onshore Wind Energy Developments.”
  http://www.snh.gov.uk/docs/A675503.pdf

———. 2014. “Guidance Note – Recommended Bird Survey Methods to Inform Impact Assessment of
  Onshore Wind Farms.”

Sengupta, D. and T. Senior. 1983. “Large Wind Turbine Siting Handbook: Television Interference
   Assessment,” Final Subcontract Report.

Smallwood, K. S., D. A. Bell, S. A. Snyder, and J. E. Didonato. 2010. “Novel Scavenger Removal Trials
   Increase Wind-Turbine Caused Avian Fatality Estimates.” Journal of Wildlife Management 74(5):
   1089–1097. DOI: 10.2193/2009-266.

State of Wisconsin. 2003. Draft Model Wind Ordinance for Wisconsin.

Strickland, D., E. Arnett, W. Erickson, D. Johnson, G. Johnson, M. Morrison, J. Shaffer, and W. Warren-
     Hicks. 2011. Comprehensive Guide to Studying Wind Energy/Wildlife Interactions. Prepared for the
     National Wind Coordinating Collaborative, Washington, D.C.

Subacoustech Report 534R1231. Oct 2007.

U.K. Department for Business, Enterprise, and Regulatory Reform (BERR). 2008. “Review of Cabling
    Techniques and Environmental Effects Applicable to the Offshore Wind Farm Industry.” Technical
    Report.

UNDP (Serbia). 2010. “Guidelines on the Environmental Impact Assessment for Wind Farms.”

United States Fish and Wildlife Services. 2012. “Land-based Wind Energy Guidelines.”

URS (URS Australia Pty. Ltd.). 2004. “Woodlawn Wind Farm Environmental Impact Statement.”

Walls, R., C. Pendlebury, R. Budgey, K. Brookes, and P. Thompson. 2009. “Revised Best Practice
   Guidance for the Use of Remote Techniques for Ornithological Assessment at Offshore Wind Farms.”
   COWRIE.

Westerberg, H. 1999. “Impact Studies of Sea-based Windpower in Sweden.” Technische Eingriffe in
   Marine Lebensraume.

Winkelman, J. E. 1995. „Bird/Wind Turbine Investigations in Europe.“ Proc. of National Avian-Wind
   Planning Meeting, Denver, CO, July 1994.




                                                  31
                               ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                               WIND ENERGY
                               August 7, 2015




ANNEX A. GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF INDUSTRY ACTIVITIES
94. Wind energy facilities are based on harnessing natural wind and converting it into electrical energy.
These facilities are located in both onshore and offshore locations. The primary factor in determining a
site’s feasibility and viability as a proposed wind energy facility is the presence of a good wind resource.
An energy yield assessment is conducted to assess predicted energy generation and consequent
revenues. Other significant factors in determining whether a site is appropriate for a wind energy project
include environmental and social impacts, the cost of construction and operation, reaching agreement on
the sale of electricity at a commercially appropriate price, and access to a grid connection with adequate
capacity.

95. As with other industry sectors, the life cycle of a wind energy project consists of a wind resource
assessment, environmental and social impact assessment, construction, operation, maintenance, and
decommissioning phases. Activities typically associated with the construction phase include access road
construction or upgrade, site preparation (such as construction of access tracks and turbine foundations),
and transport of as well as installation of project components (e.g., anemometers, wind turbines,
transformers, substations). Decommissioning activities depend on the proposed subsequent use of the
site, but typically consist of removal of infrastructure (e.g., turbines, substations, roads) and reinstatement
of the project site to its pre-project condition. The following section provides a description of the facilities
and activities common to the construction and operation of onshore and offshore wind energy facilities.

A.1 Facilities and Activities Common to Onshore and Offshore Wind Energy
Facilities

96. Structural elements of a wind energy project include wind turbines, transformers, underground or
aboveground collector transmission cables between the wind turbines, substations, and aboveground
transmission lines to connect to an existing power grid and access roads (Figure A-1). Wind turbines are
spaced to maximize energy yield while minimizing land use.

97. The wind turbine generator is the fundamental component of a wind energy project and is
responsible for harnessing wind energy and converting it into useful electrical energy. Increases in rotor
diameter and tower height have led to an increase in generating capacity and efficiency.

98. The turbine consists of a foundation, tower, nacelle, rotor blades, rotor hub, and lights (Figure A-2).

99. The turbine towers are primarily a tapered cylinder shape and are usually made of steel. They are
typically painted white or off-white, but they can have different painted markings for air traffic and marine
safety (offshore), depending on country-specific requirements.




                                                      32
                                                       ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                                       WIND ENERGY
                                                       August 7, 2015




                                            FIGURE A-1: TYPICAL COMPONENTS OF AN ONSHORE WIND ENERGY FACILITY

This image cannot currently be displayed.




                                                                           33
                                    ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                    WIND ENERGY
                                    August 7, 2015




                    FIGURE A-2: TYPICAL STRUCTURAL COMPONENTS OF A WIND TURBINE

                              This image cannot currently be displayed.




100. As the wind speed increases, the rotor blades begin to rotate. This rotation turns the generator
inside the nacelle, thereby converting some of the wind’s energy to electricity. Most wind turbines start
generating electricity at approximate wind speeds of 3 to 4 meters/second (m/s) (10.8 to 14.4
kilometers/hour (km/h)), generate maximum power at wind speeds of around 12 m/sec (43 km/h), and
shut down to prevent damage at around 25 m/s (90 km/h). 84 The maximum blade tip speed can be
approximately 90 m/s or 320 km/h. At high wind speeds, rotor power can be limited in one of three ways:
stall control, variable pitch control, and active stall control. In stall control, the aerodynamic design of the
rotor blade regulates the power of the rotor. At high wind speeds, a stall-controlled blade will begin to go
into stall above a pre-determined power limit, according to the aerodynamic design of the rotor blade. In
pitch control, the pitch of the rotor blades can be altered up to 90o to maximize wind capture. Once the
power limit is reached, the pitch is changed to begin spilling energy from the rotor. Active stall control is a
combination of stall and pitch control whereby the blades are similarly designed to stall control blades but
can still be turned to adjust the pitch. Until the 1990s, passive stall regulation was the preferred strategy,
however pitch regulation is now the favored means of limiting rotor power for large turbines.

84   BWEA 2005b.

                                                                          34
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              WIND ENERGY
                              August 7, 2015




101. The amount of energy in the wind is proportional to the cube of the wind speed. In other words,
doubling the wind speed results in eight times the energy contained in the wind. A turbine will typically
generate electricity 70 to 85 percent of the time. 85 The turbine's energy production does not change in the
same proportion, however, but roughly with the square of the wind speed. The electricity generated by a
wind turbine is generally at 700 volts, which is not suitable for power transmission. 86 Therefore, each
turbine will use a transformer to “step up” the voltage to a level sufficient for the wind farm’s collector
system (e.g., 11 kilovolts (kV)). The collector system is connected to a transformer that increases the
voltage to a level suitable for connection to a utility substation. The connection between a turbine
transformer and the substation, on one hand, and the substation and the electrical grid on the other can
be made using underground or aboveground transmission cables. Depending on the project layout, the
turbine transformers can be connected independently to the substation, or the turbines can be connected
to one another and then connected to a substation.

102. The design lifetime of a wind turbine is approximately 20 years, but in practice turbines may last
longer with proper maintenance.

103. Routine maintenance will be conducted throughout the lifetime of the wind turbine. Maintenance
activities may include turbine and rotor maintenance, lubrication of parts, full generator overhaul, and
maintenance of electrical components, as necessary.

104. The operation and maintenance of wind energy facilities does not typically involve air emissions or
effluent discharges. Fluids and other waste materials associated with typical maintenance activities are
not normally stored onsite and are disposed of according to appropriate regional or national regulations
and/or best management practices.

A.2 Facilities Unique to Offshore Wind Energy Facilities

105. The structural elements and operation of an offshore wind energy facility are similar to those of an
onshore wind energy facility. The main differences between offshore and onshore turbines are the size of
the turbines, the height of the turbine towers, and the diameter of the rotor blades. Another difference is
that offshore wind energy facilities typically use subsurface (marine and terrestrial) cables to transmit
electricity from the turbines to the transformer and from the transformer to a substation located on land
(Figure A-3).

106. The structural component materials (e.g., towers) will be similar to their onshore counterparts,
however some different methods are used to adapt the structure to the marine environment, including
coating the metal parts to protect them from corrosion; using sealed nacelles; designing different
foundations/towers to cope with wind, wave, current, tide, and seabed interactions (Figure A-1); and
providing special access platforms for maintenance.

107. Typical activities for the construction of offshore wind turbines include establishment of the turbine
foundation, marine transport of the turbine components, tower assembly, lifting of the nacelle and rotors
onto the wind tower, and rotor/nacelle assembly.



85   BWEA 2005d.
86   BWEA 2005b.

                                                    35
                                                                    ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                                                    WIND ENERGY
                                                                    August 7, 2015




108. The types of foundations and associated applications that can be used for offshore wind turbines
include:

                                             • Monopile: Most conditions, preferably in shallow water and not in deep, soft material.
                                             • Tripod: Most conditions, preferably not in deep, soft material; suits water depths greater than 30
                                               meters (m).
                                             • Concrete gravity base: Virtually all sediment conditions.
                                             • Steel gravity base: Virtually all sediment conditions, and deeper water than concrete.
                                             • Monosuction caisson: Sands, soft clay conditions.
                                             • Multiple suction caisson: Sands, soft clay conditions; deeper water than monosuction.
                                             • Floating: Deep waters to 100 meters.



                                                      FIGURE A-3: TYPICAL COMPONENTS OF AN OFFSHORE WIND ENERGY FACILITY
 This image cannot currently be displayed.




                                                                                          36
