                                 ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                 PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                                 November 23, 2015




    ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES FOR
              PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION

1. The Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines are technical reference documents with
general and industry-specific examples of Good International Industry Practice (GIIP). 1 When one or more
members of the World Bank Group are involved in a project, these EHS Guidelines are applied as required
by their respective policies and standards. These industry sector EHS Guidelines are designed to be used
together with the General EHS Guidelines document, which provides guidance to users on common EHS
issues potentially applicable to all industry sectors. For complex projects, use of multiple industry-sector
guidelines may be necessary. A complete list of industry-sector guidelines can be found at
www.ifc.org/ehsguidelines.

2. The EHS Guidelines contain the performance levels and measures that are generally considered to
be achievable in plantations by existing technology at reasonable costs. Application of the EHS Guidelines
to existing farming and forestry systems may involve the establishment of site-specific targets, with an
appropriate timetable for achieving them.

3. The applicability of the EHS Guidelines should be tailored to the hazards and risks established for
each project on the basis of the results of an environmental assessment in which site-specific variables—
such as host country context, assimilative capacity of the environment, and other project factors—are taken
into account. The applicability of specific technical recommendations should be based on the professional
opinion of qualified and experienced persons.

4. When host country regulations differ from the levels and measures presented in the EHS Guidelines,
projects are expected to achieve whichever is more stringent. If less stringent levels or measures than those
provided in these EHS Guidelines are appropriate, in view of specific project circumstances, a full and
detailed justification for any proposed alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental
assessment. This justification should demonstrate that the choice for any alternate performance levels is
protective of human health and the environment.

APPLICABILITY

5.    This document includes information relevant to large-scale plantation crops and outgrower systems
and focuses on the primary production and harvesting through farming and plantation forestry of major
multi-year food, fiber, energy, ornamental, and pharmaceutical crops, located in both temperate and tropical
regions. It includes tree crops (such as olives, citrus, coffee, rubber, eucalypts, and cacao) as well as
banana, sugarcane, and palm oil. It does not include the processing of raw materials into semi-finished and

1 Defined as the exercise of professional skill, diligence, prudence, and foresight that would be reasonably expected
from skilled and experienced professionals engaged in the same type of undertaking under the same or similar
circumstances globally. The circumstances that skilled and experienced professionals may find when evaluating the
range of pollution prevention and control techniques available to a project may include, but are not limited to, varying
levels of environmental degradation and environmental assimilative capacity, as well as varying levels of financial and
technical feasibility.

                                                           1
                                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                             PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                                             November 23, 2015




finished products. Annual crop production is addressed in the EHS Guidelines for Annual Crop
Production. Annex A contains a description of industry activities for this sector.

This document is organized in the following manner:

      1. Industry-Specific Impacts and Management ............................................................................. 2
         1.1 Environmental .......................................................................................................................... 2
         1.2 Occupational Health and Safety ............................................................................................ 16
         1.3 Community Health and Safety ............................................................................................... 20
      2. Performance Indicators Monitoring ......................................................................................... 21
         2.1 Environment........................................................................................................................... 21
         2.2 Occupational Health and Safety ............................................................................................ 24
      3. References ................................................................................................................................. 25
      Annex A. General Description of Industry Activities ................................................................... 31
      Annex B. Water Consumption ........................................................................................................ 35



1. INDUSTRY-SPECIFIC IMPACTS AND MANAGEMENT

6. The following section provides a summary of EHS issues associated with plantation crop production,
along with recommendations for their management. Additional guidance on EHS issues that may be
common across industry sectors is presented in the General EHS Guidelines.

7. Farm or forest management plans often serve as an underlying framework for the management of
environmental and social risks and impacts for perennial crop production. A farm or forest management
plan would normally cover, among other things, the risks and issues presented in this document.

1.1       Environmental

8.    Environmental issues in plantation crop production primarily include the following:

       • Soil Conservation and Management
       • Nutrient Management
       • Crop Residue and Solid Waste Management
       • Water Management
       • Pest Management
       • Use and Management of Pesticides
       • Fertilizers
       • Biodiversity and Ecosystems
       • Genetically Modified Crops (GM Crops)
       • Energy Use
       • Air Quality
       • Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions


                                                                                  2
                                  ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                  PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                                  November 23, 2015




1.1.1     Soil Conservation and Management

9. Physical and chemical degradation of soils may result from unsuitable management techniques, such
as use of inappropriate machinery or earthworks associated with plantation preparation and infrastructure
development. Chemical degradation of soil may result from insufficient or inappropriate use of mineral
fertilizers, failure to recycle nutrients contained in crop residues, and failure to correct changes in soil pH
that result from long-term use of nitrogen fertilizers and excessive use of poor-quality water, resulting in
salinization.

10. Soil erosion may result from poor crop canopy closure after land preparation and lack of soil
conservation structures on sloping land planted with perennial crops. 2 Soil loss prevention practices include
appropriate use of the following techniques:

        • Practice reduced and zero tillage (often known as “low till” or “no till”), as well as direct seeding
          and planting, to minimize damage to soil structure, conserve soil organic matter, and reduce soil
          erosion.
        • Minimize soil compaction, damage, or disturbance by using appropriate land preparation
          machinery at the right time of year.
        • Use cover crops, 3 intercropping along contours with legumes 4 to create multi-species shelterbelts,
          and/or windbreaks to reduce evapotranspiration and soil loss through wind and water erosion.
        • Replenish soil organic matter by recycling crop residues, compost, and manures.
        • Implement earthworks when weather conditions pose the lowest risk of causing environmental
          damage.
        • Employ erosion control management practices (e.g., contour and strip planting, terracing,
          discontinuous trenching, intercropping with trees, and grass barriers) in sloping areas.
        • Draw up mitigation plans for planting or harvest operations that must take place during unsuitable
          periods.
        • Use flow control weirs and diversion canals to reduce erosion in areas with field drainage.
        • Restrict the width of roads to the minimum that will provide the means for efficient and safe
          transport.


11. The following approaches are recommended to maintain soil productivity over the long term:

        • Cultivate crops that are suited or adapted to the local climate and soil conditions and adopt good
          agronomic practices 5 to optimize crop productivity.

2 Fred R. Weber and Marilyn W. Hoskins, “Soil Conservation Technical Sheets,” (Forest, Wildlife and Range Experiment

Station, University of Idaho 1983).
3 For example: Crotalaria, Canavalia, Mucuna, or Tephrosia.

4 For example: such as Cajanus, Sesbania, Lupinus, or Tritolium.

5 Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Good Agricultural Practices Principles (2007). Among others, good

practices include those that select cultivars and varieties on an understanding of their characteristics, including
response to sowing or planting time, productivity, quality, market acceptability and nutritional value, disease and stress
resistance, edaphic and climatic adaptability, and response to fertilizers and agrochemicals; maximize the biological

                                                            3
                                 ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                 PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                                 November 23, 2015




        • Collect meteorological data on precipitation, evapotranspiration, temperature, sunlight, and use
          information to inform and guide agronomic and silviculture management techniques.
        • Use soil maps and soil survey results to determine crop suitability and appropriate soil
          management practices.
        • Develop and implement a soil monitoring and management plan that includes soil and terrain
          mapping and erosion risk identification.
        • Conduct regular surveys to monitor soil structure and chemistry in order to identify areas where
          remedial action is required.
        • Recycle and/or incorporate organic materials (e.g., crop residues, compost, and manures) to
          replenish soil organic matter and improve soil water-holding capacity.
        • Minimize the use of pesticides by implementing a pest and disease early warning system, by using
          biological pest and disease control methods, and by implementing control measures before
          outbreaks require large-scale control.

1.1.2    Nutrient Management

12. Nutrient management strategies 6 should aim to maintain and/or improve soil fertility and optimize crop
yield while minimizing off-site environmental impact (e.g., contamination of groundwater resources and
eutrophication of surface water resources from surface runoff and leaching of nutrients). Consider the
following practices:

         • Use green manures, cover crops, or mulching techniques to maintain soil cover, reduce the loss
           of nutrients, replenish soil organic matter, and capture and/or conserve moisture.
         • Incorporate nitrogen-fixing legume crop plants and cover crops in the cropping cycle.
         • Draw up balanced fertilizer programs for each soil management unit based on fertility results,
           soil and leaf analysis, and crop assessment.
          • Assess EHS risks associated with the nutrient management plan and mitigating strategies to
            minimize potential adverse EHS impacts.
          • Time the application of crop nutrients to maximize uptake and minimize nutrient runoff.
          • Assess soil pH periodically and apply soil amendments (e.g., agricultural lime) to correct
            changes in soil pH as required to ensure that nutrients are available for plant uptake.
          • Conduct periodic soil analysis to detect changes in soil fertility, inform decisions on fertilizer
            application rates, and avoid unsustainable nutrient depletion and over-fertilization.
          • Establish and respect setbacks from watercourses—including appropriate buffer zones, strips,
            or other “no-treatment” areas along water sources, rivers, streams, ponds, lakes, and ditches—
            to act as a filter for potential nutrient runoff from the land.


benefits of weed control by competition, by mechanical, biological and herbicide options, by provision of non-host crops
to minimize disease; apply fertilizers—organic and inorganic—in a balanced fashion, with appropriate methods and
equipment and at adequate intervals to replace nutrients extracted by harvest or lost during production; maximize the
benefits to soil and nutrient stability by recycling crop and other organic residues.
6 Roy et al., Plant Nutrition for Food Security, A Guide for Integrated Nutrient Management, (FAO, 2006) and

www.nutrientstewardship.com.

                                                           4
                               ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                               PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                               November 23, 2015




        • Select and maintain fertilizer application equipment to ensure desired application rates are used
          and overbroadcasting of solid fertilizers as well as overspraying of liquid fertilizers are
          minimized.
        • Implement nutrient planning and documentation, which includes the use of a fertilizer logbook
          to record the following information:
              o Dates of purchase, dates of use, amount of fertilizer and nutrient used (kg/ha), purpose of
                use, and crop growth stage.
              o Weather conditions before, during, and after application.
              o Methods used to minimize nutrient loss (e.g., incorporation into the soil, split applications,
                irrigation after application).
        • Provide farm operators with training in nutrient management following published principles and
          agricultural practice manuals. 7
        • Ensure that all personnel are trained in and use appropriate management procedures for the
          storage, handling, and application of all types of fertilizers, including organic wastes.
        • Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) should be used according to the Safety Data Sheets
          (SDS) of the product or to a risk assessment of the fertilizer product. SDS should be available
          at each management unit.

1.1.3   Crop Residue and Solid Waste Management

13. In all plantation systems, residues can be recycled beneficially to improve soil organic matter and soil
structure, as well as to reduce soil loss. In addition to annual or intermittent residues, many plantation crops
also result in major residues at the end of their commercial life. These residues are valuable sources of
organic matter and carbon and can lead to the extended release of nutrients during the development
(growth) phase of the next crop cycle. Prevention and control strategies for potential risks and impacts
include the following:

        • Develop and implement a residue management plan in combination with results from nutrient
          management research and planning.
        • Recycle residues and other organic materials by leaving the materials on site or through
          composting (and spreading).
        • Consider the potential for harboring and spreading pests and diseases before implementing this
          practice.
        • Disperse (or mulch) large vegetative structures (e.g., trunks, branches), unless there are
          compelling habitat and biodiversity benefits identified in the Biodiversity Management Plan.
        • Consider using crop residues for other beneficial purposes—such as animal feed, bedding, or
          thatching—when leaving residues in the field is neither practical nor appropriate.
        • In cases where crop residues are in excess of those needed for nutrient management, consider
          using as a thermal energy source for agriculture processing or for the generation of heat and/or
          power. Relatively high atmospheric emissions (such as of particulate matter and carbon


7FAO, Guidelines and Reference Material on Integrated Soil and Nutrient Management and Conservation for Farmer
Field Schools (Rome: FAO, 2000) http://www.fao.org/docs/eims/upload/230157/misc27.pdf.

                                                       5
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                                November 23, 2015




            monoxide (CO)) are possible when using crop residues for thermal combustion; their handling,
            storage, and processing may present risks of fire, such as from spontaneous combustion of
            improperly stored damp residues or explosion of combustible dust. Strategies to prevent and
            control risks and impacts include:
              o In the planning phase, obtain physical and chemical data on the fuel and implement advice
                from a qualified specialist.
              o Undertake tests with the “new” residual biomass fuel prior to introducing it, and
                demonstrate that expert advice and feedback have been followed.
              o Adopt management practices in line with General EHS Guidelines in managing risks for
                fire and explosion.
         • Avoid using harmful residual chemicals at end of crop life when preparing for removal.

14. Non-crop wastes from the production systems (e.g., pesticide containers, waste pesticides, and
packaging) often have the potential to contribute to adverse health, safety, or environmental impacts.
Considerations for the prevention and control of potential impacts from these wastes include:

         • Ensure all packaging for pesticides and herbicides is returned to the farm or forest after use and
           properly stored until final disposal.
         • Do not burn packaging, plastics, or other solid waste. Dispose of this waste in designated waste
           disposal facilities or by recycling. Manage solid waste in accordance with the General EHS
           Guidelines.
         • Consider large container and/or bulk systems for fuels, oils, fertilizers, and chemicals to reduce
           the volume of waste containers.
         • Examine alternative product formulations and packaging (e.g., biodegradable material).
         • Manage expired and unwanted pesticides as hazardous wastes in accordance with the General
           EHS Guidelines and Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) Guidelines for the Management
           of Small Quantities of Unwanted and Obsolete Pesticides. 8,9

1.1.4    Water Management

15. Water management for plantation crop production should aim to conserve the quantity and quality of
water resources while optimizing crop yield. Surface or groundwater resources used for irrigation should
be managed in accordance with the principles of Integrated Resource Water Management, 10 consistent
with the following recommendations:

         • Determine rain or water irrigation requirements of the crop, based on internationally recognized
           guidelines, while recognizing seasonal variations and regional norms. When irrigation is



8 FAO,  Guidelines for the Management of Small Quantities of Unwanted and Obsolete Pesticides (Rome: UNEP, WHO,
and FAO, 1999) http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/user_upload/obsolete_pesticides/docs/small_qties.pdf.
9 In the event that disposal of pesticides involves overseas shipments, the project must ensure compliance with the

country’s commitments under the Stockholm, Rotterdam, and Basel Conventions.
10 Global Water Partnership.



                                                        6
                     ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                     PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                     November 23, 2015




   practiced, develop an appropriate irrigation plan and schedule, and monitor consumption and
   compare regularly with these targets.
• Maintain soil structure and soil organic matter. Use of crop residues and mulches will assist in
  maintaining soil organic matter levels, retaining soil humidity, and reducing surface evaporation.
• Maximize the retention of rainwater through appropriate “rain harvesting” techniques, which may
  include:
     o Diverting water flow from roads and paths toward crops, thus storing water in the soil and
       reducing the effect of short dry spells.
     o Storing runoff from rainy periods for use during dry spells by using tanks, ponds, cisterns,
       and earth dams.
     o Controlling weeds through the use of cover crops, mulching, or herbicides to encourage
       beneficial but low-water-use soil cover plants.
     o Maintain protective vegetation in canals and drainage systems to reduce canal bank
       scouring and slow runoff.
• When irrigation is used, implement irrigation water conservation techniques, such as:
     o Ensure regular maintenance of the irrigation system, as well as that of its associated
       channels and infrastructure.
     o Maintain a water management logbook that records the time and quantity of rainfall
       evaporation, as well as the amount of irrigation applied and soil moisture levels (%), in
       order to verify both that irrigation is being used according to crop need and to develop an
       understanding of long-term trends in water use.
     o Reduce evaporation by avoiding irrigation during periods when evaporation is elevated
       (e.g., in periods of higher temperatures, reduced humidity, or high winds). Use trickle or
       drip irrigation techniques (if practical), or install “under canopy” rather than overhead
       sprinklers.
     o Reduce evapotranspiration by using shelterbelts and windbreaks.
     o Reduce seepage losses in supply channels by lining them or using closed pipes.
     o Consider collecting storm water through catchments.
     o Employ a cutback furrow irrigation technique, slowing or stopping irrigation water well
       before the water reaches the end of the furrow and discharges to the environment.
     o If herbicides are used, ensure they are applied at the appropriate time of year to most
       effectively control undesirable vegetation and reduce its water consumption.
• The following measures are recommended to prevent and control the contamination of water
  sources:
     o Avoid over-irrigation, which may result in the leaching of nutrients and contaminants.
     o Ensure appropriate soil moisture by active monitoring of soil humidity.
     o Use harvesting methods or other appropriate measures to minimize the amount of debris
       deposited in streams.
     o Establish and respect setbacks and buffer zones in riparian areas. Buffer widths should be
       based on the specific risk, land management regime, and slope of the area.



                                             7
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                                November 23, 2015




              o Remove harvest debris from streams and consider the use of debris traps, such as trash
                lines, where possible.

16. Sediments may become a significant pollutant due to their physical and chemical properties.
Suspended sediments in surface water carry pollutants such as pesticides, nutrients, and trace metals,
affecting water quality. Sediment loading reduces storage and flow capacities of streams, lakes, and
reservoirs; may adversely affect water supplies; and increases the risk of flooding. Soil loss prevention
practices are presented in the "Soil Conservation and Management" section.

1.1.5    Pest Management

17. The primary aim of pest management should not be to eradicate all organisms, but to manage “pests,”
including insect pests, diseases, and weeds that may negatively affect plantation crops so that they remain
at levels beneath an economically and environmentally damaging threshold. Pests should be managed
through a process of integrated pest management (IPM) 11 that combines chemical and non-chemical
approaches to minimize pest impact, while also minimizing the impact of such measures on the
environment. Pesticides should be used only to the extent necessary under an IPM and integrated vector
management (IVM) approach, and only after other pest management practices have either failed or proven
inefficient. The following steps should be considered and documented in an integrated pest/vector
management plan:

         • Identify the main pests affecting crops in the region, assess the risks to the operation, and
           determine whether a strategy and capacity is in place.
         • Where possible, apply early-warning mechanisms for pests and diseases (i.e., pest and disease
           forecasting techniques).
         • Select resistant varieties and use the cultural and biological control of pests, diseases, and
           weeds to minimize dependence on pesticide (chemical) control options. An effective IPM regime
           should:
              o Identify and assess pests, threshold levels, and control options (including those listed
                below), as well as risks associated with these control options.
              o Rotate crops to reduce the presence of insects, disease, or weeds in the soil or crop
                ecosystems.
              o Support beneficial bio-control organisms—such as insects, birds, mites, and microbial
                agents—to perform biological control of pests (e.g., by providing a favorable habitat, such
                as bushes for nesting sites and other original vegetation that can house pest predators and
                parasites).
              o Favor manual, mechanical weed control and/or selective weeding.
              o Use animals to graze areas and manage plant coverage.



11 IPM refers to a mix of farmer-driven, ecologically based pest control practices that seeks to reduce reliance on

synthetic chemical pesticides. It involves: (a) managing pests (keeping them below economically damaging levels)
rather than seeking to eradicate them; (b) relying, to the extent possible, on nonchemical measures to keep pest
populations low; and (c) selecting and applying pesticides, when they have to be used, in a way that minimizes adverse
effects on beneficial organisms, humans, and the environment.

                                                          8
                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                             PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                             November 23, 2015




             o Employ mechanical controls—such as traps, barriers, light, and sound—to kill, relocate, or
               repel pests.
             o Use pesticides to complement these approaches, not replace them.
             o Prior to procuring any pesticide, assess the nature and degree of associated risks and
               effectiveness, taking into account the proposed use and the intended users.

1.1.6   Pesticides Use and Management

18. Where pesticide use is warranted, in order to prevent, reduce, or control the potential contamination
of soils, groundwater, or surface water resources caused by accidental spills during transfer, mixing,
storage, and application, pesticides should be stored, handled, and applied in a manner consistent with the
recommendations for hazardous materials management presented in the General EHS Guidelines.

19. A pesticide management plan (PMP) that includes procedures for the selection, procurement, storage,
handling, and ultimate destruction of all out-of-date stocks should be prepared in accordance with FAO
guidelines and should be consistent with country commitments under the Stockholm, 12 Rotterdam, 13 and
Basel 14 Conventions. The PMP prescribes the type of pesticides to be used, as well as the purpose of their
use, and outlines best practice for the procurement and storage of all pesticides. Personnel must have
appropriate training—including certification, where relevant—to handle and apply pesticides safely. In
particular:

        • Ensure that any pesticides used are manufactured, formulated, packaged, labeled, handled,
          stored, disposed of, and applied according to the FAO’s International Code of Conduct on
          Pesticide Management. 15
        • Do not purchase, store, use, or trade pesticides that fall under the World Health Organization’s
          (WHO) Recommended Classification of Pesticides 16 by Hazard Classes 1a (extremely
          hazardous) and 1b (highly hazardous), or Annexes A and B of the Stockholm Convention. 17
        • Do not use pesticides listed in WHO Hazard Class II (moderately hazardous), unless the project
          has appropriate controls established with respect to the manufacture, procurement, or
          distribution and/or use of these chemicals. These chemicals should not be accessible to
          personnel without proper training, equipment, and facilities in which to handle, store, apply, and
          dispose of these products properly.
        • Preferentially, use selective pesticides, where appropriate, rather than broad-spectrum products
          to minimize impacts on non-target species.




12 http://chm.pops.int/.
13 http://www.pic.int/.
14 http://www.basel.int/.

15 FAO, International Code of Conduct on Pesticides Management (revised 2014), (Rome: FAO, 2014)

http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/agphome/documents/Pests_Pesticides/Code/CODE_2014Sep_ENG.pdf
16 World Health Organization (WHO), Recommended Classification of Pesticides by Hazard and Guidelines to

Classification (Geneva, 2009): http://www.who.int/ipcs/publications/pesticides_hazard/en/
17 The Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants 2011.



                                                     9
                                    ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                    PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                                    November 23, 2015




Storage

            • Store all pesticides in a lockable, bunded container or store that has sufficient space in which
              to capture any spills without contaminating the environment. Stores should be set away from
              water sources, residential and built-up areas, as well as livestock and food storage areas.
            • Procure spill kits and institute suitable control measures in case of accidental spillage.
            • Store all pesticides in their original, labeled containers and ensure that storage instructions are
              followed.
            • Keep a register of all pesticides procured, recording when they were received, the amount used,
              the amount remaining in store, and their location.
            • Keep SDS at appropriate locations in storage facilities.
            • Warehouses must have appropriate ventilation, secondary containment, and emergency
              showers and kits.

Handling

            • Operators must read, understand, and follow product label directions for mixing, safety,
              application, and disposal; use trained personnel for critical operations (e.g., mixing, transfers,
              filling tanks, and application).
            • Insist that correct PPE (e.g., gloves, overalls, eye protection) for each exposure route 18 listed in
              the SDS be worn at all times when handling and applying pesticides.
            • Mandate that any mixing and filling of pesticide tanks occur in a designated filling area.
                 o This should be set away from watercourses and drains.
                 o If on concrete, water should be collected in a separate sump and disposed of as a
                   hazardous waste.
                 o Ensure that spills are cleaned up immediately using appropriate spill kits; spills should not
                   be washed away into watercourses or drains.

Application

            • Give preference to the application method with the lowest EHS risk.
            • Select pesticide application technologies and practices designed to minimize off-site movement
              or runoff (e.g., low-drift nozzles, using the largest droplet size and lowest pressure that are
              suitable for the product).
            • Establish buffer zones around watercourses, residential and built-up neighborhoods, as well as
              livestock and food storage areas.
            • For the aerial application of pesticides, the boundaries of target areas should be clearly
              demarcated and all possible nearby communities, livestock, and rivers should be identified in
              the flight plan. The aerial application of pesticides should not be conducted where there is
              potential for contamination of organic or otherwise certifiable production.


18   Possible routes of exposure are skin contact, eye contact, inhalation (respiratory system), and ingestion (swallowing).

                                                              10
                                  ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                  PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                                  November 23, 2015




           • Ensure that all equipment is in good condition and properly calibrated to apply the correct
             dosage.
           • Insist that applications occur under suitable weather conditions; avoid wet weather and windy
             conditions.

Disposal

           • Any unused dilute pesticide that cannot be applied to the crop, along with rinse water, and out-
             of-date or no-longer approved pesticides, should be disposed of as a hazardous waste, as per
             FAO guidelines.
           • Empty pesticide containers, foil seals, and lids should be triple rinsed, and washings used in the
             pesticide tank should be sprayed back onto the field or disposed of as hazardous waste in a
             manner consistent with FAO guidelines and according to the manufacturer's directions.
             Containers should be stored safely and securely under cover prior to their safe disposal; they
             should not be used for other purposes.

1.1.7      Fertilizers

           • Store fertilizers in their original packaging and in a dedicated location that can be locked and
             properly identified with signs, access to which is limited to authorized persons.
           • Ensure that SDS and inventories are available at fertilizer storage facilities and available to first
             responders when necessary.
           • Only purchase and store minimal fertilizer requirements, and use older fertilizers first.
           • Keep fertilizer stores separate from pesticides and machinery (e.g., fuels, ignition, or heat
             sources).
           • Know and understand each crop’s fertilizer requirements and only apply what is required, when
             it is required, to minimize losses to the environment.
           • Implement a suitable training program for personnel that are transporting, handling, loading,
             storing, and applying fertilizers.

1.1.8      Biodiversity and Ecosystems

20. Perennial crop production has the potential to have a direct and indirect impact on biodiversity and
ecosystems. Key direct impacts relate to habitat conversion or degradation, water usage, pollution,
introduction of invasive species, inappropriate cultivation techniques, 19 and quality and or availability of
priority ecosystem services. Indirect impacts relate to in-migration, and induced changes to access for
traditional land uses (including hunting, fishing, and recreation). Impacts and associated mitigation activities
related to biodiversity and ecosystems are primarily specific to the crops, techniques, and existing land use
context at any specific site.

21. Impact avoidance should be the goal. Appropriate site selection, including expansion planning, is the
single most important impact avoidance measure available to plantation crop production. Early screening


19   UNDP, Protecting Biodiversity in Production Landscapes, (UNDP: South Africa, 2012).

                                                          11
                               ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                               PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                               November 23, 2015




can improve macro-level project site selection so as to avoid selecting areas with high biodiversity values,
such as critical or natural habitat, areas with high conservation values (HCV), those modified habitats that
contain significant biodiversity value (such as previously abandoned farmland that has subsequently
developed into secondary forest), or provisioning or regulating ecosystem services. Such screening can
thus help with scoping of priorities for further assessment, if complete avoidance is not possible, thus
reducing unnecessary biodiversity and/or ecosystem impacts and costs in the future. Screening should be
conducted to identify species and sites of importance within the broader region or landscape. Tools, such
as the Integrated Biodiversity Assessment Tool (IBAT), 20 can facilitate access to key international data sets.
Sites of local, regional, and international importance 21 may include: nationally and internationally protected
areas, Important Bird Areas (IBA), Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs), Alliance for Zero Extinction (AZE) areas,
Ramsar Sites (Wetlands of International Importance), along with known congregatory sites and unique or
threatened ecosystems.

22. Screening should consider any existing spatial data and landscape mapping as part of the literature
review and desktop analysis. Key sources for biodiversity or ecosystem information include Strategic
Environmental Assessments (SEA), National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans (NBSAP), 22 relevant
sector plans (including those that may be impacted, such as eco-tourism or fisheries), and conservation
plans.

23. Conversion of existing critical, natural, or HCV habitats into agriculture should be avoided wherever
possible and planting on modified habitats or degraded lands should be promoted. This should be informed
by an assessment of existing modified habitats or degraded lands suitable for crop production or restoration,
to reduce risks and costs associated with biodiversity impacts or further reduction of ecosystem services.

24. The farm- or forest-level management plan should be informed by an assessment of biodiversity
values of importance, including species, sites, and habitats. This should, at a minimum, consider the
farm/forest management unit, but in cases of higher risk, expected landscape connectivity or wildlife
movement issues should consider a broader landscape unit based on the specific needs of biodiversity
values in question. Very large management units, particularly where conversion or planting will be managed
in smaller sub-units (e.g., multiple compartments or a phased approach), may not find a single
comprehensive assessment to be practically feasible. In such cases, a desktop assessment, including
analysis of satellite data supported by targeted groundtruthing, can be used to scope areas of potentially
modified, natural, and critical habitat, as well as to identify potential set-asides and restoration areas that
could mitigate possible impacts on biodiversity values across the full management unit. Groundtruthing can
be practically implemented at the level of smaller sub-units (e.g., refining existing set-asides or establishing
new ones). Perennial crops subject to international standards and certification systems now routinely
employ tools to identify, delimit, and manage areas of HCV. 23 Such areas should be clearly established on
maps and within management plans. It is important that the conversion or planting schedule for these sub-



20 http://www.ibatforbusiness.org
21 EC Guidance Document, Wind Energy Developments and Natura 2000, (European Commission: 2011).
22   Convention on Biological Diversity, National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans (NBSAPs)
http://www.cbd.int/nbsap/search/default.shtml.
23 E. Brown et al., "Common Guidance for the Identification of High Conservation Values," (2013)




                                                      12
                                    ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                    PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                                    November 23, 2015




units allow sufficient time (one to two years) to allow for assessment, analysis, and development of an
appropriate management plan based on this information.

25. Some biodiversity values will require on-site management to maintain viability on-site and within the
larger landscape. These include maintaining, establishing, or restoring corridors (e.g., riparian areas,
movement corridors for wildlife), set-asides (e.g., important breeding or feeding sites), and buffer zones
(e.g., to minimize off-site disturbance to neighboring riparian areas and wetlands, protected areas, and
other important sites). The number, extent, and location of these areas should be informed by the
assessment process and not simply by the prevalence of areas in which development is not feasible (e.g.,
steep slopes). Active management (e.g., access control, hunting reduction, and enrichment planting with
indigenous species) and monitoring may be required in some situations to maintain required biodiversity
values.

26. Developers should seek to avoid the introduction of invasive species, as well as control and reduce
their further spread. This includes sourcing planting material (e.g., seeds, tube stock) from reliable suppliers
who can provide evidence of purity.

27. Developers should use planting material that does not contain seeds from invasive alien species and
that complies with local quarantine and hygiene regulations, implementing machinery cleaning programs
when moving between fields to remove soil and seeds that may carry invasive or alien species.

1.1.9      Genetically-Modified Crops (GM Crops)

28. A Genetically Modified Organism (GMO) is defined as a living organism that possesses a novel
combination of genetic material obtained through the use of modern technology. 24 Environmental concerns
related to the introduction of GM crops should be addressed and appropriate research conducted to
demonstrate that human and environmental risks (if any) are acceptable.

29. The introduction of GM perennial crops should be conducted in compliance with the host country’s
regulatory framework. If such a regulatory framework does not exist in the host country, the applicability of
the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety 25 should be verified and used to scientifically evaluate the potential
impacts and risks related to a specific crop’s introduction, including its invasive potential, and identify
appropriate mitigation measures. The next steps in the risk assessment are to evaluate the likelihood of the
events occurring, the consequences if it happens, and whether the overall risks (i.e., consequence and
likelihood) are acceptable or manageable.

1.1.10 Energy Use

30. Energy is used in perennial crop production for site preparation, cultivation, management, irrigation,
harvesting, transport, lighting, heating, cooling, and ventilation. Recommendations to reduce energy use
and increase efficiency are presented in the General EHS Guidelines. Additional recommended strategies
include:



24   Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity (http://bch.cbd.int/protocol).
25   Ibid.

                                                             13
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                              November 23, 2015




        • Select energy-efficient machinery and equipment (e.g., tractors, ventilation systems, drying and
          storage systems, cooling devices) and consider on-board fuel-use monitors.
        • Consider implementing training programs to make operators aware of energy-efficient practices
          when using machinery (e.g., switching off engines when waiting to load) and when driving.

31. Irrigation energy use can be significant: the following techniques are recommended for efficient use of
energy in irrigation systems:

        • Develop an irrigation plan that is appropriate for climate, season, soil conditions, plant materials,
          and grading. This plan should include optimum scheduling, monitoring, and recording systems
          so that energy usage and efficiencies can be examined. An irrigation logbook or database
          should be maintained so that quantitative measures are recorded (e.g., kWh electricity per cubic
          meter applied, fuel usage as liter per cubic meter applied).
        • Regularly maintain the irrigation system and associated infrastructure, such as supply channels
          and water storage.
        • Select efficient pumps.
        • Ensure properly matched pumps, systems, and power sources by keeping a good record of the
          amount of water pumped and the energy used to ensure suitability.

1.1.11 Air Quality

32. Atmospheric emissions are primarily associated with emissions of combustion by-products—including
carbon dioxide (CO2), sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen oxide (NOx), and particulate matter (PM) —resulting
from the operation of mechanized equipment or from combustion by-products from the disposal or
destruction of crop residues or processing by-products. The impacts of these pollutants depend on the local
context, including the proximity to communities, sensitivity of ecosystems, concentrations of the pollutant,
topography, and meteorology. Air-quality issues, including management of mechanized farm equipment,
should be managed according to recommendations in the General EHS Guidelines for mobile and
stationary sources. Specific recommendations for perennial crop production to prevent and control air
emissions are:

        • Avoid open burning for land preparation, weed control, and post-harvest treatments. Evaluate
          controlled burning in energy production facilities to extract thermal energy for beneficial use.
          Where burning is unavoidable, potential impacts should be identified and weather conditions
          monitored to schedule burning in an effort to minimize impacts.
        • Prohibit burning of pesticide-treated agricultural wastes and by-products (e.g., pesticide
          containers) to avoid unintended emissions of persistent organic pollutants (POPs).
        • Adopt IPM strategies to avoid and reduce use of pesticides and associated drift.
        • Monitor and minimize ammonia emissions resulting from nitrogen fertilizer and manure use.
          Note certain types of nitrogen fertilizer have higher ammonia emissions associated with their
          use than others. Consider incorporating fertilizer at planting to minimize ammonia emissions.
        • Reduce the risk of fire by reducing the build-up of potential fuel sources and controlling weeds
          and invasive species. Where controlled burns of residues are necessary, ensure optimal
          conditions for the low risk of spread and low impact on existing air quality.

                                                      14
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                              November 23, 2015




        • Consider in-field systems and logistics that reduce the usage of high-emission equipment (e.g.,
          the use of cable transport systems instead of tractors).
        • Evaluate the substitution of no- or low-emission energy sources for combustion methods.
          Ensure proper maintenance and operation of combustion equipment (irrigation engines, boilers,
          tractor engines, heaters, etc.) and consider replacing old units or retrofitting air emission
          controls.
        • Modify field operations where possible (e.g., reducing the number of in-field passes with
          machinery, reduced tillage operations, or improved logistics to minimize travel distances).
        • Modify timing of operations, where possible, to coincide with favorable atmospheric conditions
          and reduced risk of air pollution.
        • Establish cover crops where possible; retain residues, and reduce tillage intensity to avoid dust
          and soil degradation due to wind erosion. Where water supplies are ample, water application to
          cropped areas and access roads may reduce the risk of airborne dust.
        • Establish natural wind barriers—such as vegetative field borders, hedgerows, herbaceous wind
          barriers, and tree/shrub establishment—to intercept airborne particulate matter and droplets,
          which may also include contaminants.

1.1.12 Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions

33. Perennial crop production produces GHG emissions, including methane, nitrous oxide, and carbon
dioxide from different stages in the production cycle. Carbon is also stored in the crop’s residual biomass
above and below ground, as well as in the soil ecosystem. The primary sources of GHG emissions during
site preparation for perennial crops will be carbon dioxide associated with land use change. During the
production phase, emissions are nitrous oxide from fertilizer use and carbon dioxide from on-farm fuel and
electricity use. Emissions from fertilizer come from both the manufacture of the product and from the
application of the product to the crop, with both activities resulting in nitrous oxide emissions, which have a
high global warming potential. These emissions should be managed through resource-efficient farming.

34. The following are recommended measures for minimizing GHG emissions from crop production:

        • Identify sources of on-farm GHG emissions and establish a GHG management plan that
          includes methods of mitigating emissions and a monitoring program.
        • Follow the nutrient management plan to ensure that the nutrient balance is right for maximum
          crop uptake, the quantity of nitrogen matches crop needs, and the timing of application coincides
          with active growth stages.
        • Consider using a fertilizer recommendation system to help with planning.
        • Where available, use abated nitrogen fertilizers, which have lower GHG emissions associated
          with their manufacture, or use nitrification or urease inhibitors, which reduce soil emissions.
        • Reduce fossil energy use through adopting energy-efficient production and management
          practices.
        • Where feasible, consider using renewable energy (e.g., solar, wind, biofuel) for crop drying or
          to power irrigation pumps.



                                                      15
                                   ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                   PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                                   November 23, 2015




35. The loss of stored carbon in the land occurs primarily during harvest and plantation establishment.
Land use changes, such as converting grassland or forest to crop production areas, are responsible for the
release of GHG emissions in the form of carbon dioxide. If the existing vegetation is burned as part of site
preparation activities for the new land use, both methane and nitrous oxide will be emitted during the
combustion process, in addition to carbon dioxide.

36. When converting land, the potential impact on GHG emissions should be assessed and measures
implemented to reduce and mitigate this impact.

37. The following activities and strategies can prevent and control GHG emissions:

           • Avoid conversion of high-carbon stock areas, such as natural forest and peatlands/wetlands.
           • Avoid open burning of biomass during site preparation, field operations, and post-harvest.
           • Protect soils from the loss of organic matter by implementing good soil conservation
             management practices.
           • Increase soil organic carbon stocks through land management techniques.
           • Maintain and rehabilitate degraded areas and vegetative buffer zones to increase carbon
             stocks.
           • Consider increasing the rate of sequestration with species/clone selection.

1.2        Occupational Health and Safety

38. In developing suitable plans for mitigating environmental, health, and safety risks associated with all
plantation crops, the hierarchy of controls 26 should be followed as a means to limit workplace risk.
Occupational health and safety (OHS) issues associated with plantation crop production include the
following:

           • Physical hazards
                 o Operational and workplace hazards
                 o Machinery and vehicles
                 o Confined and restricted space entry
                 o Risk of fire and explosion
           • Biological Hazards
           • Chemical hazards

1.2.1      Physical Hazards

Operational and Workplace Hazards

39. Operational hazards include:



26   http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/ctrlbanding/.

                                                       16
                                 ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                 PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                                 November 23, 2015




           • Slips, trips, and falls (inadequate workplace) resulting in sprains, strains, and fractures;
           • Ergonomics hazards from manual handling, lifting weights, or repetitive movements;
           • Sharp and moving objects in the workplace (e.g., foot injuries from thorns on oil palm fronds
             and fruit); and
           • Over-exposure to noise, vibration, and extreme or adverse weather conditions.

40. Occupational safety and health impacts and controls relating to safe work practices during routine
operations are discussed in the General EHS Guidelines. Potential risks within perennial crop production
include biological hazards, wounds from equipment or sharp objects, extreme/adverse weather, manual
handling. 27 Exposure to vibration and noise from equipment operation. Exposure to extremes of weather,
including sustained exposure to the sun or cold, can be harmful. Typical problems include hypo- or
hyperthermia dehydration, UV damage to skin or eyes, and heat or cold exhaustion cases. These risks
should be managed according to the General EHS Guidelines. Vibration from machinery may affect the
whole body and can cause chronic backache or hip and knee pain and can additionally lead to spinal,
gastro-intestinal, and urinary tract problems. Noise and vibration from hand-held equipment (such as
chainsaws, brush cutters, or strimmers) can cause hand/arm problems or hearing loss.

Machinery and Vehicles

41. Accidents may occur in the use of machines and vehicles, including worker transportation, farm
tractors, harvesting and felling machinery, and a variety of other machines used on plantations and in
forests. These may include vehicle collisions; vehicle and machinery roll-overs; uncontrolled movement
resulting in personal injury (e.g., crushing by moving vehicles); damage or loss of asset; injury, entrapment,
or death due to faulty or unguarded equipment and machinery (e.g., moving parts and pinch points on
machinery and vehicles); entrapment due to unplanned starting, activation, or engagement of equipment
(e.g., rollers); or injury during inspection or repair of vehicles (e.g., vehicle lift not secured while personnel
working underneath).

42. Most fatal accidents are associated with crushing by vehicles or equipment. Where plantation crops
are harvested by hand, many of the injuries are hand-tool related. By far the largest number of logging
accidents occurring annually are associated with felling operations. Workers may also be exposed to
associated risks, such as the noise produced by the machines they operate. Occupational safety and health
impacts and controls relating to equipment and vehicle operation and repair are discussed in the General
EHS Guidelines. Physical hazards resulting from felling activities are discussed in the Forest Harvesting
Operations EHS Guidelines.

Confined and Restricted Space Entry

43. Occupational health and safety hazards associated with confined and restricted spaces on plantations
(e.g., processing bins and silos, product storage bins, water tanks, inadequately ventilated buildings, areas
treated with pesticides, etc.) include risk of asphyxiation; explosions due to gas, dust, or fumes (e.g.,
residual petroleum fumes); and entrapment or enclosure within the confined space. Serious injury or fatality
can result from inadequate preparation when entering a confined space or in attempting a rescue from a
confined space. Entry into all confined spaces should be restricted and subject to permitted supervision by

27   ILO 2011.

                                                        17
                               ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                               PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                               November 23, 2015




properly trained persons, as described in the General EHS Guidelines. Restricted areas should be clearly
marked and clearly conveyed to personnel and contractors.

Risk of Fire and Explosion

44. Fire safety should be managed according to the General EHS Guidelines. Additional sector-specific
risks include fires resulting from the combustion of stored oil or crop residues, which can lead to a loss of
property or cause possible injury to or fatality of project workers. National or international safety standards
should be used in the design, operation, and maintenance of facilities, where applicable. 28

45. Management plans and operating procedures should include comprehensive strategies for the
prevention, detection, and suppression of fires within plantation perimeters and adjacent properties,
including:

        • Description of primary detection methods, tools, and protocols;
        • Ability to communicate with field staff, contractors, and communities;
        • Measures for reducing fuel loading;
        • Means to access and contain fires within plantation premises;
        • Proper placement of appropriate fire suppression equipment; and
        • Training of staff, contractors, and communities in fire prevention and suppression actions.

1.2.2   Biological Hazards

46. Occupational health and safety hazards associated with crop production may include contact with
venomous animals, such as stinging insects, spiders, scorpions, snakes, disease vectors (e.g., mosquitoes,
ticks), and with certain wild mammals (e.g., tigers, wild pigs). Recommended mitigation measures include:

        • Wear appropriate protective clothing, such as a long-sleeved shirt, long pants, hat, gloves, and
          boots.
        • Inspect and shake out any clothing, shoes, or equipment (including PPE) before use.
        • Remove or reduce tall grasses, debris, and rubble from around the outdoor work areas.
        • Control water accumulation.
        • Use insect repellent.
        • On-site first-aid equipment (including, for example, antivenom serum) and trained personnel
          should be available, as well as procedures for emergency evacuation.
        • Use observation and sighting records so workers know areas where there are dangerous
          animals. Install fencing and other exclusion methods for larger animals and use armed
          guards/spotters to protect workers from large animals (e.g. elephants, tigers, wild boar).


28 For example, EN 1127-1 Explosive Atmospheres - Explosion Prevention and Protection, EN 13463-1 Non-Electrical

Equipment for Potentially Explosive Atmospheres, NFPA 61: Standard for the Prevention of Fires and Dust Explosions
in Agricultural and Food Processing Facilities. 2013 Edition, OSHA Grain Handling Facilities Standard 29 CFR
1910.272.

                                                       18
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                                November 23, 2015




1.2.3    Chemical Hazards

Exposure to Hazardous Products, including Pesticides and Herbicides

47. Occupational health and safety impacts associated with pesticides are similar to those for other
hazardous substances, and their prevention and control are discussed in the General EHS Guidelines.
Potential exposures to pesticides include:

         • Dermal contact (e.g., in storage rooms or from leaking containers or splashes/spillage);
         • Inhalation during preparation, mixing, and application; and
         • Ingestion by swallowing the pesticide or contaminated foodstuffs.


48. The effect of such impacts may increase due to climatic conditions, such as wind (which may increase
the chance of contaminant drift), elevated temperatures, or high humidity (which may be a deterrent to the
use of PPE by the operator, thereby increasing the risk of exposure). Recommendations to minimize risks
associated with pesticides and chemicals include (in addition to those listed in Section 1.1):

         • Use alternative products or methods with a lower OHS risk profile (such as using lower toxicity-
           rated products, or using safer application methods, such as shielded sprayers, incorporation, or
           low-volume equipment).
         • Train personnel on hazardous product management and storage. Include training on how to
           read labels and the SDS and to understand the risks associated with all hazardous products,
           including pesticides, fertilizers, and crop-processing products.
         • Train operators and support personnel to apply pesticides and ensure that these personnel have
           received the necessary certifications 29—or equivalent training where such certifications are not
           required—so that they are competent.
         • Monitor and proactively manage all stages of pesticide and chemical purchase, storage, mixing,
           usage, and disposal. Maintain accurate records and analyze these records for any evidence of
           undue exposure or misuse of hazardous products.
         • Respect pre- and post-treatment (re-entry) intervals to avoid operator exposure to pesticide
           residues in production areas and on roadside landings and logging decks.
         • Ensure that product withholding periods are observed to minimize the risk of chemicals or their
           by-products entering the value chain.
         • Ensure hygiene practices are followed (in accordance with FAO 30 regulations and the project
           pesticide management plan) to avoid exposure of personnel or family members to pesticide or
           chemical residues.




29 The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) classifies pesticides as either “unclassified” or “restricted.” All
workers that apply unclassified pesticides must be trained according to the Worker Protection Standard (40 CFR Part
170) for Agricultural Pesticides. Restricted pesticides must be applied by or in the presence of a certified pesticide
applicator. For more information, see http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/health/worker.htm.
30 FAO 2014.



                                                         19
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                              November 23, 2015




49. Re-entry into plantation areas that have been treated with pesticides and fungicides should be guided
by information provided by the chemical manufacturer, normally included in the SDS.

1.3     Community Health and Safety

50. Community health and safety issues during the production of plantation crops may arise due to land
use changes or to the loss of natural buffer areas (such as wetlands, mangroves, and upland forests that
mitigate the effects of natural hazards, such as flooding, landslides, and fire) that may result in increased
vulnerability and community safety-related risks and impacts. The diminution or degradation of natural
resources may result in health-related risks and impacts. Hazardous products, including pesticides, may
affect community health in the same ways that they affect individual operators: through dermal contact,
ingestion, or inhalation of harmful products or chemicals. Risk of exposure to hazardous products can be
minimized by ensuring that the plantation group is following guidelines for the transportation, storage,
handling, usage, and disposal of those products. Risks also arise from:

        • Potential exposure to pesticides (e.g., spray drift, improper disposal and use of packaging and
          containers) and presence of pesticides or by-products in potentially harmful concentrations in
          foodstuffs and postharvest products.
        • Potential exposure to pathogens and noxious odors associated with the use of manure.
        • Potential exposure to air emissions from fires, burning of crop waste, residues, or solid waste
          (e.g., packaging).
        • Increased risk of vehicle or machinery injuries on roads and access routes around the
          community.

51. While odors from manure—especially during application—are not generally hazardous, they can be a
serious source of discomfort to the community. Avoid burning of residual crop and other wastes, which
create harmful air emissions that may adversely impact surrounding communities.

52. Specific recommendations to minimize risks to communities include:

        • Monitor and record all potentially harmful products and activities and manage them to minimize
          the risk to communities. Regularly audit and update operating procedures and ensure that
          personnel are suitably trained.
        • Implement best practice guidelines for management of potentially harmful products, and follow
          the General EHS Guidelines.
        • Avoid the aerial application of pesticides and give priority to other management strategies, if
          possible.
        • Do not apply pesticides, chemicals, or manure if meteorological conditions are likely to result in
          adverse impacts in surrounding communities.
        • Use biological or lower-risk-profile products, if available.




                                                     20
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                              November 23, 2015




        • Respect pre-harvest intervals and post-harvest withholding periods for products that have been
          treated with pesticides to avoid unacceptable levels of residues. 31
        • Do not store or transport pesticides and fertilizers with food (human or livestock foodstuffs) or
          beverages (including drinking water).
        • Ensure that animals and unauthorized people are not present in the areas where pesticides or
          other potentially harmful products are handled, stored, or applied.
        • Store manure and crop protection products as far away from dwellings as possible, and use
          measures, such as covering the manure, to reduce odors and atmospheric emissions.

2. PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MONITORING

2.1     Environment

53. The indicators in Table 1 can be used to monitor the effectiveness of EHS measures applied to the
unit of production. This list of indicators is not crop-specific and can be generally applied to most crop
production systems.

54. The performance indicators in Table 1 do not have minimum threshold requirements, as these are
difficult to establish at the global level. When consistently measured and monitored as part of the farm/forest
management plan implementation, they can be used to determine the effectiveness of risk mitigation
actions and to enable adaptive management, where necessary. In addition, some indicators of resource
efficiency can be used to demonstrate gradual improvements in resource efficiency against a baseline.
Baselines should be measured for individual projects.

55. Environmental monitoring programs for this sector should be implemented to address all activities that
have been identified to have potentially significant impacts on the environment, during both normal
operations and upset conditions. Environmental monitoring activities should be based on direct or indirect
indicators of emissions, effluents, and resource use applicable to the particular project. They should include
monitoring of community impacts—such as those from waste, discharges, and emissions from any
processing activities—through a well-designed monitoring program.

56. Monitoring frequency should be sufficient to provide representative data for the parameter being
monitored. Monitoring should be conducted by trained individuals following monitoring and record-keeping
procedures. Equipment should be properly calibrated and maintained. Monitoring data should be analyzed
and reviewed at regular intervals and compared with the operating standards, so that any necessary
corrective actions can be taken. Additional guidance on applicable sampling and analytical methods for
emissions and effluents is provided in the General EHS Guidelines.




31 Examples of potentially applicable pesticide tolerance requirements include the FAO/WHO (1962–2005) Codex

Alimentarius’ Maximum Residue Limits in Foods and 40 CRF Part 180, Tolerances and Exemptions from Tolerances
for Pesticide Chemicals in Food, the latter of which applies to crops sold in the United States.

                                                      21
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                              November 23, 2015




         TABLE 1. CORE PERFORMANCE INDICATORS FOR PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
 PERFORMANCE INDICATOR        EXAMPLES OF MEASUREMENT                          MONITORING CRITERIA

Farm or forest                                                 A site-specific farm or forest management plan is
                              Yes/ No
management plan                                                available for review and updated annually.

WATER

                                                               Water quality parameters should not deteriorate
                              Biochemical oxygen
                                                               from baseline measurement levels. For off-site
                              demand (BOD) (mg/L), pH,
                                                               water supplies, measurement and monitoring
                              Total suspended solids
Water quality (on-site and                                     according to vulnerable areas and key risks (such
                              (TSS) (mg/L), turbidity
off-site water supplies)                                       as earthworks) should take place and plans may
                              (Nephelometric Turbidity
                                                               include measurement of TSS at discharge, but also
                              Unit ), nutrients (mg/L), or
                                                               in the upstream and downstream river/stream
                              other potential pollutants
                                                               (mg/l).

  Irrigation water –          See above                        Concentrations should not exceed those described
  pesticides, nitrates,                                        in national irrigation water quality standards or
  coliform, or other                                           internationally recognized guidelines (e.g., WHO
  potential agricultural                                       Water Guidelines applicable to irrigation water
  contaminants                                                 quality),a whichever is the more stringent.

                              See above                        Concentrations should not exceed those described
  On-site water supplies –                                     in national drinking water quality standards or
  pesticides, nitrates,                                        internationally recognized guidelines (e.g., WHO
  coliform, or other                                           Irrigation or Drinking Water Guidelines for
  potential agricultural                                       compounds potentially present in on-site
  contaminants                                                 groundwater wells or surface waters),b whichever is
                                                               the more stringent.

                              Liters per hectare and liters    Projects should aim to measure and improve water
                              per ton of product               resource efficiency (e.g., liters/ha and liters/t of
  Water resource efficiency                                    product) and assess on a seasonal basis whether
                                                               water use is in line with water availability within the
                                                               watershed.c

SOIL AND SOIL MANAGEMENT

                                                               Projects should aim to reduce erosion hazard rating
                              tons per hectare per year
                                                               levels, which should be assessed annually based on
Soil erosion and soil                                          topography and slope; ground cover; exposed and
erosion risk                                                   bare soil; evidence of sheet, gully, and/or rill
                                                               erosion; recent sedimentation; silt deposition in
                                                               streams; and exposed plant roots.

                                                               • Soil maps appropriate to culture are available
Nutrient application and                                       • Soil analysis indicating nutrient deficiencies are
                              kg nutrient per ha
management                                                       available
                                                               • Fertility prescriptions are in place and supported




                                                          22
                                   ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                   PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                                   November 23, 2015




        TABLE 1. CORE PERFORMANCE INDICATORS FOR PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION SYSTEMS (CONT.)
    PERFORMANCE INDICATOR           EXAMPLES OF MEASUREMENT                            MONITORING CRITERIA

PESTICIDE

                                    Active ingredient usage per       System in place that allows effective identification of
Use and effectiveness of
                                    ton of market product and/or      phytosanitary problems and effective treatment.
pesticides
                                    per hectare treated

Pesticide residues on site                                            These parameters should be below applicable
                                    Active ingredient in g/ha
soil                                                                  tolerance levels.d

Pesticide residues on               Active ingredient in µg/kg of     These parameters should be below maximum
produce                             product                           residue levels.

AIR QUALITY, AIR EMISSIONS, AND ENERGY USE

                                    MJ/t product, kWh                 Projects should aim to show improvements in
Energy use                          consumed, kWh/ha crop,            energy efficiency. Systems to monitor and report
                                    kWh/t crop product                energy use and efficiency should be implemented.

                                                                      Projects should aim to install appropriate monitoring
                                                                      systems to record changes in GHG emissions (t
                                                                      carbon stocks, gCO2eq/t product), including those
GHG emissions and                   t carbon stocks, gCO2eq/t         changes associated with above- and below-ground
carbon stocks                       product                           carbon stocks (e.g., as part of harvest planning in
                                                                      forest management plans) and soil carbon stocks.
                                                                      CO2, CH4 can be measured using fixed or portable
                                                                      meters that are located near sources.

                                                                      Strategically placed depositional dust gauges or
                                    Depositional dust                 PM2.5/PM10 air quality monitoring equipment, e.g.,
Particulate matter                  (g/m2/month)                      TEOM (Tapered Element Oscillating Microbalance),
                                    PM10, PM2.5                       especially near sensitive receptors (e.g., clinic near
                                                                      a busy harvest road).
Notes:
a
 WHO Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta and Greywater. Volume 2: Wastewater Use in Agriculture
http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/wastewater/gsuww/en/
b
    WHO Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/dwq/en/
c
 See FAO (1998) Crop evapotranspiration – Guidelines for computing crop water requirements and Cropwat 8.0 tool -
www.fao.org/nr/water/infores_databases_cropwat.html
d
 Examples of potentially applicable pesticide tolerance requirements and maximum residue levels include: Food and Agriculture
Organization Codex Alimentarius’ Maximum Residue Limits in Foods http://www.codexalimentarius.net/pestres/data; US Code of
Federal Regulations Title 40, Part 180 — Tolerances and Exemptions from Tolerances for Pesticide Chemicals in Food
https://www.globalmrl.com/db#query; European Community MRLs http://ec.europa.eu/food/plant/pesticides/eu-pesticides-
database/public/?event=homepage&language=EN and MRL database of the Japan Chemical Research Foundation
http://www.m5.ws001.squarestart.ne.jp/foundation/search.html




                                                                23
                                 ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                 PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                                 November 23, 2015




2.2      Occupational Health and Safety

57. Occupational health and safety performance should be evaluated against internationally published
exposure guidelines, examples of which include the Threshold Limit Value (TLV®) occupational exposure
guidelines and Biological Exposure Indices (BEIs®), published by the American Conference of
Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH); 32 the Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards, published by the
United States National Institute for Occupational Health and Safety (NIOSH); 33 Permissible Exposure Limits
(PELs), published by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the United States (OSHA); 34
Indicative Occupational Exposure Limit Values, published by European Union member states, 35 or other
similar sources.

2.2.1    Accident and Fatality Rates

58. Projects should try to reduce the number of accidents among project workers (whether directly
employed or subcontracted) to a rate of zero, especially accidents that could result in lost work time,
different levels of disability, or even fatalities. Facility rates may be benchmarked against the performance
of facilities in this sector in developed countries through consultation with published sources (e.g., U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics and U.K. Health and Safety Executive). 36

2.2.2    Occupational Health and Safety Monitoring

59. The working environment should be monitored for occupational hazards relevant to the specific
project. Monitoring should be designed and implemented by accredited professionals 37 as part of an
occupational health and safety monitoring program. Facilities should also maintain a record of occupational
accidents and diseases and dangerous occurrences and accidents. Additional guidance on occupational
health and safety monitoring programs is provided in the General EHS Guidelines.

60. Where pesticides are used, the health conditions of the workers who handle pesticides should be
monitored through periodic health exams that include clinical assessment and blood/urine testing of
relevant bio-indicator parameters (e.g., for organo-phosphates, cholinesterase, and alkylphosphates).




32 http://www.acgih.org/tlv-bei-guidelines/policies-procedures-presentations/overview and http://www.acgih.org/store/
33 http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npg/.
34 http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDARDS&p_id=9992.

35 https://osha.europa.eu/en/legislation/directives/exposure-to-chemical-agents-and-chemical-safety/osh-directives

36 http://www.bls.gov/iif/ and http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/index.htm.

37 Accredited professionals may include Certified Industrial Hygienists, Registered Occupational Hygienists, or Certified

Safety Professionals or their equivalent.

                                                           24
                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                             PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                             November 23, 2015




3. REFERENCES

Allen, R. G., L. S. Pereira, D. Raes, and M. Smith. 1998. Crop Evapotranspiration – Guidelines for
    Computing Crop Water Requirements, FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper 56. Food and Agriculture
    Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy: FAO.

Bonsucro. 2011. Bonsucro Production Standard – Version 3.0, March 2011. http://www.bonsucro.com

Brown, E., N. Dudley, A. Lindhe, D.R. Muhtaman, C. Stewart, and T. Synnott. 2013. Common Guidance for
   the Identification of High Conservation Values.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), U.S. 2012a. “Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses. Table SNR05.
   Incidence Rate and Number of Nonfatal Occupational Injuries by Industry and Ownership, 2011.” BLS,
   Washington, DC. http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/osh/os/ostb2805.pdf

———. 2012b. “Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries. Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries Charts,
  1992–2011.” Revised data. BLS, Washington, DC. http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/cfoi/cfch0010.pdf

Danida (Ministry of Foreign Affairs). 2002. Assessment of Potentials and Constraints for Development and
   Use of Plant Biotechnology in Relation to Plant Breeding and Crop Production in Developing Countries.
   Working Paper. Copenhagen: Danida.
   http://pure.au.dk/portal/files/674254/Working_paper_104.DAN-52-5b

Department for Environment, Food, and Rural Affairs (DEFRA). 2004. Pesticides and Integrated Farm
   Management.       London:    Department   for    Environment,  Food,     and   Rural    Affairs.
   http://www.pesticides.gov.uk/Resources/CRD/Migrated-esources/Documents/P/PesticidesandIFM.pdf

Department of Labour (South Africa). 2007. Occupational Health and Safety in Agriculture.
   http://www.labour.gov.za/downloads/documents/useful-documents/occupational-health-and-safety/

Duer,I., M. Fotyma, and A. Madaj. 2004. Kodeks Dobrej Praktyki Rolniczej [Code of Good Agricultural
   Practice]. Warsaw: Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development and Ministry of Environment.
   http://sitem.herts.ac.uk/aeru/footprint/foot-fs/library/pl/docs/Kodeks_dobrej_praktyki_rolniczej.pdf

Ecofys. 2010. Responsible Cultivation Areas.
   http://www.ecofys.com/files/files/ecofysrcamethodologyv1.0.pdf

European Commission (EC). Biotechnology. Brussels: European Commission, Health and Consumer
   Protection DG. https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/science-area/health-and-consumer-protection

———. 2011. Wind Energy Developments and Natura 2000.
  http://ec.europa.eu/environment/nature/natura2000/management/docs/Wind_farms.pdf




                                                   25
                            ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                            PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                            November 23, 2015




European Economic Communities (EEC). 1990. Council Directive of 27 November 1990 on the Fixing of
   Maximum Levels for Pesticide Residues in and on Certain Products of Plant Origin, Including Fruits
   and Vegetables (90/642/EEC).
   http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31990L0642:en:NOT;
   Consolidated text 2006:
   http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:1990L0642:20060216:EN:PDF

———. 1991. Council Directive of 12 December 1991 Concerning the Protection of Waters against Pollution
  Caused       by    Nitrates   from    Agricultural   Sources   91/676/EEC.      EEC.     http://eur-
  lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31991L0676:en:NOT;
  Consolidated text 2008:
  http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:1991L0676:20081211:EN:PDF

———. 1999. Council Directive 91/414/EEC of 15 July 1991 Concerning the Placing of Plant Protection
  Products on the Market. EEC. http://eur-
  lex.europa.eu/smartapi/cgi/sga_doc?smartapi!celexapi!prod!CELEXnumdoc&lg=EN&numdoc=31991
  L0414&model=guichett

European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). http://www.efsa.europa.eu

Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). 1990. Guidelines on Personal Protection When Using Pesticides
   in Hot Climates. Rome: FAO.
   http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/agphome/documents/Pests_Pesticides/Code/Old_guidelines/P
   ROTECT.pdf

———. 1992. The Use of Saline Waters for Crop Production. Irrigation and Drainage Paper 48. Rome:
  FAO.

———. 1995. Revised Guidelines on Good Labeling Practice for Pesticides. Rome: FAO.
  http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/agphome/documents/Pests_Pesticides/Code/Old_guidelines/l
  abel.pdf

———. 1996. FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice.
  http://www.fao.org/docrep/v6530e/v6530e00.htm

———. 1999. Guidelines for the Management of Small Quantities of Unwanted and Obsolete Pesticides.
  FAO Pesticide Disposal Series No. 7. Rome: UNEP, WHO, and FAO.
  http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/user_upload/obsolete_pesticides/docs/small_qties.pdf

———. 2000. Guidelines And Reference Material on Integrated Soil and Nutrient Management and
  Conservation for Farmer Field Schools. AGL/MISC/27/2000. Rome: FAO, Land and Plant Nutrition
  Management Division. http://www.fao.org/docs/eims/upload/230157/misc27.pdf

———. 2001. Biosecurity in Food and Agriculture. Sixteenth Session, Rome, 26–30 March 2001. Item 8 of
  the Provisional Agenda. http://www.fao.org/DOCREP/MEETING/003/X9181E.HTM




                                                 26
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                              November 23, 2015




———. 2002a. Fertilizer Use by Crop, 5th ed. Rome: FAO.
  http://www.fertilizer.org/ifa/statistics/crops/fubc5ed.pdf

———. 2002b. Biological Management of Soil Ecosystems for Sustainable Agriculture. World Soil
  Resources Report 101. Rome: FAO.
  http://www.fao.org/docrep/006/y4810e/y4810e00.HTM

———. 2003. Environmental and Social Standards, Certification, and Labeling for Cash Crops. Rome:
  FAO. http://www.fao.org/docrep/006/y5136e/y5136e00.htm

———. 2005. Organic Agriculture at FAO. Rome: FAO. http://www.fao.org/organicag/

———. 2006a. Responsible Management of Planted Forests. Planted Forests and Trees Working Paper
  FP37E. http://www.fao.org/docrep/009/j9256e/j9256e00.htm

———. 2006b. Responsible Management of Planted Forests: Voluntary Guidelines. Planted Forest and
  Trees Working Paper 37/E. Rome. http://www.fao.org/forestry/plantedforests/67508@170537/en/

———. 2007. FAO Good Agricultural Practices Principles.
  http://www.fao.org/prods/gap/home/principles_en.htm

———. 2014. International Code of Conduct on Pesticides Management (revised 2014). Rome: FAO.
  http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/agphome/documents/Pests_Pesticides/Code/CODE_2014Sep
  _ENG.pdf

———. “FAO Water.” FAO, Rome. http://www.fao.org/nr/water/index.html

———. “CLIMWAT 2.0 for CROPWAT.” FAO, Rome.
  http://www.fao.org/nr/water/infores_databases_climwat.html

Food and Agriculture Organization, Land and Water Division (FAO AGL). 1991. Water Harvesting — A
   Manual for the Design and Construction of Water Harvesting. Training Manual No. 3. In Water
   harvesting. AGL/MISC/17/91. Rome: FAO. http://www.fao.org/docrep/u3160e/u3160e00.HTM

FAO and WHO (Food and Agriculture Organization and World Health Organization).1962–2005. Codex
   Alimentarius. Geneva: FAO and WHO. http://www.codexalimentarius.net/web/index_en.jsp

———. 2008. International Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides. Guidelines on
  Management Options for Empty Pesticide Containers.
  http://www.who.int/whopes/recommendations/Management_options_empty_pesticide_containers.pdf

Forest Stewardship Council (FSC). 2012. FSC Principles and Criteria for Forest Stewardship FSC-STD-
    01-001 (V5-0) EN. https://ic.fsc.org/principles-and-criteria.34.htm

Forest and Wood Products Research and Development Corporation (2006). Pesticides in Plantations: The
    Use of Chemical Pesticides by the Australian Plantation Forest Industry. Summary Report.
    http://www.fwpa.com.au/images/resources/FWPpestreport.pdf

                                                    27
                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                             PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                             November 23, 2015




GlobalG.A.P. 2012a. Integrated Farm Assurance: All Farm Base — Crops Base — Combinable Crops:
   Control Points and Compliance Criteria. Version 4.0. Edition 4.0-2_Mar 2013. Cologne: GlobalG.A.P.

———. 2012b. Integrated Farm Assurance: All Farm Base — Crops Base — Tea: Control Points and
  Compliance     Criteria.  Version      4.0.    Edition    4.0-2_Mar2013.     Cologne:  GlobalG.A.P.
  http://www.globalgap.org/export/sites/default/.content/.galleries/documents/130315_gg_ifa_cpcc_af_c
  b_fv_v4_0-2_en.pdf

———. 2012. Integrated Farm Assurance: All Farm Base — Crops Base — Coffee: Control Points and
  Compliance Criteria. Version 4.0. Edition 4.0-2_Mar2013. Cologne: GlobalG.A.P.

Helsinki Commission (Helcom). 2004. The Convention on the Protection of the Marine Environment of the
    Baltic Sea Area 1992. Helsinki: Helcom.
    http://helcom.fi/Documents/About%20us/Convention%20and%20commitments/Helsinki%20Conventi
    on/1992_Convention_1108.pdf

Health and Safety Executive (HSE). “Fatal Injuries in Farming, Forestry, and Horticulture.” HSE,
   Merseyside, U.K. http://www.hse.gov.uk/agriculture/resources/fatal.htm

International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements (IFOAM). 2012. The IFOAM Norms for Organic
    Production and Processing. Bonn: IFOAM.
    http://www.ifoam.org/sites/default/files/page/files/ifoam_norms_version_august_2012_with_cover.pdf

International Finance Corporation (IFC). Performance Standard 3.
    http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/25356f8049a78eeeb804faa8c6a8312a/PS3_English_2012.pdf?
    MOD=AJPERES

International Labour Organisation (ILO). 1998. Safety and Health in Forestry Work: An ILO Code of Practice
    Geneva. International Labour Office.

———. 2000a. “Safety and Health in Agriculture.” Report VI (1), 88th Session, 30 May–15 June 2000. ILO,
  Geneva.
  http://www.ilo.org/public/english/standards/relm/ilc/ilc88/rep-vi-1.htm#CHAPTER%20IV

———. 2000b. ILC88—Report of the Director-General: Activities                   of   the   ILO,   1998–99.
  http://www.ilo.org/public/english/standards/relm/ilc/ilc88/rep-1a-3.htm

———. 2011. Productive and Safe Work in Forestry: Key Issues and Policy Options to Promote Productive,
  Decent Jobs in the Forestry Sector. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO (also available at:
  www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/documents/publication/wcms_158989.pdf).

Inter-Organization Programme for the Sound Management of Chemicals (IOMC). 2002. Reducing and
    Eliminating the Use of Persistent Organic Pesticides. Geneva: IOMC and UNEP.
    http://www.chem.unep.ch/pops/pdf/redelipops/redelipops.pdf




                                                   28
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                              November 23, 2015




King, N. 2013. Banana Best Management Practices. Environmental Guidelines for the Australian Banana
    Industry. Department of Agriculture, Fisheries, and Forestry (Queensland). http://abgc.org.au/projects-
    resources/industry-projects/best-management-practice-project/

Meyer, J. (ed.). 2011. Good Management Practices for the Cane Sugar Industry. Prepared by PGBI Sugar
   & Bio-Energy (Pty) Ltd for International Finance Corporation.

Molden, D. (ed.). 2007. Water for Food, Water for Life: A Comprehensive Assessment of Water
   Management      in    Agriculture.  International  Water   Management      Institute (IWMI).
   www.iwmi.cgiar.org/assessment/files_new/synthesis/Summary_SynthesisBook.pdf

Muilerman, S. 2013. Occupational Safety and Health on Ghanaian Cocoa Farms. Baseline report.
    Sustainable Tree Crops Program, International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA). Accra, Ghana.
    http://www.iita.org/c/document_library/get_file?uuid=50b4bf19-b1bd-44a2-9ac0-
    56a590c7c36e&groupId=25357

Ortiz, O., & Pradel, W. 2010. Introductory Guide for Impact Evaluation in Integrated Pest Management
    (IPM) Programs. International Potato Center. http://cipotato.org/publications/pdf/005514.pdf

Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification (PEFC). 2010. Sustainable Forest Management
   Requirements. PEFC ST 1003:2010 http://www.pefc.org/standards/technical-documentation/pefc-
   international-standards-2010/676-sustainable-forest-management-pefc-st-10032010

Roundtable for a Sustainable Cocoa Economy. 2009. Guidelines on Best Known Practices in the Cocoa
   Value Chain. http://www.roundtablecocoa.org/showpage.asp?RSCEdocBestKnownPractices

Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO). 2009. Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Palm Oil Production:
   Literature Review and Proposals from the RSPO Working Group on Greenhouse Gases.
   http://www.rspo.org/files/project/GreenHouse.Gas.Working.Group/Report-GHG-October2009.pdf

Roy, R. N., A. Finck, G. J. Blair, and H. L. S. Tandon. 2006. Plant Nutrition for Food Security, A Guide for
   Integrated Nutrient Management. FAO Fertilizer and Plant Nutrition Bulletin 16. Geneva: FAO.
   ftp://ftp.fao.org/agl/agll/docs/fpnb16.pdf

Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants. 2011. Stockholm. http://chm.pops.int/

Sustainable Agriculture Alliance. 2010. Sustainable Agriculture Standard, version 2.
   www.sanstandards.org

Sustainable Agriculture Initiative Platform. 2009. Principles & Practices for Sustainable Green Coffee
   Production: SAI Platform Coffee Working Group.
   http://www.saiplatform.org/uploads/Library/PPsCoffee2009-2.pdf

Sustainable Forestry Initiative. 2010 Section 2. SFI 2010-2014 STANDARD.
   http://www.sfiprogram.org/sfi-standard/




                                                    29
                            ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                            PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                            November 23, 2015




United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and Global Environment Facility (GEF). 2006. Danube
    River Basin Project. Reduction of Pollution Releases through Agricultural Policy Change and
    Demonstrations by Pilot Projects. UNDP and GEF. http://www.icpdr.org/main/sites/default/files/1.2-
    3_Agri%20Pilot%20Project_-Ph-II_FINALR_31Jan07-f.pdf

United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP). 1992. Convention on Biological Diversity. Montreal:
    Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity UNEP. http://www.cbd.int/

United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Natural Resources Conservation Services (NRCS), & US
    EPA. 2012. Agricultural Air Quality Conservation Measures: Reference Guide for Cropping Systems
    and General Land Management.
    www.nrcs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/stelprdb1049502.pdf

———. Pesticides: Health and Safety, Worker Safety and Training. Washington, DC: US EPA.
  http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/health/worker.htm

World Health Organization (WHO). 2006a. Wastewater Use: Safe-Use of Wastewater, Excreta and
   Greywater. Volume 2: Wastewater Use in Agriculture.
   http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/wastewater/en/

———. 2006b. Wastewater Use: Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta and Greywater. Volume 4: Excreta and
  Greywater Use in Agriculture. http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/wastewater/en/

———. 2010. The WHO Recommended Classification of Pesticides by Hazard and Guidelines to
  Classification: 2009. Geneva: WHO. http://www.who.int/ipcs/publications/pesticides_hazard_2009.pdf

———. 2011. Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality, 4th Edition.
     http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/2011/dwq_guidelines/en/index.html




                                                 30
                               ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                               PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                               November 23, 2015




ANNEX A. GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF INDUSTRY ACTIVITIES

61. The production of perennial crops consists of planting useful crops and modifying the environment to
provide them with optimum conditions for growth. The life cycle of a plantation is normally longer than one
growing season. For example: olive trees may be productive for several hundred years; modern oil palm,
coconut, and rubber plantations are productive for 20 to 30 years; but sugar cane crops are only grown for
one or two seasons. Perennial crops belong to many different plant classifications and families. Products
from palms include palm oil and coconuts; products from tree crops include citrus fruits, rubber, and cacao;
products from bushes include coffee and tea; products from herbs include bananas; and sugar cane is
derived from a member of the grass family. Tropical forestry plantations include species such as Eucalyptus
and Pinus. Temperate and boreal plantations are varied and many include spruce, pine, and fir.

62. The optimal growing conditions (including nutrient and water needs) and threats (including diseases
and insects) differ for each crop. This is also the case for the utilization of the crop, which varies from human
consumption to industrial uses.

63. Modification of the environment ranges from minimal to intensive depending on the particular crop,
growing conditions (soil, climate, diseases, weeds, and insects), and management techniques. The land
area used for plantation crops and the scale of the production output are a factor of the above
considerations, in addition to the use of fertilizer, water, and pesticides. It is the management of these latter
factors that is of particular concern for environmental protection, as well as for occupational and community
health and safety. However, achieving sustainable intensification and increased productivity per unit of land
may be the most important factor in both reducing the expansion of plantation crops into natural areas and
ensuring the adequate provision of foodstuffs for communities.

64. As illustrated in the schematic diagram in Figure A-1, the agricultural operations for plantation crops
are divided into soil preparation, nursery (or planting material/seed production), planting, and tending before
the crop starts to yield productively.

A.1     Site Planning and Preparation

65. Site preparation involves preparing and improving the soil and the surrounding borders specifically for
plantation crops, including removing undesired plants, enhancing water supply and drainage systems,
adding nutrients to the soil and regulating pH, and establishing various mitigation measures in view of
potential threats from flooding, runoff, and erosion. This is the phase in which land use is assessed,
topographic and terrain models are established, natural vs modified habitats are mapped, species and sites
of high biodiversity value (including critical habitat and HCV areas) are identified, roads are planned,
community receptors are identified, and watercourses are protected, etc.

66. Tractor-drawn equipment and heavy machinery (e.g., bulldozers, excavators) are often used to
remove existing vegetation. Cleared vegetation can be left to form a mulch to help improve soil quality,
rather than burned.

67. Following clearing, a period of six to eight weeks passes before the land may be selectively sprayed
with herbicides, to reduce vegetation, and the plantation crop is then sown or planted.



                                                       31
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                              November 23, 2015




                      FIGURE A-1. GENERALIZED PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION CYCLE




A.2     Planting or Sowing

68. Depending on the type of plantation crop and soil conditions, the planting seedbed and planting rows
are prepared to maximize early growth, to reduce soil exposure, and to optimize early yields from the crops.
The choice of appropriate tools and equipment will ensure a successful crop, with minimum impact on the
local environment. Sowing equipment and methods range from tractor-drawn implements (e.g., sugar cane)
to manual planting by digging planting holes and inserting a juvenile plant (sapling) (e.g., oil palm, coconut,
cacao, rubber, forestry), or to partially or fully mechanized planting methods (e.g., sugar cane, forestry).

69. The inter-row areas should be planted with suitable cover plants (e.g., legumes, food, or fodder crops)
to protect the exposed soil, cycle organic matter and nutrients, and maintain desirable soil structure and
conditions.

                                                      32
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                              November 23, 2015




A.3     Weed Control

70. Weed control is the botanical component of pest control, which attempts to stop weeds, especially
noxious or injurious weeds, from competing with plantation crops. Weed control is normally conducted
mechanically through harrowing or other forms of plowing, the use of mulch or plastic barriers, or the use
of chemical herbicides.

A.4     Immature (Growing) Phase

71. In the plantation crop’s immature phase, the planted rows and access paths are kept clear of undesired
vegetation and fire risk is managed to optimize early growth and prevent unplanned damage. Returning
crop residues from harvesting, thinning, pruning, and processing to the inter-rows, and establishing
vegetative cover crops in trees or palm and bush plantations, minimize soil and environmental impacts.
Other activities in this phase to promote optimal growth include shaping the plantation crop canopy and
structure (for example, pruning branches to form the trees or bushes and to assist future harvesting),
irrigation, and the application of pesticides and nutrients.

72. Some plantations apply intercropping techniques to maximize harvest output. For example, olive tree
plantations may also cultivate other crops, such as tomatoes and potatoes, between the rows of olive trees.

A.5     Harvesting, Transport, and Postharvest

73. Once the crop reaches the mature stage of growth, it is carefully harvested. Harvesting of plantation
crops involves digging, cutting, picking, or other methods to remove the crops from the ground, stalks,
vines, bushes, or trees. Some are harvested by hand (e.g., oil palm, coconut, cacao, rubber) where there
is adequate labor availability and/or mechanized methods are not available. Other crops may be harvested
by machine (e.g., sugar cane, coffee), and some utilize both methods (e.g., forestry). For some crops, such
as sugar cane and forestry, prescribed fire may be conducted to improve access to the crop and reduce
fuel loading, although this practice is declining worldwide as the value of crop residues and effective residue
management methods are demonstrated and effective methods of residue management are developed.

74. After the harvest, the crop is stored on site in a controlled environment and may undergo certain
preprocessing activities, such as washing (to remove pesticide residues) and drying.

75. Plantation crops destined for use as processed foods (e.g., olives, palm oil) and products (e.g., forestry
timbers) are likely to undergo extensive processing, and this may require significant water use (e.g.,
washing of food crops such as olives). Crops such as coffee and cacao require fermentation and drying on
site before transport to the processing plant is possible. Crops such as oil palm and rubber undergo
processing to extract the marketable fractions (e.g., palm oil, palm kernel, fiber) of the yield.

76. The processed plantation products are then prepared for market transport using a wide variety of
forms, including:

        • Consumer packaging: the produce is packed using various materials, including corrugated
          cardboard, paper, and plastic/fabric packaging materials, to protect it until it reaches the
          consumer (e.g., fresh bananas) or additional processing facilities (e.g., coffee beans being sent
          for roasting and grinding).

                                                      33
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                              November 23, 2015




        • Small bulk containers: bulk containers including large crates (e.g., copra from coconuts), small
          tanks (e.g., refined coconut oil), or large reinforced cardboard containers (e.g., citrus fruit
          destined for juicing plants).
        • Break bulk systems: the products are packaged in lots that can be handled and these are then
          packed inside larger bulk handling in containers (e.g., bags of copra and bundles of timber are
          packed inside shipping containers). These large consignments are then broken down into
          smaller packages at the destination for further transport and distribution.
        • Bulk handling: typically, large tankers (e.g., palm oil, raw coconut oil), shipping containers (e.g.,
          processed timber, bags of cacao or coffee), and freighters/ships (e.g., copra, timber).

77. The potential pollution outputs of harvesting and post-harvesting activities include air emissions from
harvesting equipment and crop residue burning, wastewater contamination with organic wastes and
pesticides from crop washing, wastewater and waste product from processing, and damaged packaging
materials.

A.6     Replanting Phase

78. Once the marketable component is harvested and/or the yield declines, a plantation is then prepared
for the next cropping phase. Activities include:

        • Review of the site and replanning for the next crop cycle (including community and EHS);
        • Establishment of a nursery (e.g., oil palm, cacao, rubber, forestry) or seed crop (e.g., sugar
          cane) to provide planting material for the next rotation;
        • Removal and mulching of the existing crop in-situ;
        • Site preparation, including lining of new planting rows in the inter-rows;
        • Soil and nutrient management in preparation for the new crop;
        • Managing pests and diseases, if needed;
        • Replanting or propagating from rootstock; and
        • Restoration of infrastructure, such as irrigation systems, roads, bridges, and harvesting access
          paths.

79. When the plantation crop reaches maturity, the leaf area usually provides significant ground cover to
limit weed growth, and weed control activities may not be necessary. A well-established canopy provides
soil protection from raindrop impact and erosion. On slopes, the planting density should not be too dense
to prevent light and rainfall penetration, which would limit protective inter-row vegetation establishment.




                                                      34
                                     ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                     PERENNIAL CROP PRODUCTION
                                     November 23, 2015




ANNEX B. WATER CONSUMPTION

80. Water consumption per crop can be calculated and compared with a theoretical standard value. In
practice, the requirements for water depend on crop species, soil type, evaporation, and water conservation
practices. The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) provides guidance on water management and how
to calculate appropriate irrigation. 38 CropWat is a computer program for the calculation of crop water
requirements and irrigation requirements based on soil, climate, and crop data that can help design and
manage irrigation schemes.

81. Crop-specific evapotranspiration factors (crop coefficients—Kc) form the basis of crop water
calculations. Table B-1 shows the single-crop coefficients for selected crops. 39 It is provided for illustrative
purposes only and demonstrates that water requirements vary over the growing season, influencing the
risks and impacts of a particular project. The total water requirements are therefore affected by the length
and time of the growing season, which must also be considered when estimating whether crop water
requirements are in line with water availability.

82. The risks and impacts associated with water use should consider the status of the river basin within
which the project is located.



                  TABLE B-1. INDICATIVE SINGLE-CROP COEFFICIENTS (KC) FOR SELECTED CROPS

                                     Single-Crop Coefficients (Kc)                               Single-Crop Coefficients (Kc)
                      Initial1          Mid2               End3                           Initial1        Mid2            End3
 Banana              0.5–1.0            1.1–1.2            1–1.10            Rubber       0.95            1.0             1.0
 Sugarcane           0.40               1.25               0.75              Tea          0.95–1.1        1.0–1.15        1–1.15
 Oil Palm             0.95              1.0                1.0               Citrus5      0.5–0.7         0.45–0.65       0.55–0.7
 Cacao                1.0               1.2                1.0               Citrus6      0.75–0.85       0.7–0.85        0.75–0.85
 Coffee4              0.9–1.05          0.95–1.10          0.95–1.10         Olives       0.65            0.7             0.7
 Notes:
 1
   Crop coefficient during the initial crop development stage. These values are subject to the effects of large variations in wetting
 frequencies.
 2
   Crop coefficient in the mid-season.
 3
   Crop coefficient at the end of the season.
 4
   Lower values are bare ground, higher values are with weeds.
 5
   No ground cover 20–70% canopy.
 6
   With active ground cover or weeds.

 Source: Allen, R, Pereira, L.S, Raes, D and Smith, M (1998) Crop Evapotranspiration – Guidelines for Computing Crop Water
 Requirements – FAO Irrigation and Drainage paper 56. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome.
 http://www.fao.org/docrep/X0490E/x0490e00.HTM




38 R. Allen et al., “Crop Evapotranspiration – Guidelines for Computing Crop Water Requirements,” FAO Irrigation and

Drainage Paper 56 (Rome, Italy: FAO, 1998).
39 The effects of the integration over time represent an average wetting frequency for a “standard” crop under typical

growing conditions in an irrigated setting.

                                                                  35
